Beatriz Colomina
Lars Müller Publishers
X-RAY
ARCHITECTURE
X-RayArchitecture explores the enormous impact of medical discourse and imaging technologies on the formation, representation and reception of twentieth-century architecture. It challenges the normal understanding of modern architecture by proposing that it was shaped by the dominant medical obsession of its time: tuberculosis and its primary diagnostic tool, the X-ray.
Modern architecture and the X-ray were born around the same time and evolved in parallel. While the X-ray exposed the inside of the body to the public eye, the modern building unveiled its interior, dramatically inverting the relationship between private and public. Architects presented their buildings as a kind of medical instrument for protecting and enhancing the body and psyche.
Beatriz Colomina traces the psychopathologies of twentieth-century architecture—from the trauma of tuberculosis to more recent disorders such as burn-out syndrome and ADHD—and the huge transformations of privacy and publicity instigated by diagnostic tools from X-Rays to MRIs and beyond. She suggests that if we want to talk about the state of architecture today, we should look to the dominant obsessions with illness and the latest techniques of imaging the body—and ask what effects they have on the way we conceive architecture.
  To Katyand Andrea
   Beatriz Colomina
 X-RAY
 ARCHITECTURE
   Lars Müller Publishers
  7 Introduction
13 CHAPTER 1
     Health and Architecture: From'Vitruviusto Sick Building Syndrome
61 CHAPTER2
     Tuberculosis
117 CHAPTER3
     X-Ray Intimacy
151 CHAPTER4
     Blurred Visions
173 CHAPTER 5
     Hyperpublic: An Afterword
187  Biography
188  lnde*
195 Image Credits 1 98 Acknowledgments
introduction
The bond between architecture and illness is probably my longest preoccupation. It goes back at least to the year I arrived in New York, attheend of 1980,after studying architecture in Barcelona. Bysome impossibly good luck, I landed as a visiting'fellow at the NewYork Institute for the Humanities, then ru n by Richard Sennett, and with some extraordinary figures as senior fellows—Carl Schorske, Wolfgang Schivelbusch, and Susan Sontag, among others. I was deeply attracted to the kind of interdisciplinary work they were doing. In particu lar, Sontag’s///ness asMetaphor; which had recently been published, had an enormous influence on me.
I started seeing modern architecture in terms of all the pathologies related to it, real or imagined—agoraphobia, claustrophobia, nervous disorders, and, above all, tuberculosis and the obsession with hygiene,with germs,with fresh air.... I thought this would be a great topic for my dissertation and actually wrote about one hundred pages on it in some kind of feverish state induced by my intoxication with New York.
       But there was not yet a climate for that kind of inter-disciplinaryresearch in architecture—not in Barcelona, and not at Columbia University, either, where I was a visiting scholar the following year. So I ended up working on two canonical figures, Adolf Loos and Le Corbusier, and the relationships between modern architecture and the emerging media of its time—photography, illustrated magazines,film,
                                                               1  Susan Sontag, handwritten notes on
and so on. Itturned outthat the field of architecture was not tuberculosis pati ent m ThomasMann's readyfor that, either. Talking about media in architecture rnstan’c*'1975
                                                               2  Susan Sontag (1933-2004),
was anathema in the early 1980s, as if it were an attack on November 3,1972
7
i*»1l
theobject,or revealinga dirty secret, cr even as ifthe media were a kind ofillness.
      Returning to the project on tuberculosis and modern architecture isfor me like tlie returnofthe repressed. Except that it has always been there in some kind oflatent form, like a virusthat surfaces every now and then in essays and conference papers, butnever completelytakesover.1 Sothis isthe project that I decided to work on during a sabbaticalyear at theAmerican Academy in Berlin andths Getty Research Institute in LosAngeles. I was planning to do something else. But or one of myfirst days atthe academy in Wannsee, I discovered that there had been several tuberculosis sanatoriums inthe area. The airthere was famously cleaner, and people from elsewhere in Berlin cameto Wannsee forthe cure. fig.3
      So I decided, or perhaps it was decided for me, to change my topic and take up again this question that had been with me for such a long time. I nceed, that fall, I immediately imagined myself as a patient in a sanatorium taking the cure, alongwith all thewonderful,witty fellows and partners with their various ailments—a feeling that made perfect sense of the academy’s retired location, the lake, the fresh air,theterraces,theforest, the light, the extraordinary and abundant food, the great care of the team of professionals in the house, and the beautiful pavilion in the garden by the lake that Regine Leibinger and Frank Barkow had recently completed asa kind ofsun pavilion for the cure,FiG.4 where I wrote these lines.
      Likewise,arriving at the Getty in the springofthataca-demicyear, to a verywhite building ontop of a hill, I thought
8
3  Open-air terrace for the cure, Hecke shorn pulmonary clinic, BerlinWannsee. in the 1950s
4  Barkow Leibinger architects, pavilion at the American Academy in Berlin-Wannsee.2014
about it as almost like a Magic Mountain, with terraces outside every room where patients in the Getty Research Insti-tutecouldtakethesunlight-and-aircu re and where I walked past a photograph of Sontag, who had been a fellow there, on the way to my office every day anc I waved to her as if to remind-myse f how it all started.
      That year, the theme at the Ge:ty Research Institute was the canon of art history. There is today an ever more nuanced understanding of the canon in architecture, yet the central mythology of modern architecture remains remarkably intact after almost one hundred years—perhaps because it was never true. Concealed within the standard narratives about modern architecture are other stories that have been forgotten or repressed. stories that energized and rationalized the work of the avant-garde, but were pushed to the background in favor of a simplistic rhetoric oftechnical and visual efficiency.
      Reyner Banham, probably the first historian to challenge the mythology of modern architecture as functionalist, contrasted the way his teacher Nikolaus Pevsner could never escape the short list ofcanonical figures that he himself had canonized with Henry-Russell Hitchcock's “extracanonical" vision,which picks upperipheraland unexpected figures and ideas.2 In these terms, I think of my research as “intra-canonical"—attentive to the unexpected within thecanon itself. And inthis case.the unexpected is disease.
      So what is this surprisingly resilient canonical view?
      Modern architecture, launched in the 1920s by an international group of avant-garde architects, has usually
introduction
been understood in terms of functional efficiency, new materials (glass, iron, reinforced concrete), new technologies of construction, and the machine aesthetic. In contrast, the hypothesis of this book' is that modern architecture was shaped by the dominant medical obsession of its time— tuberculosis—and the technology that became associated with it—X-rays. That technology produced a new and widespread change in the conception of space and the relation of inside to outside. This change can be understood as a specific historical event, a twentieth-century twist in the ancient, intimate relationship between architecture and medicinethat is ongoing today. Just as medicaltechnologies and the treatment of illness played a major role in determining the characteristics of modern architecture. new medical technologies are today creating new forms of architecture as the relationship between inside and outside passes through another transformation. Yet we are still living in the architecture shaped by a specific disease,tuberculosis, and its primary diagnostic tool, the X-ray. Modern architecture remains the default everyday environment, the norm produced by vast industrial systems, rather than the transgressive work of an avant-garde inspired by a specific disease.
      It is as if the widespread success of modern architecture depended on its association with health, its internationalism the consequence of the global spread of the disease it was meantto resist. A map showing the distribution of modern architecture would echo a map of the distribution of the illness. Tuberculosis is fundamentally urban, as was modern architecture. One in seven people on the planet
10
died from it inthe nineteenth century, but in the city of Paris alone, it was close to one in three.
      Modernity was driven by illness.The engine of modern architecture was not a heroic, shiny, functional machine working its way acrossvthe globe, but a languid,fragile body suspended outside daily life in a protective cocoon of new technologies and geometries. It is the difficulty pf each breath and therefore' the treasure of each breath: the melancholy of modernity.
      Modern architecture is inseparable from an intimate, even romantic, relationship between a new kind of medical image and a new kind of space—each intriguing and inspiring the other. The point here is not to pin this relationship down and ossify it, but to release it, to reactive it, to stimulate reflection by offering a kind of portrait at the intersection of biology, psychology, biography, sexuality, and technology-to invite the reader to look again, to see modern architecturethrough different eyes.Whatdoes it mean when everyone—the client, the architect, the theorist, the critic, the worker—is a patient?
1 Some ofthe texts I published onthis theme include:"Krankheit als Metapher inder modernen Architektur.’Ooidolcs 64 (1997); “The Medical Body in Modern Architect ure,“ in Anybody. ed.Cynthia Davidson (Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 1997);"Skinless Architecture." n The State ofArchitecture at the Beginning of th e 21st Century; ed. Bernard Tschumi and Irene Cheng (NewYork:Columbia University Press, 2QQ3);"X-RayArchitecture: Illness as Metaphor," Pos/t/ons Q (Fall
2008)   : “U nclear Visions;Architectures of Surveillance.' in Engineered Transparency: The Technical, Visual, and Spatial Effects ofGlass, ed. Michael Bell and Jeannie Kim (NewYork: Princeton Architectural Press,
2009)   : “Rontgen-Architektur." in Elektro-magn efts mus in Architektur, Design und KunS. ed. Stephan Truby(Munich:Wilhelm Fink,2009);"Illness as Metaphorin Modern Architecture.’ in CaringCulture: Art, Architecture andthe Politics ofPublic Health, ed. Andrea Phillips and Markus
Miessen(Berlin:Sternberg Press, 2011); "X-Ray Architecture: TheTuberculosis Effect," Well, We/l, Well, HarvardDesign Magazib e no. 4Q (Spring-Summer 2015); X-Screens: Ron tgen Architecture" e-flux journal no.66.October 2Q15.
2 Reyner Banham, "ActualMonuments," (1988) inA Critic Writes: Selected Essays by Reyner Banham, ed. Mary Banham, Paul Barker, Sutherland Lyall, and Cedric Price (Berkeley: UniversityofCalifornia Press, 1999), p. 283.
Introduction
11
CHAPTER 1
Health and Architecture:
From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
Architecture and medicine have always been tightly inter-linked.Just asclassical theories of the Greek polis followed theories of the four humors, contemporary ideas of health organize design theories today. Architectural discourse weaves itself througl;l theories of body and brain, constructing the architect as a kind of doctor and the client as patient.
      Vitruvius in the first century BC launched Western architectural theory by insisting that all architects needed to study medicine: "Healthfulness being their chief object."1 He devoted a large part of the first book of his Ten Books on Architecture to the question cf health, giving detailed instructions on how to determine the healthiness of a proposed site for a city by returning to the ancient method of sacrificing an animal that lives there and inspecting its liver to make sure it is “sound and firm." Likewise, for the healthy site of each building, he discusses the theory of the four humors and emphasizes the direction of the winds andthe sun. Too much ofone humor enfeebles and"impairs the fluids of the human body.” In reverse, those who are unwell can be cured more quickly through design, rebuilding the system of those “exhausted by disease," including "consumption" (tuberculosis). Vitruvius discusses the internal wo rkings of the body just as much as he discusses the internal working of buildings. Theories of medicine are used as a kind of foundation for architectural theory. Architecture itself thus becomes a branch of medicine. Symptomatica Uy, Vitruvius di dnt simply import the theory of the four humors, which was treated skeptically by many
1 Measureofthehumanbody,Cesare Cesariano’stranslationofVitruvius's DeArch/tectura, 1521
13
2  John Banister delivering an anatomical lecture at the Barber-Surgeons’ Hall, ca.1530
3  Leonardo daVinci, View of a Skull. cs.1489
4  Pietro Berrettini da Cortona. Tobuloe onotomicoe, Plate XXVII, engraving
by Luca Ciamberlano, Pome 1741,original drawingca.1618
s Leonardo da Vi nci. Embryoin the Womb. ca.1510
14
7
physicians, but elaborated on it, adjusting it to develop his own architecturally based theory of health or health-based theory of architecture.2
      By the Renaissance, however, the central reference for architecture was flo longer the whole body, its health determined bythefour humors, but a dissected,fragmented, analyzed body. Just as Renaissance schools of medicine used casts of body parts, design schools such as the very first one, the Accademia delle Arti del Disegno in Florence, founded in 1563 by Giorgio Vasari, used cast fragments of historical buildings for teaching, and anatomical dissection at the Santa Maria Nuova hospital was a central part ofthe training to which all students of Vasari's academy were required to attend and draw for days on end, even as the body putrefied and some students fell ill.3 As doctors investigated the mysterious interior of the body by cutting into and dissecting it, architects tried to understand the interior of buildings by slicing section cuts through them. In the sketchbooks of Leonardo da Vinci, cutaway views of architectural interiors appear beside anatomical drawings. He even understood the interiors of the brain and the womb in architecturalterms, asenclosuresthat must be cutthrough to revealtheir secrets. figs.3,5 Likewise, in the mid-nineteenth century, Viollet-le-Duc illustrated his Dictionnoire raisonné de l'architecture française du XIe au XVI" siècle (1854-1868) with perspectival sectional cutaway drawings showing medieval buildings as if dissected. fig.7 Influenced by George Cuvier’s Leçons d'anatomie comparée (1800-1805) fig.6 and Jean-Marc Bourgery's Traite comp let de l'anatomie de
6 Lessonsofanatomyofthebaron GeorgesCuvier(1769-1832), in theJardin des Plantes of Paris. ca. 1800
7 Eugène VioUet-le-Duc. Tos-de-chorge drawing, in hisDictionnairefaisonné dei'architecturefranr;oi$eduXjl®au>M® siècle, 1854-1868
a Jean-Baptiste \1arc Bourgery.exploded viewoftheskull, n Troitécomplet de l'ano tomie de (homme comprenont iomédecineopérato/re, Paris.1831
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrom e
15
9  B.Cermllk. the ViewingGlass Tower of the Chamber of Commerce Pavilion, Exhibition of Contemporary Culture
in Czechoslovakia. Bro 1928
10  A chest X-ray m progress at Professor MaximeMenard's radiologydepaitment at the Cochin hospital. P^Paris, 1914
11  Robeit Koch/DieAetiologie der TuberculoseMThe etiology oftubercuLosis), published m the Serfiner Ktinische Wochenschrift on April 10, 1882. First publication ofthe discoveryof the tuberculosis bacillus
l'homme, comprenant la médecine opératoire (1830-1849), fie.« he treated medieval architecture as a body to be analyzed—an “animate being" requiring "dissection" to allow separate study of its parts. His new mode of drawing revealed the functional roLe of each dissected fragment. His own interventions into medieval buildings were understood as surgicaL procedures, with modern iron technology used as a prosthesis.4
EXERCISING ARCHITECTURE
As medicaL representations changed, so did architectural representations. In the twentieth century, the widespread use ofX-rays made a new wayofthinking about architecture possible. Modern buildings even started to look like medical images, with transparent glass walls revealing the inner secrets of the structures. fig.9 Indeed, the architecture of the earLy twentieth century cannot befully understood without grasping its relationship with disease and especially withtuberculosis, a diseasefor which X-rays wereby chance particuLarLy weLL adapted as a means of diagnosis and monitoring of treatment. no. 10
     The symptoms, if not the principles, of modern architecture seem to have been taken straight out of a medicaL text on the disease. A year before the German microbiologist Robert Koch discovered the tubercle bacillus in 1882, «e.n a standard medical book gave the cause of the disease as, among other things, lack of exercise, sedentary indoor Life, defective ventilation, deficiency of Light, and depressing emotions.5 It took a long time for these notions to lose
16
11
                     BERLINER
  KLINISCHE WOCHENSCHPJET.
                  Organ für practiscbe Aerzte.
                Mit Berücksichtigung der pre rssischen Medicmiüvenraltung und Medieinalgesetzgcbung
                     nach amtlichen Hütheünngen.
         Redactetur: ProfcssM Dr C. 4. Md.                                                         Verlag von Augiisl Ilirsckirild ii Bnlffl.
         Montag, den 10. April 1882.                               j\l 15.                                   Neunzehnter Jahrgang.
         Inh all: L Kooh: Die A*tiol<*gic der Tub rtulösc. — II. JJ®.Harr Ueber cineD Fsll tod Wanderleber. — UI. Huste*". Ueher autisepliscbe Pnlviti-reTbände (Schluss). — IV- Verhandlungen ärztlicher Gesellschaften (Berliner medic mische Gesellschaft). — V. FcaületcD (Jlasir.ialiiösentabolc der Rharrcacopoca Germanica, ed. II — Tagesgescbicbtlicbe Notizen). — VI. Amtliche Mittheilungen. — Inserate.
                                                                              1. IMe Aetiolegie der Taliertulese.
(Nach etoßiD/!u de? physiologischen Gesellschaft zu Berlin am
                                                                                 *S4_ März er. gehaltenen. Vortrage.)
                                                                                                 V*o
                                                                                         Br, Robert Jtocii>
                                                                                Bcferonss :ith 5m Kaiscrl. Ge^unJbeitsamL
     Die Ton Vjllemin gemachte Entdeckung, dggg die Taber-eulose aaf Thieve übertragbar isN bat bekanntlich vielfache Bestätigung,. aber aneb anscheinend woLlbegniudeteu Vfidersprueh gefunden, sn dass es bis vor wenigen Jahren unentschieden bleiben nmsste, ob die Tnbercolose eine Infektionskrankheit m oder nicht. Seitdem baben aber die zoeret von Cohnheim und Sal v mouseu, später von Eaumgarten ausgefübrteu Impfungen in die vordere Angeokamjuer, ferner die Inbatations-vexanebe von Tapp einer and Anderen die Öebcrtragbarkeit dev Tuberculose gcgeQ jedeo Zweifel sicheT gestellt itnd ei; muss ihr in Zukunft ein Platz unter den InfectinnakrAnkbeiteD an. gewiesen werden.
     "Wenn die Zahl der Opfer, welebe eine Krankheit fordert, als Massstab für ihre Bedenton« *n gelten hat, dann mi^ct alle Krankheiten, fflunentlieh aber die gefnrebtetstea Iniectinns-kraokteiten, Pest, Chnlera u. s. w. weit hinter der Tubercolnse aurücksteben. Die Statistik lehrt, da« ’/T aller Menschen an Tnberculose stirbt and dass, weun nnr die mittlcreu productiven Aitersklasseo in Betracht kommen, die Tubercolnst: ein Drittel derselben und oft mehr dabinrafft Die öffentliche Gesundbeit;?-pl.ege hat also Grund genug, ihre Aufmerksamkeit eine? sn mörderischen Krankheit zu widmen, gaoz abgesehen davon, dass nnch andere Verhältnisse, von denen nnr die Beziehungen der Tubereulose zut Perlsücitt erwähnt werden sollen, das Interesse dev Gesundheitspflege in Anspruch nehmen.
     Da es non zu den Aufgaben des Gesundheitsamtes gehört, die InJectionskrankbeiten vnm Standpnokte deT Gesnndbeits-pflege aus, also in erster Linie in Beang anf ihre Aerologie, ¡cum Gegenstand von Ermittelnngsarbelten an machen, sn erschien es als eine dringende Pflicht, vor Allem 6beT die Tubereulose eingehende Dntersudumgen anznstellen.
     Das "Wesen dar Tnbercnlnse zu ei gründen, ist sebnn wieder-hnlt versnobt, abeT bis Jetzt ohne Erfolg. Die zum Nachweis de? pathogen eoUicrourgacismen sn vielfach bewä.biicnPirbnugs-metboden haben dieser Krankheit’ gegenüber im Stich gelassen
ond die aum Zwecke der Isnlirung and Zdcbtnng des Taberkeb Virus angestelltcn Versuche konnten bis jetzt nicht als gelongen angesehen werden, sn dass Gnbn beim 1 n der soeben erschienenen neuesten Auflage seiner Vorlesungen über allgemeine Patbnlogie „den directew Nachweis dee tnb«TcaU>sen Viras als ein bis heute noch ungelöstes Problem* bezeiebuou musste. 1
      Bei meinen Uutersvcbnogeo über die Tnberculose habe ich micb anfangs auch der bekakele» Methoden "bedient, ohne damit eine Aufklärung übe? das Wesen der Krankheit zu erlangen. Aber durch einige gelegentliche Beobachtungen wnrde ieb dann veranlasst, diese Methoden &u verlassen and andere "Wege einZuschlägen., die sehliessheh aueb za positiveo Resultaten föbrteo.
      Das Ziel der Untersuchung musste zunächst auf den Nachweis von irgend weiden, dem Körper fremdartigen, parasitischen Gebildet) gerichtet aein, die möglicherweise ala Krankheitsursache gedeutet werden konnten. Dieser Nachweis gelaug aueb in der That dorcb ein bestimmtes Pirbungsverfahren, mit Hßife dessen in alleo tnbereniös. verändetlen Organen obaracte-ristlsebe, bis dahin nicht bekannte Bactcrieo zu ^uilen waren. Ks würde su weit führso, den Weg, auf welchem ich zu diesem ueueu Verfahren gelaugte, zu schildere und ich will deswegen sofort iur Beschreibung desselben übergehen,
      Die Cntersacbungsobjeete werden in der bekannten, für Untersuchungen auf pathogene Bacterieu fibliden "Weise, vorbereitet and eutweder aof dem Deckglas ausgebreitet, gvtmckoet nud erhitat, nder na eh Erhärtung in Alkohol in Schnitte seile ®t. Die DeekgläseLen oder Schnitte gelangen in eine Farblösung von folgender Zusammensetznng. 2fK> Ccm, destiilirten Wasse:». werden mit I Gern, einer ooncentrirten aleoholisehen Kfetbylen. blau-Lösung verroischt, umgescbättelt und erhalten dann unter wiederholtem Schütteln noch einen Zusatz von 0,2 Gern, einer 10% Kalilauge. Diese Mischung darf selbst uaeb tagelaugem Stehen kernen Niederschlag geben. Die zt? färbenden Objecte bleiben in derselben 20 bis 2i Stunden, Dnreb. Erwärmen der Parbiösuug auf 40° C. im Wasserbude kann diese Zeit auf Vs bis I Stunde abgekürzt werde». Die Deckgläscbea werden Lieraof mit einer coneentrirten wässrigen Lösung von Vesuvio, welche vor jedesmaligem Gebrauche 20 flltriren ist, ubergossen und nach ein bis 2wei Minoten mit destiliirtem "Wasser ab-gfeapült "Wenn dje Deckgläschen aus dem Methylenblau kommen, rieht die Urnen aobaftende Schiebt dunkelblau aus and is; stark
Health and Architecture:From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
17
12 Willi Baumeister, poster ofthe Werkbund exhibition Die Wohnung, 1927
13 Woman exercising on the terraceof Richard Dockers house in the Weissen-hofSiedlung, Die Wohnungexhibition, Stuttgart, 1927
14 CIA\1 Algiers team, presentation panel on tuberculosis in Bidonville Mahiejdi nne, for the 9th ClAM congress in Aix-en-Provence, 1953
13
credibility. Tuberculosis was thought to be a “wet" disease produced by damp cities. In an uncanny echo of Vitruvius, theTB patientwasthought toneeda new environmentto dry out the inside of their bodies. Modern architects offered health by providing exactly such a change of environment. Nineteenth-century architecture was demonized as unhealthy, and sun, light, ventilation, exercise, roof terraces, hygiene, and whiteness were offeree as means to prevent, if not cure, tuberculosis. FGS,iz-i4 The publicity campaign of modern architecture was organized around contemporary beliefs about tuberculosis and fears ofthe disease.
      In engaging TB, architects were not just tuning in to one illness among others.TheTB scarewas key in the emerging bond between the body, the military, industry, and politics. As Susan Sontag argued, few diseases have been so “spectacularly, and similarly, encumbered by the trappings of metaphor" as tuberculosis and cancer.6 ln The Human Motor; Anson Rabinbach goes as far as locatingTB as part of a complete reconceptualization of the human body? He argues that the obsession with fatigue that took over between 1895 and World War I marked rising anxiety about the industrial age. Diseases such as TB were blamed on fatigue, and exercise programs offered to combat them. Therewasa widespread call fororganized sports.Gymnastic exercises,which had been limited tothe militarythroughout the nineteenth century, were now advocated for schools. Furthermore, the military itself was reorganized on the basis of the new “sciences of work." Medicine and biology becamethe basis of politicaltheory.Through this “biologiza-
18
tion of politics," the sciences of the body were firmly established as the basis of “social hygiene." By 1910, they were split into physiology and psychology, but successfully recombined as “psychotechnics” during the war. On the basis ofthismilitarysi.Iccess,an amalgamation of European scientific research and US Taylorism became standard equipment of modern industrial management. The,dream of a body without fatigue finally reached its sinister peak in the dictatorial regimesofthe 1930s.
      We can see this trajectory in a-chitecture. Architects repeatedly used disease imagery to express concern for social order. Architecture’s traditional role of imposing order takes on different meanings with different diseases. The reconfiguration of the medical body by new sciences leads to a reconfiguration of architecture. Take Le Corbusier, the opening pages of Vers une architecture (1923) give his “diagnosis" of the state of architecture, condemning the traditional house for producing the debilitating effect of tuberculosis (“consumption"). He goes on to promote the healthy engineer over the u n healthy architect:
      We have become sedentary beings, that is our lot. The house eats away at us in our immobility, like consumption. We will soon need too many sanatoria.... Engineers are healthy and virile, active and useful, moral and joyful. Architects are disenchanted and idle, boastful or morose.That is becausethey will soon have nothingto do. We hove no more money to pile up historical keepsakes. We need to cleanse ourselves....
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
19
15   Le Corbusier explaining the Plan Voisin using a map of thecity of Parts. Film still from L'Architecture d'au/ourd'hui 1929
16   Fi Im stills from L'Architecture d'au/ourd'hui 1929, by Pierre Chenal and Le Corbusier
      The diagnosis is dear. Engineers make architecture.... People still believe, here and there, in architects, just as people blindly believe in doctors8
Throughout the book, health is a battle cry. The final chapter opposes the healthy modern workplace to the u nhealthy private house: “The machine that we live in is an old coach full oftuberculosis"9 Likeso many architects, Le Corbusier expanded the medical argument from the house to the city. In Urbamsme (1925) he opposes the fatiguing city and looks for a “cure," concluding that "su rgery" is required to remove the “cancer” of degenerate street layouts and “rotten old houses full oftuberculosis"10
      In his film L'Architecture d’au/ourd’hui (1929), made in collaboration with the young filmmaker Pierre Chenal, Le Corbusier argues that disease breeds in cities because, in the twentieth century, people still live as if in the Middle Ages. His solution:cutthrough thefabric oftheold cityand exercise on the roof garden. fis.ib The film's tourthrough his villas of the 1920s emphasizes once again the value ofsun-bathingand exercise. Itculminates in close-ups, shotonthe diagonal from below, of a man and two women excitedly working out in a kind of sexualized intensity on the roof garden of Villa Church in exercise clothing and (for the women) high heels. FiG.isThe house isfirst andforemosta machinefor health, a form of therapy.
      In Lo ville radieuse of 1935, fig.17 Le Corbusier insists on detaching the house, with the help of pilotis (thin columns), from the “wet, humid ground,where disease breeds" and on
20
16
Health and Architecture:From Vitruvius toSick BuildingSyndrOme
7 Terraceofthe villa Stein at Garches. Film stll from !:Ardhitectum d'oujourd'hui. 1929, bf Pierre Chenal and Le Corbusier ia Le Corbusier, The Radiant City, first English edition, 1967,cover 9-21 l.lustrations from Le Corbusier's The Radiant City, 1967
usingthe roofasagardenforsunbathing and exercise.11 Fis.17 Nobody seems to have known anything about skin cancer yet. To reinforce the point, Le Corbusier uses pictures taken from medical texts as architectural illustrations, showing the lungs and their inner workings, Fia.20 while giving architectural illustrations medical labels, as when a photograph of an old partofthe city becomes “Historic Paris, tubercular Paris.”12 fig. 9 In this book, Le Corbusier develops a concept of“exact air”wherebythe outdoor air is continually circulated and cleaned, made “dust free, disinfected ...and readyto be consumed by the lung.’i3 fig.ji One by one, Le Corbusier thus presents the characteristic features of modern architecture—pilotis, roof garden, glass walls, and clean air—as medical devices, and theoverall effect is that of a sanatorium devoted to both preventive and reactive cure. There is no line between domestic architecture and medicine.
     Le Corbusier had long been obsessed with his own health. Moving in 1917 to Paris from his small hometown, La Chaux-de-Fonds in Switzerland, he complained about feeling exhausted allthe time until he met Dr. Pierre Winter, wio introduced him to exercise as a way of combating fatigue and stress. They played basketball together twice a week, and Winter subsequently turned Le Corbusier into a boxer, fig.23 runner, and eventually a swimmer. Winter would become a contributor to Le Corbusier and Am§dee Ozenfant’s journal LEspritnouveau, which regularly covered sporting events and informed its readers of new athletic records. In an article in LEsprit nouveau entitled "Sports" Winterwrites:
22
LE CORBUSIER - THE RADIANT CIT»
EXACT RESPIRATION
                                                                 Fig. 253. — Circulation a ra surface d uo lobule pulmonaire.
   1     el 2. roseau capillaire. 3. paroi de l'alv^ote; 4 "t 5. noyaux des celhilea épithéliales, 6. bronctoi, 7. vaiSseau sanguin aftroot.
                                                             Fig. 253. Circulation at the surface of a pulmonary lobule.
   I  and 2, capillary network.’ 3, Alveole wall. 4 and 5, nuclei of epithelial cells. 6, Bronchial tube 7. Afferent blood vessel.
• • Cut ¡n <he LUNG, the ,rn“e which cia be oocvptoJ t,w is pil •l)(hcf'Uhui)OI.Iiry,- i-\ '«ill '«hill  an esli^^^ ana (>(
200 ÎV. . . Aohtti""""'"n"M
                    ChC diwlftl Npri.-lu«Clo.'l\ici an :f(la vJ 150 fW it Is Kixcood '"11b cv'cryeII"tr..iOOIi l)f bc
htau, tklli ¡s: 70 umtsa n".,'" Till
bun's n'^i wnlndk- ponps aboul ll!IO yans of blocd in') i»: ll^tohal"' lltlrry i* ihll cicry l4    ubMJl
20.000    Liters
Iw!;' lloJWjIt«^.- Ill Norilnt "(l|
10.000   Liters,,,.. .•
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Build ng Syndrome
24
22  Children dancing in thaDalcroze method school of AlbartJeanneret, L'Espntnouvscu 2.1920
23  La COrbuserandPterreJeanneret bonngon the beach at Piquet». 1933
24  L'Espntnouveou 15. February 1922. cower
25  Pierre Winter, “Lecorps nouveau,” L'fspnf nouweou 15. February 1922
      Let us put our personal life and our social life in order. If everybody methodically studies his daily timetable with a view to taylorizing his acts and gestures... if we all banished idle habits and lackadaisical work, wasted effort... if sleep were better regulated ... when all those extra minutes were added up, one might find time for sport, for tending to the body..., [T]o regulate one’s life is to control it and is a great source of deep joy.... Sport introduces an element of ORDER in life,14
      FIGS.24,26
Winter was an enthusiast of the authoritarian wing of the syndicalist movement in France and a follower of Georges Valois (the self-proclaimed French Mussolini), who founded the short-lived fascist party Le Faisceau in 1925. In 1928, Winter joined the fascist revolutionary party of Philippe Lamour, made of old members of Faisceau. In a 1926 article for Valois's journal Le nouveau siècle on Le Corbusier’s plan for a new kind of city, Winter writes: “Only a strong program of urbanism—the program of a Fascist government—is capable of adapting the modern city to the needs of all.”15 This intimate bond between architecture, urbanism, disease, war, industry, and politics is explicit throughout the work of Le Corbusier and manyof his colleagues in the interwar period. In a lengthy statement prepared to introduce Le Corbusier’s lecture in L’Académie de la Coupole, Paris, in 1936, Winter describes “Le Corbusier... the architect, the painter, the poet as inseparable from the less known Le Corbusier that I have the particular mission to
L’ESPRIT
NOUVEAU
Health and Architecture. From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
25
                   introduce you to—under the labels, too pompous for their modesty ... Biologist (with a big B), sociologist (with a bigS), and I would add athlete, who could have perhaps become a champion"16 and goes on'to describe how he had encountered Le Corbusier in the early twenties in bad shape: “he disregarded his body ... worked day and night ... 7 days a week ... didn’t care about his sleep ... had. forgotten his breathing ... his muscles: He was surprised that did not go well and he complained and invoked bizarre gods, those that doctors have invented to deceive their ill."17
                        Winter, who in 1925 became chief surgeon in the Faculty of Medicine in Paris, was militantly in favor of homeopathy and actively searchingfor alternative forms of medi cine, including the curative capabilities of exercise and diet.The polemical pages of L'Esprit nouveau offered a number oftheories of health: from Dr. Winter's hygiene and exer-cisethrough Dr. Allendy’s homeopathy to Jaques-Dalcroze’s rhythmic gymnastics. fig.22 Each produced a unique image ofthe healthy body.
                        The modern body housed by modern architecturethus was not a single body, but a multiplicityof bodies. The body was no longer a stable point of reference around which an architecture could be built. It was a construction site. Architects such as Le Corbusier and his colleagues in the architectural avant-garde actively redesigned the body with their architecture, ratherthan housingit or symbolizing it.A new spirit(/’esprit nouveau) requiresa new body, as Winter writes in his article “Le corps nouveau":
     A truly new spirit can exist only in a new body. Instinctively, modern man knows that.... We have to realize thatthe most formidable discovery ofourtime is Health, understood in this more comprehensive sense. Physical health: the basis ,of mental health, the basis of every balanced activity, of all production, in all domains, and in that of art as much as in all the others.... The body will emerge naked i n the sun. washed, muscled.su pple.1s
Modern architecture likewise presented itself as lean and fit, all the excess weight of neoclassical tradition stripped off to reveal a muscular and agile body in a white sports outfit.The modern housewas understood notjustasa kind of medical equipment, a mechanismforcaringforthe body, but as a piece of exercise equipment designed to enhance it, to produce a strong and healthy body. Think of all the bodybuilding houses in modern architecture: Marcel Breuer’s bedroom for Erwin Piscator in Berlin (1927) fig.26, with its gymnastic equipment, and his apartment with Gustav Has-senpflugfor Hilde Levi in Berlin (1930) fig.27; Walter Gropius’s gyms in his communal apartments for the Werkbund exhibition in Paris (1930) Fie.23 and for the German Building Exhibition in Berlin (1931) FiG.29; Richard Docker’s rooftop gym at the Weissenhofsiedlung in Stuttgart (1927); Theo Effenberger’s roof terrace gym at the Werkbund building exhibition in Breslau (1929) ns.31; the sports room and solari-umon the top ofJohannes Brinkman and Leendert Cornelis van der Vlugt’s van der Leeuw house in Rotterdam (19281930). FiG.30 Then there are Le Corbusier’s Immeuble Villas
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick BuildingSyndrome
26  Marcel Breuer, bedroom for Piscator, Berlin,
1927
27  Marcel Breuer, apartment tor Hilde Levi
in Berlin, 1930
28  Walter Gropius. communal gym forapartment house.Werkbund exhibition, paris, 1930
29  Walter Gropius. communal gym for apart ment house, GermanBuilding Exhtoihorn Berlin. 1931
30  Leendeit Cornelisvan derVlugt and Johannes Brinkmann. gym in C. H van der Lew House. Rotterdam. 1928-1929
31  ^Theo Effenberger. house in the Werkbund housing ^ftibition. Breslau. 1929
                    27
28
28
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
29
32
33
(1922), where each apartment was to have its own sports room. “On the roof of the building there is a 1000-meter track on which to run in the fresh air, and there are also the gymnasiums, where the gym instructors would direct parents as well as children; there are so iariums too (which have proved so successful in the United States in combating tuberculosis)."19 fig.33 Th e athletic fig ure is one of the parad igmatic clients of modern architecture and tuberculosis lurks as the ever-present threat.
      But the body was not seen as simply physical. L'Espr/t nouveau was also obsessed with the relationship between psyc h e and body. It published articles by Dr. Allendy and his colleague Dr. Laforgue onthe relationsh ip between Freud ian psychoanalysis and French psychiatry, with titles such as "The Conscious and the Unconscious," "Neuroses,” “Dreams," and "The Oedipus Complex." While Le Corbusier was sometimes dismissive of psychoanalysis, he repeatedly spoke of the intimate relationship between mind and body, portraying mental stability as the product of a healthy physical environment. In Urbanisme, hearguesthatthe degeneration ofthe city leads to “physical and nervous sickness," and in Lo v/iie radieuse, he proposes that the new living cell be a machine for the “recuperation of physical and nervous energy ... the upkeep of the human machine: cleaning, drain ing the toxic substances, recuperating nervous energy, mainte-nan ceor increase of physicalenergy"!0 FiG.3*0nce again, the architectwas a doctor. practicing a form of preventive medicine that nurtures and rebuilds the body and psyche.
30
32  LeCorbusier portrayed as a biologist.
Pi erre Winter, "The Po int ofView of a Biologist,"' 1933
33  LeCorbusierfArchitecrur$ et urbanisme, suspended garden, lmmeuble Wanner, Geneva, 1928-1929
34  The Biological Unit,Illustrationfrom Le Corbusier's The Padiont City
MODERN NERVES
The history of modern design uncannily parallels that of modern anesthetics. Every element of modern architecture addressed both physiological and mental sickness. Le Corbusier saw ttie smooth, white surfaces he was strongly advocating with his architecture not just as hygienic, a way to prevent the spread of germs,..but as 3n anesthetic to calm “the nerves shattered fn the aftermath of war," at the same time that actual anesthetics (cocaine) were being“peddled" in the street of Paris, as he noted.21 Cocaine was one of the first substances used as anesthetic for surgery by Karl Koller (on the recommendation of Freud) in 1884. fig.3s
     Anesthesia is the removal of feeling, the te mporal suppression of the central nervous system in order to achieve lack of sensation, and by minimizing friction, the smooth surfaces of modern architecture anesthetize bodily sensation. Smooth white planes restore the "calm" that preceded the brutality of the arrival of the mass-produced ornaments of modern industry Le Corbusier repeatedly uses the word “calm" as an ideal, as if the purpose of design was stress reduction. For him, even the touch of the modern object becomes a reassuring visual effect: “Our hand reaches out to it [the modern object) and our sense of touch looks in its own wayas ourfingers close around it."22
     The shock of war, the shock of the machine age, the shock of the metropolis have in common anesthesia, the temporary removal of feeling, whether physical or psychological. In “Experience and Poverty" (1933) Walter Benjamin wrote about people returning from World War I “poorer in
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
experience,” unable to communicate, siLent, in shock after feeling the fuLl force of modern technology: “A generation that had gone to schooL in horse-drawn streetcars now stood in the open air, amid a Landscape in which nothing was the same except the clouds, and, at its center, in a force fieLd of destructive torrents and exp.osions, the tiny, fragile human body."52 Until the nineteenth century, aesthetics, from the Greek, had n ot hing to do with the intelLect or the ideal and everyth ing to do with sensation, with perception by bodily feeling.24 But now, feeLing was no longe r possibLe. Humanswere anesthetized by the shock,yet sou ght further anesthetics. This poverty of experience find s its parallel i n
32
35  Robert C.Hinckley, first operatio nunder ether. 1846,painted 1832-1893
36  Opium Poppy, in Otto Wilhelm Thomê, Flora von Deutschland, ûsrerrefch und der Schweiz, 1835
37  The equipment of adentist. published by Le Corbusier and Ozenfant in their articleTormation de l'Optique Moderne’' in L'Esprit nouvvou 21,1924
modern architects re i n glass-and-ste eL bui Ldings on whose smooth surfaces the inhabitant canno: leav e anytraces, any memory, In his writings on BaudeLaire, Benjamin speaks of the smile of passersby in the metropolis (“keep smiLing") that protect them from,an unprecedented number of close encounters with strangers by developing mimetic tactics. The smiLe “functions as mi metic shock absorber.“25 Modern design is likewise a shock absorber, its frozen smile barely hiding the terror it tries to cover over.
      Benjamin’s understanding of modern experience is neurological, as Susan Buck-Morss has written.26 "The shock expe rience which the passer-by has in the crowd corresponds to what the worker ‘experiences' at his machine.“27 War. machine. and metropoLis are all shock environments. conditions of danger where one has to be able to react quickly to protect oneseLf from sudden, unforeseeable threats. Nerves are on the periphery.
      The elimination of ornament is not simply an aesthetic choice, but a neurological or even narcotic one. Adolf Loos argued that we moderns no Longer have the nerves necessary to eat, dress, and decorate as in previous centuries. In "Ornament and Crime," he speaks of his "horror" in front of the decorated animaLs in culinary dispLays, particularLy if he thinks he has to eat “one of these stuffed animal corpses.
I only eat roast beef!" Hefeelsthe same nausea inthefaceof any excessive ornament, whether on food or architecture: “We Lack the steady nerves to drink from an eLephant's ivory tuskon which an Amazon battle scene has bee n engraved.... Our temples are noi onger painted bLue, red,green,and white,
Health and Architecture; From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
34
38 Adolf Loos after a stomach operation, Sanatorium der Kaufmannschaft, 1918
39  "The Man with the Modem Nerves; poster for a senes of lectures by Adolf ^Lo in La Sorbonne. Paris, 1926
40  Hydrotherapyatthesanatorium “Lebendige Kraft." fill body ^rap by Or. Maximilian BircherBrenner,Zunch. 1910
Healthand Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
35
like the Parthenon. no, we have learned to appreciate the beauty of naked stone."28 Modern man has a whole new set of nerves with completely different sensitivities.
     In “Karl Kraus," Walter Benjamin quotes Robert Scheu, brother ofGustavScheu (for whomAdolfLoos built a controversial house in Vienna in 1912): “Kraus discovered a great subject that had never before set in motion the pen ofa journalist: the rights of the nerves.... He became the advocate of the nerves ... but the subject grew under his hands, to become the problem of private life."29 Private life, the interior, becomes newly fragile, like that of the nervous i ndi-vidual analyzed by psychoanalysis or the vulnerable body of the tuberculosis patient penetrated by X-rays. Everybody becomes like a child or a patient needing to be wrapped ir soft lining. fig.4» It is as if the new nerves are so new that the modern individual has only just been born and needs a protective incubator to survive, to gain the necessary strength. Loos's architecture is such an incubator.
     Loos was himself fragile. He suffered from numerous nervous and physical ailments throughout his life. He contracted syphilis as a young man, and it left him sterile. He had stomach cancer and underwent a number of major surgeries. figjs All his life he suffered from poor hearing, and he eventually became completely deaf. At the end of h s life, he checked himself into the sanatorium run by his friend. the neurologist Dr. Norbert Schwarzmann, in Kalksburg, where he died in 1933. Ayear earlier, Buckminster Fuller had included “nerve shock proofing" in his list of basic requirements for all houses.80 Frederick Kiesler and Richard
36
41  Frederick Kiesler, ContemporOry Art Applied to the Store ond Its D/sploy, 1930.cover
Neutra would develop entiretheories of design based onthe nerves. It is as if nerves themselves were the true clients of modern architecture.
      Modern architecture was not just a form of medical equipment or an exercise machine. It also was a cocoon for shelteringthefragile psychetraumatized byexposu re to war, loss of stable borders, and..he new rhythms and,speeds of modern industrialized technology. Every room became a recovery room, every building a trauma center. Architecture became a psychological craft.
“PSYCHO-FUNCTION,” OR ARCHITECTURE AS EATING DISORDER
«
Take, for example, the extraordinary concept of "psychofunction” that Friedrich Kiesler introduced in his 1930 book Contemporary Art Applied to the Store and Its Display: fig.41 “The ‘psycho-functional’ influence is exhibited not only in lines, planes and form, but also in materials and colors. Glass has a different psychological effect from leather, wood from metal. The same applies, of course, to color schemes. Function and efficiency alone cannot create art works. ‘Psycho-function' is that 'surplus’ above efficiency which may turn a functional solution into art."31 Kiesler continues the argument in the later essay "Pseudo-Functionalism in Modern Architecture”:"We muststrivefromthe outset to satisfy the psyche ofthe dweller. "31 The house, he says, is a human body, "a living organism with the reactivity of a full-blooded creature,” with organs (the stairs are the feet, the ventilation system is the nose, and so on), a nervous
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
37
system, and a digestive system that can “suffer from constipation”33 More than that, he insists, the house, like man, lives “in emotions and dreams through the medium of his physique.” The psyche cannot be separated from the body. Indeed, the house is the product of “the erotic and creative insti nct,” and our experience of it is erotic3'
      In the press release for the 1969 exhibition of Ga/ax/es at the Howard Wise Gallery in New York, Kiesler claims to have “discovered architecture” when, at the age of three, he crept under the “volum inouspeasant ski rts of his Ukrain ian nanny and struck a match." Architecture for him is always erotic. Of his Endless House, fiss.42,43 he writes: "There is no beginning and no end to it,likethe human body....The‘End-less' is rather sensuous, more like the female body in contrast to sharp-angled male architecture.”35 The building is meantto produce a kind of high—in 1961, he likened the experience of the Endless House to that of smoking marijuana. In the course of an interview, he was asked: “What do you think would happen if architects generally became interested in whatyou have done and inyour approach? Isn't it a terribly dangerous, undisciplined sort of architecture for most people?” To which he responded: "I can assure you, it will be like giving them marijuana, architecturally speaking.”36 For him, the occupant of modern architecture yearns to bespaced out.
      In 1947 Kiesler generated the first version of his Endless House. The house was not just one project among others. It was his whole life—his philosophy and even his body. He built it, literally, from the inside and saw himself
38
42,43 Frederick Kiester, Endless House. interior models, 1960
Health and Archilecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
39
being swallowed by it. The house was like a stomach, fu U of folds, absorbing juices and nutrients. The occupant thus becomes a kind of food. In anextraordinary confusion of his own body with architecture, he described modern architecture as architecture on a diet inthe aftermath of World War I:
     We had nothing to eat. I recall very well my own situation: after the war I lived on the dole for many years;
     I got about seven Kronen a week, which would be the equivalent of seven dollars per week now. But one could live on that monastically; I had rice, chiefly, and mushrooms. I remember only too well the mushrooms which I dried and reheated again just as I did with tea-leaves. As in our living habits, we started to clean off everything that was surplus in design—ornamentation, certain luxurious materials, moldings, this and that. Everythi ngbecame, over the years, sim pler, cleaner, whiter, and ... you know, what we call functionalism was on its natural way.
          So functionalism was really a reaction to the overstuffing of the Victorian age. Architecture had to be put on a diet. And the rectangular style did it. Now the period of diet is over and we caneatnormallyagain. However that does not mean that we should overeat, stuff ourselves with whipped cream, ice cream—or with architecture either.37
Modern architecture is an eating disorder. The result was what Kiesler called "the rectangular style;’ the skin-and-
44  Frederick Kiesler, Endless Theater, foor plan. Venna.1924-1925
45  Frederick Kiesler. Space Stage, International Exhibition of New Theater Techniques.Vienne, 1924
46  Frederick Kiesler. Endless^^ofer, longitudinal section, Vien na, 1924-1925
bones architecture of the modern period. For him, a weLL-baLanced diet meant his Endless House: the elimination of any constipating residue. Everything in the Endless House is skin. The skin is the structure, as in an egg. Kiesler claimed to have worked on this idea for a long time. In fact, he insisted that he worked on just one idea throughout his life. Hetraced it back to his Space Theater of 1923, FGs.«-46 his “first Endless." When he came to the United States in 1926, he said, he carried the Endless with him, but no one understood it. The organizers of the International Style exhibition of 1932 at MoMA reviewed his work when they were preparing the exhibition. This is how Kiesler recalls their meeting:
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Bui ldingSyndrome
41
      Philip Johnson came with Henry-Russell Hitchcockto see plans of my work.Among our friends of the De Stijl group it was known that I have deviated from the “quadrat," but van Doesburg stood by enthusiastically, as did Mondrian. The others were doubtful; Mies was neutral and reserved. I was terribly poor.... Here were the plansfor a buildingthat looked like an egg, not Like the customary box. It wasn’t square, it wasn’t in steel, it wasn’t in glass, it wasn’t in aluminum, it was absolutely outside the mode ofthe International Style.39
47 Frederick Kiesler withhis model of the Endless House. New York. 1959-1960
48 Frederick Kiesler inside the Bucephalus, Amaganset.Long Island, 1964-1965
49,so Twostudies of human perception/ Vision Machine (Shortest-Longest), NewYork,ca. 1937-1941
51 Portrait of Frederick Kiesler, 1965
52 Frederick Kiesler, inside the Endless House. 1966, cover
Kies ler was starving. Apparently he survived thanks to a coffee shop owner on Sixth Avenue who fed him and his wife Stefi Frischer every da . When he was finally thrown out of his apartment because he could not paythe rent, hewas let in every day bythe doorman whilethe new tenants were out so hecould use the drafting table, which had been confiscated by the landlord, to work on his project for the shop windows of Saks Fifth Avenue. Inside the Endless House describes his inability to afford even basic expenses in terms of the same emaciated body that he identifies with modern architecture: “All in all, I'm down at the bottom and have practically nothing left: these expenses are the bone structure, and there is no hope for either skin or flesh with which to cover the skeleton."33
      Just as Le Corbusier’s idea about health and architecture started with his obsessions about his own body, Kieslers physical condition organized his theories and designs. He could not separate himself from his architec-
42
«
50
ture. Not by chance, he always photographed his own body insidethe bodyofthe building. pigs.4?,4s With his fragile frame inside the egg, it is as if the house became his surrogate body. He replaced the heroic, athletic, muscular body of modern architecture w,ith a. frail body in need of protection by architecture. Architecture here becomes an infinite, uterine cave, nurturing a kind oUranslucent body so tpat the brain can thrive and feel.The bodyfor Kiesler quivers, sheltered ina kind ofspiral, not in orderto be disconnected from the world, buton the contrary, in order to connect itself to the world.
      The polemical sensuality of Kiesler’s designs extends the nerves from the psyche through the tactile to the cosmic. A series of sketches make this point. In one, the interaction of the nervous system with a chair becomes part of a multisensual engagement with the world. In another, the chair becomes partofan interior, and the human is described as "a terrestrial spectra," the environment as a “stellar spectra (with the objectstaking the place of stars)." figs. 49,so Space for Kiesler is always outer space. Everything in his architecture floats. The floors go up and down, the structure hangs, and even the furniture, the cabinets, the tables, the lighting fixtures are suspended in a Surrealist project that begins with the thought ofthe body as a kind of house and of the house as a body. It is not by chance that his memoirs are entitled Inside the Endless House. fig.sz Psyche, sexuality, the body, and architecture are inseparable.
      Indeed, in Inside the Endless House Kiesler refers to “the house of the human body." The book is a kind of diary
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
43
(covering the years 1956 to 1964) that revolves around the condition of thearchitect's body. Itis filled with referencesto his medical problems, from rheumatism to asthma, allergies, colds, and fevers. Much of it involves eating, or the desire to eat. Detailed descriptions of numerous meals are preceded by comments such as “a hunger rose from my stomach incessantly" or “My solar plexus signaled hunger. And starved I was." Even a client's final agreement to commission Kiesler is interrupted by the stomach: “I was desperately hu ngry. ...I ate a naked pieceof meat."40 The modern subject is like thefirst humans survivingin their caves after the occasional hunt.
      Le Corbusier’s fatigue and Kiesler’s malnourishment completely organized their thinking about architecture. Their rhetoric of the healthy and health-inducing building is underpinned by the actual experience of sick bodies. The wasting away of the body became the countermodel for a healthy architecture. But their therapeutic proposals are very different, as is clear in a section of Inside the Endless House entitled “The Correalism of the Plastic Arts": “nobody has ever defined the meaning of the roots of function; it has notbeen recognized that anyfunction is subject toevolution just as man is. Function is now frozen in hygiene, light and air-conditioning"41 Kiesler dismisses the aesthetic of sun, air, and hygiene as a “magic fake of pseudo-functionalism" that is “vomiting its indigestion."42 Modern architecture is not as healthy as it looks. inside the Endless House suggests that healthy architecture has to avoid threats like the “cancerous growth of ducts"43 imposed on all building types by
44
engineers and the filling of basements with the “excrement from the digestion of our house-life."44 a whole different attitude toward the body of the building is required.
     For Kiesler, the healthy body is first and foremost the sensual body. lndeed,,sensual pleasure is the organizing principle of his work. At one point, he describes the model of the Endless House as "rolled up like a sex kitte)l." The architect’s primary role isto satisfy appetites, whether sexual or gastric: “fart could be accepted like sex and sex like eating, men and women would not feel like perverts, shamelessly obscene in the presence of modern art or architecture."45 For Kiesler, the International Style is filled with disorders and repressions. Unblocking architecture in the name of pleasure does not mean abandoning the medical body. On the contrary. Kiesler’s twisted forms are meant to be healthier than Le Corbusier’s “machine a habiter." Dissidents such as Kieslerexpose that modern architecture is an always failed attempt to repress its own sensuality and like every person is full of secrets, obsessions, and forbidden pleasures hidden behind its attempts to project the image ofa new normality.
NUDITY, FREE LOVE, ANDTHEHEALTH HOUSE
R. M. Schindler and Richard Neutra are well known in the history of modern architecture for their respective “health houses" for Doctor Phillip Lovell in California: Schindler’s Lovell Beach House in Newport Beach (1922-1926) fig.54 and Neutra’s Lovell House in Los Angeles (1927-1929), also known as the Health House. fig.53 Less well known is thatthe
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick Building Syndrome
53  Rudolph Schindler bathing at illilouette Falls,Yosemite, 1921
54  R. M.Schindier.Beach House for Dr. Phillip Lovell, Newpoit Beach. 1925-1926
ss Paule Schindler end Leah Lovell, in the garden." ca. 1925 56 Adolf Koch's socialist body culture school, Lake Motzen. near Berlin, ca. 1930
46
Health andArchitecture: From Vitruvius to Sick BuildingSyndrome
47
59
WTK «te DT
NE COMPLEX Of NUDISM
57 Image in Nude Liv'ng, April 1962
58 CcverofNude Living, April 1962
59 Article by Richard Neutrain Nude Laving April 1962
60 Richard Neutra, Lovell Health House.under construction
at Back cover of Richard Nautra,
Sur vr.'O Through 1954, with the Health House underconstruction superimposed on an image of the nervejs system of the body
58
^NODE . U,,N? .
impu Ise behind both houses came not so much from straight modern architecture theories as from theories about sex, health, psychoanalysis, and n udism. fiss.gj, ss Modern architecture was here inseparable from a new lifestyle, which included a vegetarian diet, exercise, su nbathing in the nude, sleeping in the open air, and dressing in simple robes made from natural fi be rs. Many of these ideas came from the late nineteenth-century Lebensreform movement in Germany, fig.56 which advocated a back-to-nature lifestyle of fresh air, gardening. health food, alternative medic ine, nudism,sexual liberation, and the avoidance of alcohol, tobacco, and vaccines. These ideas had arrived in California, where many proponents of the movement had emigrated Neutra even contributed to the magazine Nude L'wng on the recommendation of his secretary, Audre Hardy, who was featured
n aked in its pages.46 FIGS.57-S9
      Dr. Lovell was a naturopath and drugless practitioner who thought all diseases have a dietary origin. He never studied medicine, but his theories of diet, exercise, sun therapy, and open-air sleepingwere veryinfluential in Southern California. He wrote a colum n for the Los Angeles Times entitled “Care of the Body." The publisher of the newspaper, Harry Chandler, was one of his patients. The Lovell Houses of Schindler and Neutra were organized around his full regime of sun, air, exercise, fasting, and dietstrategies. The Health House of Neutra, in particular, became a public cemonstration of Lovell’s theories, with en-suite sleeping porches outside every room, "nude sunbathing opportuni-t es”th roughout the house, and “hydrotherapy equipment”
48
60
and “marathonshowers"inthe master bathroom, which was also equipped with a “built-in enema fixture with various douches and nozzles devices,thermostatically controlled.”47 Lovell opened the house to the public for two weekends, announcingit' in his Los Angeles Times column, which included photographs, a description of the house, and a map showing howto get there. Fie.oi.Arou nd fifteen thousand people showed up, and Neutra himself gave the tours. fig.«3 Two photographs of the “House of Health" appear in this column alongside ads for treating “sagging flabby chins,” “pelvic troubles: men and women;’ “severe cases of chronic constipation;’ “Prostate troubles;’ and “eczema;’4® a testament to the increasing preoccupation of Americans with the physical appearance and performance of their bodies.
      Lovell saw in modern architecture a model for health, a mechanism for reconstructing the human:“When we learn to build our bodies with the same careful precision and the same scientific accuracy with which the modern builder constructs his houses” we finally will become healthy.49 Neutra, on the other hand, saw architecture as a “branch of preventive medicine.” lnfluenced by Lovell’s theories of drugless health, he was proud of resisting what he called the “drugs of ornamentation" inthe designof the house, avoiding the “corpulent excesses of ornament and curvature.”50 Neutra had his own theories about the relationship between health and architecture and wrote extensively about it. In Survival through Design (1954), fb.6i for example, he argues that theverysurvival of the human species depends on having designers focus on “physiological space.” Design, for
Health and Architecture:FromVitruvius toSick Building Syndrome
49
62
An out-of-doors. yel Inclosed area, b a ficlmUssoi prvpcr vrttb provision tec their carpenter work, clay modeling and other hand tools
Time are tacUltlci tor swimming, basketball, handball and. In fact, any other provision which can be developed In a reasonably email area of ground.
Yet most of these are available to the average small home—«« cottage ot modest means
The entire home should be contidend Horn a social sense rather than freon a restricted private family residence—a place «vhtre friends and kin can gather —where children of ghe ntighbsrtiocd wtll prolong their stay voluntarily.
For year* X have periodically written articles telling you now to build your bom« to that you can dtrlve tram it the maximum degree ot health aod beauty service. I hare written on miscellaneous problem* each as lighting, heating, hydrotherapy equipment, labor-saving dcvlcrj, sleeping parches, material tor cone true tlon and other health featuren Always at tho cod ot each ortielo Ana the thought, "It I em build a home myseh—•’
At last the day has arrived. We have bout such a home—a boo« prcmiMd on the fundamental health principles and construction Ideas which I have presented In my writings 1» the pact.
                                                                              Chronic Constipation Relieved’*
                                                                                   Write Thu Doctor
________/h.cri fi\£C 0e<>_
DR. WHITE has a boob (or MEN and a book for WOMEN. Either one tent FREE If you clip out this adr. and send it
RUPTURE
LXVEU, HOME or
health Ah.
Expert Here Permanently
Many of the win down are ot the latest Invention el glass, admitting ultra-via- < let light
The bathrooms are completely , equipped with hydrothorapy equipment, Including such things as cits hatha, mul- ; Upi* Barathea «hover* aod the latest type cl sanitary fixtures.
Sanitation and hygiene an the keynote.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ' /«ntliatton. sunshine and light
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      r>st'e wait until m or* -te» mlionble"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    tooAr?n?(”00 Kíí» »f l>f. Waller« "o»«r an<-»„mjiej' «••olio. (kut »telo «kleV. «na» sr»u have.
                                                                                                                  GEORGE STARR WHITE, M.D. 317-131 South Alvarado Street los Argeles. Coltferai*
      Z           rv       Jo            The n____________________ .
                  3        0 y         ideas are exceedingly modern,
                  r        —I y          The bedrooms are bulk 'on suite"; that
      2 .         j          IA         b, «very Iraida badionm has 1« aceom-
      >           —          [         praying sleeping porch so that sleeping
— L ■ -       1^1 '     . I — c»n be done outdoor«. .
      I ac ITFI IC Pi \/n                The lighting b Indirect—mostly re
i 1-0 r C.U1 j PL-vu.                Ce«ed In tide the celling-and ahowa be-
                                1 bind ribbed glass.
                                         The kitchen wotkld be Interesting to to Griffith Park. Tne accompanying every practical housewife, foe It lr.cce-sketeh win ttiow the way of getting porntes not only'the principles of hy-113 «c.                                glen» and sanitation, but also most of
Good Teeth lastre Good Health
                                       . gwm ana sanitarian,------------------------
The hoiuo will be open for public In- the labor-saving devices so deur to the spcctlon today, Sunday, the litis Inst, average woman There tr, for Instance, end Saturday and Suc-Joy, the 21st and Bn cjectr|c dishwasher a vegetnble-2ind Inst, rerpcetlrely. from B in to waoJi.r, % waUr Altar. a grinder for t P-OS-                                   Brains or coffees, if one wishes, heaps
Mr. Richard T. Neutro, architect who 0( cloiet ipace. a g*> Incinerator and (lessened and supervised the 00rutrue- similar conveniences Hon. «01 lectur# at 3 pin. on each of From the pbotographt cf the exterior these days oo building the home foe of ghe residence you con ace the quon-health and will conduct the audience city 0f glass which makts the house from rcom to roam and place to place, really an outdoors borne whenever so describing In detail the purposes of each debired.
Innovation.                                 This homo. In a erase, Is being built
The home ts located at tho end of a mainly tor the Lttle ones. It Is really blind street with a wide turning radial. • tuclal school In which they will laarn In order to avoid confusion It la re- their life habits. Their customs will be quested that everyone visiting the house molded and shaped therein, by automobile go to th* end of the rood. With this In view. It has many of the turn around it tho turning basin and features vvhleh schools should have, hat park on the right curb with your car moat of thorn do not. Th«re are, for lacing downhill I shall also ask that Instance, ample playground facilities you pleute drive tlowly and carefuly on with playground equipment to be added. Dundee Delve, as there win probably be lh<n ts a wading pond, where they con many ptoplo coming and going and sail their boats and grow their fish.
Prostate Troubles
CJO Masses CRD
                                                                                                    racscomco omd cousoui m im
HARRY S. BEUCHE*. OPT. D.
                                                                                                             AtrMtui vno
                                                                                                     Or. P1IU M. L.V.II-. H««M> Oft«.
                                                                                                       •Dislir ef Ceaneete Buida.
                                                   TRUSS SALE BIG BARGAIN

PARADISE RESORT
rwrJTJ»'
                                                                                                                                           ECZEMA-*—1
                                                                                                                                       Successfully Treated by Natural
                                                                            Methods
DR. H. A. HOUDE, D C., N.D.
1111 a». cimMii n, «t>ua oosv
HOME TREATMENTS
           A-WV4 *r rtwe a            «.«luu. HtUU
SU* vino of home and garage.
kutnowsHintment
Loa Angola Tim«» Sunday Magazine
of the Body
Care
By Philip M. Lovell, N. D.
Tfcn Homo Built for Wcola*
Author of “Diet fer-fí*oWi1' oíd "The HozHk of ihs Cîiüd'
Th» pictures will show »me of It. The
Inspection. The thought
Pelvic Troubles
Severe Cases of
Front View of Dr. Lovell Homo of Health
with you
throughout the bous« foe nudt sun
baths privately token toe each member
oni- a»nflf »(
MMtfeR^Chins

LOS FELIS BLVD.
Send fE.'Ad'T-j'vi?«£,
KfiKVÄ re*
wan
50
63
Neutra, operates at the intersection of biology and psychology as a therapeutic defense against the “disastrous effects" of all theaccumulated conditions of modern life.
      Neutra thought his buildings could improve not just the health, Out also the sex lives of their inhabitants. The desire for self-improvement in every aspect of one’s life resonated with Californians who.had become increasingly concerned with. their bodies' appearance and performance.51 Exercise, bodybuilding, dieting, therapy, surgery, and cosmetics became a major part of a continuous se f-construction.
Already by midcentury, the preoccupation had extended to mental health. As tu berculosis became controlled w th antibiotics, particularly streptomycin (the first antibiotic cure for tuberculosis, discovered in 1943), Neutra switched his idea of the architect as a doctorto the idea of the architect as a kind of psychoanalyst. The function of the house was to provide not just physical health, but also psychological well-being. Many clients of Neutra talked to him about their “nervous" problems, their marital problems, their fertility problems. In fact, his theory of architecture was ultimately a theory about the nerves, the intersection of body and brain.
      A symptomatic figure was Wilhelm Reich, a protégé of Freud who deviated from his theories, was expelled from psychoanalytic circles, and settled in America in 1939. He was the inventor of the “orgone energy accumulator," popularized as an “orgasm machine" in films such as Woody
Allen’s Sleeper (1973) and Roger Vadim's Barbarella (1968). «2 PhilipM.Loveutcareofthe Body,”
Several clients of Neutra werefollowers of Reich, especially ^p^StoteL^vell Josephine and Robert Chuey,whocommissioned a house by House, LosAngeies, 1927-192L
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius toSick Building Syndrome
51
65
him that became a salon for orgone users and early experi-mentswith LSD.52fig.64
      Reich thought the libido is affected by physical space and—unlike Freud, who saw sexual dysfunction as a symptom of neurosis—Reich thought it is the cause of the neurosis and sought to alleviate it with “orgone," a previously unaccounted-for form of energy His “orgone energy accumulator" fig.ss was a primitive box the size of a telephone booth, composed of up to twenty layers of organic and nonorganic materials, that was supposed to accumulate the energy and transmit it to the body inside it. Reich wrote about the need for regular, daily sessions in the machineand claimed it could cure anything from headaches to chronic fatigue, arthritis, heart disease, cancer, brain tumors, and impotence.The orgone accumulator became best known as a machine to increase sexual performance, orwhat Reich called “orgastic potency,” a complete release of energy that could be measured as an electrical discharge. Several clients of Neutra had accumulators in their houses. More important, Neutra thought of the house itself as a kind of orgone accumulator, a machine not just for health, but also for desire—or rather, desireas health.
64 Richard Neutra, Chuey House,
Los Angeles, 1956
65 Wilhelm Reich, Orgone Energy Accumulator
66 Charles and RayEames, wartime splint made of molded plywood, 1943
67 Charles and RayEames,mass production of plywood leg splints, 1943
SHOCKABSORBER
The bond between design, medicine. war, and psychology keeps runningthrough architectural discourse into the second half of the century. Charles and Ray Eames’s famous designs of the 1940s and 1950s, for example, are usually understood as reacting against the cold materials and
52
austere forms of 1920s and 1930s furniture design, which looked like doctor’s equipment, and as expressing a new concern for the body, for natural materials, and for organic forms. But there is nothing “natural" about them. In fact, the EameseS’ plywood, furniture and toys are the result of medicaland military research.
     During World War II, ChaRes and Ray Eames hadJormed a company with John Entenza to mass-produce plywood war products with military funding. In 1941 and 1942, they developed a molded plywood splint for the US Navy to replace a metal leg splint that did not sufficiently secure the leg and even led to gangrene and death. By the war's end, morethan one hundred and fifty thousand Eames splints had been shipped to the navy. FIGs.ss,s7 The splint performed very well in the field and was praised for its lifesaving features. In addition, the company designed and developed a plywood body litter and an arm splint, molded plywood aircraft parts, and more. By1945,the Eameses were producing molded plywood chairs with the technology they had developed for the military. A photograph ofthe plywood lounge chairof 1946 shows Charles Eames reclining on it, the position of his leg sticking straight out indicating that he had not forgotten where the idea came from. In addition,the Eameses produced molded plywood children’s furniture, molded plywood animals, lightweight plywood cabinets, and even plywood Christmas decorations made out of leftover splints. Military and medical equipmenthad become the basisofdomestic equipment.
     For the Eameses, as for Le Corbusier, the designer is a su rgeon. I n the course of an interview, Charles Eames said:
Health and Architecture: From VitruviustoSick Bui ldingSyndrome
53
                           “The preoccupation with self-expression is no more appropriate to the world of art than it is to the world of surgery. That does not mean I would reduce self-expression to zero; I am sure that really great surgeons operate on the edge of intuition. Butthe rigorous constraints in surgery—those are important in any art.”53 Yet the Eameses’orthopedic body is not Le Corbusier’s tuberculoid body or Kiesler’s emaciated body.At any one time there was more than one such theory at the intersection of medicine and architecture. Architectural discourse is shaped by a continuous debate and tension between alternative medical scenarios.
                                After World War II, Charles and Ray Eames defined the house itself as a “shock absorber." “The house must make no insistent demands for itself, but rather aid as a background for life in work ... [and] acts as re-orientor and ‘shock absorber."’54 But what is this shock? The shock in the postwar years was the shock of nuclear annihilation. FIGS. 6B,B9 Domestic life could no longer betaken for granted. It became an art form carefully constructed and marketed by a whole new industry: a form of art therapy for a trau ma-tized nation, a reassuring image of the “good life” to be bought like any other product.The interior becomes a showroom full of objects. fig.70 Shock is presumably absorbed through the consumption of design. “Good design" offers a “good life;’ a galaxy of happy, self-contained objects for people who do not feel safely contained and cannot be sure of life itself.
                                The Eameses perfected the “keep smiling” strategy that Benjamin had observed after World War I. Perhaps no
54
other designers can be seen smiling so often and so polemically. fig.71 While the ever-scowling Adolf Loos had insisted in “Ornament and Crime” that the craftsman is "so healthy he cannot invent ornament,” the ever-beaming Eameses. the poster children of good-design, encouraged the postwar consumer to keep clinging to smooth design as if to a psychological liferaft. The real fu.nction ofgood design regained anesthetic,a symptom of atraumathatcannot be expressed, a smooth line ofdefense.
      If architectural discourse has from its beginning associated building and body, the body that it describes is the medical body, reco nstructed by each new theory of health. Throughout the twentieth century, designers positioned architecture against medical and psychological trauma. Each new instrument of medical diagnosis implied new positions for design and new systems of architectural representation. The occupant is a patient, with modernity itself being both a disease and a possible cure.
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to SickBuilding Syndrome
56
63 Cover of Arts & Architecture, December 1946
se "Containment at Home:ACold War FamilyPoses in theirFallout Shelter," life magazine, August 1,1961
70  Charles and Ray Eames in the living room of the EamesHouse. 1958
71  Charles and Ray Eames at Christmas 1944,with plywood sculpture byRay
Health and Architecture: From Vitruviusto Sick Building Syndrome
57
1  Vitruvius Pollio, The Ten Books on Architecture, trans. Morris Hicky Morgan (Cambridge, MA: Harvard UniversityPress, 1914), p. 20.
2  Vitruvius argued thatobjects can be a combination ofthefourelements in different proportions, rather thanjustof two. as in theoriginal medical theory. "Commentary: Book 2,"' in Vitruvius: Ten Books on Architectue, trans. Ingrid 0. Rowland, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999), p. 178.
3  Karen-Ed isSarzman.Tte Florentine Academy and the Early Modern State:
The Disci#ine of Oisegno (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000),
pp. 163-64.The requirement of attending theannual dissection was added to the found ing statutes in 1563.
4  MartinBressani,"Prosthetic Fantasies of theFirst Machine Age:Viollet-le Ouc'slron Architecture,"AA Fites 68(2014), pp.43-49.
5  Austin Flint and William H.Welch, The Principles and Proctice ofMedicine, 5th ed.(Philadelphia: HenryC. Lea's Son & Co .. 1881), p. 203. See also Susan Sontag, Illness os Metophor(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977), p.54.
6  Sontag, Illness asMetaphoi, p.5.
7  Anson Rabinbach, The Humon Motor: Energy, Fatigue, ond the Origins of Modernity (NewYork: Basic Books, 1990).
8 Le Corbusier, To word an Arch    . trans.JohnGoodman (Los Angeles: Getty Research Institute, 2007), pp. 94-95; originally publishedin 1923as Vers une architecture,
9  Ibid., p.297.
10  LeCorbusier, TheCityofTo-morrow and Its Planning, trans. Frederick Etchells (New York: Dover Editions, 1987), pp. 256-57;originally published in 1925 as Urbonisme.
11  LeCorbusier, 7he Radiant City;, trans. Pamela Knight, Eleanor Levieux, and Derek Coltman (New York: Orion Press, 1967). pp. 55-56:originallypublished in 1933
as La ville radieuse.
12  Ibid.p. 100. LeCorbusier had already symptomatically ended his book Urbanisme (1925) with anappendix featuring highly detailed sectional medical images of lungs. Le Corbusier, Urbonisme (Paris: Cres 1925). unpaginated appendix.
13  Ibid.,p. 48.
14  Dr. Winter, "Sports." L’Esprit nouveau. no. 16 (May 1922), p. 1952.
15  Pierre Winter, "La ville moderne,”
Le nouveau siècle, May 16, 1926, quoted in Robert Fishman, Urbon Utopias in theTwentieth Century (New York: Basic Books,1982), p. 224.
16  “Le Corbusier... l'architecte, le peintre, le poète se confondent et ne sontpas séparables des le Corbusier moins connus que j'ai la particulière mission de vous presenter, -sous les étiquettes trop pompeuses pour sa modestie ...Biologiste (avecun grand B) du Sociologue (avec un grands) et j'ajouterai de l'athlète, qui
au rait peut-e^re pu arriver champion.”
Or. Pierre Winter,"Le Corbusier, Biologists, Sociologue," in LeCorbusier and Pierre Jeanneret. Œuvre complète, 7934-7938, (1936: Zurich:Girsberger, 1964). pp. 13-15.
17  Ibid., p. 14.
18  Or.Winter,“Lecorpsnouveau.'
L'Esprit nouveau, no. 15 (February 1922). p.1755.
19   LeCorbusier, Urbanisme(Paris:Crès, 1925), p. 207. In English, Le Corbusier,
The City of To-monowand Its Planning, p. 216,translation slightly modified.
20   LeCorbusier. TheCHyofTo-morrow ond Its Planning, p. 84; Le Corbusier,
The Radiant City, p.36.
21  LeCorbusier. TheDecorotiveArtof Today,trans.James L Dunnett (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987), p. 96; originally published in 1925 as décoratif d’aujourd'hui. See also Nina Rosenblatt, "Empathy andAnaesthesia: On the Origins of a French Machine Aesthetic," Grey Room, no. 2 (Winter 2001), pp. 78-97. The first public demonstration ofan operation under anesthesia (with ether) took place at Massachusetts General Hospital in 1846.
22  LeCorbusier, TheDecorativeArtof Today, p. 112.
23  Walter Benjamin,"Experience and Poverty," trans. Rodney Livingstone,
in Wo Iter Benjamin: Selected Writinngs, Iblume 2: 1927-7934, ed. Michael W. Jennings, Howard Eiland,and GarySmith (Cambridge. MA: BelknapPress of Harvard University Press, 1999),p. 732.
24  Susan Buck-Morss. ''Aestheticsand Anaesthetics:Wa lter Be njamin’s Artwork Essay Reconsidered," October 62 (Fa ll 1992), pp. 3-42.
25  Walter Benjamin, Chorles BoudeLoire, trans. Harry Zohn (London:Verso. 1983), p.133.
26   Susan Buck-Morss, ''Aesthetics and Anaesthetics: Walter Benjamin’s Artwork Essay Reconsidered "'October 62 (Fa II 1992), pp.3-42.
27  WalterBenjamin, “On Some Mots on Baudelaire," trans. Harry Zohn, in illu-minotions, ed. Hannah Arendt (NewYork: Harcourt, Brace & World, 1968). p. 155.
28   Adolf Loos, "Architecture.1 in The Architecture of Adol f'Loos :An Arts Co uncil Exhibition, ed.Yehuda Safran and Wilfried Wang (London: Arts Council of Great Britain, 1985). p.107.
29  Walter Benjamin,"Karl Kraus,* trans. EdrnundJephcott. in Walter Beni am in;
58
Sefected Writings, Volume 2: 7927-7934, p. 438. Benjamin often confuses Loos with thearchitecture of glass. Nothing could be further from Loos. But where he issurgical is with the dismantling of the private from within and the resolute defense against the intrusivega2eofpublicautho(rity.
30  Buckm.inster Fuller, "Universal Conditions of the Industrially Reproducible Shelter;1 T-Squore 2. no. 2 (February 1932V p. 37.
31   Frederick Kiesler, Contemporary ArtApplied to the Store andlts Display (New York: Brentano's. 1930). p. 87.
32  Frederick Kiesler. "Pseudo- Functionalism in Modern Architecture,” Partisan Ret'ew 16 (July 1949), p. 735. Emphasis in the original.
33   "Ahouse mustbepractical.To be practical means to serve.To be serviceable in every respect. in any d ire cti on.
If any directions are closed, the house suffers from constipation.' Ibid., p. 739.
34   Ibid.pp. 733-42.
35   Frederick Kieslerjnside theEndJess House: Art, faiple, and Architecture—
A Journol (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1966). p.566.
36   "Kiesler: Pursuit of anldea,1' interview by Thomas H. Creigton, Progressive Architecture (July1961 ). p. 115.
37   Ibid., p. 106.
38   Ibid.,pp. 113-14. Twentyyears tate, Johnson supported Kiesler's work.
In 1950, he acquiredfor the Museum of Modern Art the model of the Endless Housethat had beenexhibited in the KootzGallery. He also facilitated Kiesler’s subsequent exhibitions of the Endless House in theMuseum of Modern Art:
Tw/o Houses, New/ WOys of Building (1952). with Buckminster Fuller; and Visionary Architecture (1960), with Bruno Taut,
Frank Lloyd Wright, Buckminster Fuller, and LeCorbusier.
39   Frederick KiesJer, Inside the Endless House: Art. People, ondArchitecture— AJoumol, p. 229.
40   Ibid., p. 203.
41   Ibid., p. 154.
42   ibid., p. 155.
43   Ibid., p.338.
44   Ibid., p. 272.
45   Ibid., p. 236.
46   Richard Neutra, "Some Notes onThe Complex of Nudism;Nude Living 1, no. 6 (April 1962). pp 7-10, and "Audre: Able and Agile." ibid.. pp. 11-13.1 am grateful to Thomas Hines for pointing this out tomeand lendingme his own copyofthe magazine.
47   Willard Morgan, "Plumbingand Heating for a Modern Health Home;Domestic Engineering (April 5, 1930), p. 52.
48   Philip Lovell/'Careofthe Body.“
Los Angeles Times Sundoy Magazine. December 15,1929. p. 26.
49   Philip Lovell and Leah Lovell, Diet for Health by Natural Methods: Together with Health Menus on d Recipes; Complete Instruction s for the Cure of the Sick Without the Use of Drugs (Los Angeles: Times-MirrorPress, 1927), p. 16,quoted in Victoria JaneSolan, "Built for Health" (PhD dissbyale University, 2004), p.140.
50   Richard Neutra,quoted in"Steel Construction with Plaster,"Coiiforn/o Plosterer, 1929,clipping in Neutra archives. UCLA. SeeSolan, "BuiltforHealth,"
pp. 145-46.
51   Sara Schrank, "Naked Houses: The Architecture of Nudism and the Rethinking ofthe American Suburb," Journol
of Urban History 38, no. 4 (2012), p. 638.
52   Sylvia Lavin, Form Follows Libido: Architecture and Richard Neutra in a
Psychoanalytic Culture (Cambridge, MA: MET Press, 2004), p. 76.
53  Charles Eames, interview with Digby D ehl,"Charles Eames: Q&A," Los Angeles Times WESTMogozine, October 8, 197 2, p. 14. reprinted in Digby Diehi, Supertolk (NewYork: Doubleday, 1974). The original transcript is in the Eames archives, Library ofCongress.
54  "Case Study Houses 8 and9by Charles Eames and EeroSaarinen,Archi-tects," Arts & Architecture (Oecember 1945), p. 44.
Health and Architecture: From Vitruvius to Sick BuildingSyndrome
59
CHAPTER2
Tuberculosis
One could write an entire encyclopedia just about the impact of tu berculosison earlytwentietl'-centuryarchitecture, beginningwith the active collaborations between architects and doctors in the design oftuberculosis sanatoriumssuch as Alvar and'Aino Aalto’s Paimio (1929-1933) in Finland,' fig.1 considered bySigfried Giediononeof "three institutional buildings inseparably linked,to the rise of contemporary arch tecture —the other two being the Bauhaus at Dessau by Walter Gropius (1926) and the unrealized project for the League of Nations Palace at Geneva by Le Corbusier (1927). Giedion claimedthat inallthree projects, “thevarious parts are fully integrated—like the organs of a body." 2 The most
1 Alvar Aalto, Paimio Sanatorium, site plan
61
Alvar andAino Aalto, Paimio Sanato rium.
1929-1933
2 Exteior view with sundeck balconies, ca.1924
3.4 Patient rom
5  Alvar Aalto,drawing erf curved floor under window, 1929
6  AlvarAalto, drawing ofnoiseless sink,1932
62
. it* *4
3
modern of buildings are themselves healthy bodies, in an update of the Vitruvian idea, with the twist that one of the three buildings isdevoted to sick bodies.
      With its dramatic terraces in the sky, the Paimio Sanatorium even bears an 1-1ncanny resemblance, in canonical photographs, to ribs in an X-ray, fig.z the primary diagnostic toolforTB. Its clean-li ned bed{ooms,void of ornament, were designed to minimize surfaces where dust could accumulate. figs.3,4 Even the intersection of floor and wall beneath the window curved tostopdustbuildup. fig.s The rooms were equipped with furniture and sanitary fittings designed by the architects, including chairs whose back was angled to facilitate breathing and expectoration, figjs sinks designed to reduce splashing, fig.s and spittoons to minimize sound. Door handles were carefully designed not to catch the sleeves of the doctors’ white coats. fisuz But the building’s main equipment was the top-floor terrace, figs.s,9 seven stories above the forested landscape, where patients were wheeled out for regular doses of fresh air and sun in the lounge chairs specially designed by Aino Aalto. hg.io Eventually, the terrace had to be closed off. because the nurses couldn't keep desperate patients from throwing themselves from it every time they turned their backs on them.3 The discovery and success of streptomycin in 1943 revealed that there was little scientific basis for the air-and-sun therapy of the sanatorium.4 Sometimes the therapy even precipitated the end—at Paimio, quiteliterally.
                                                        Tuberculosis helped make modern architecture modern. It is not that modern architects made modern sanatoriums.
ARKIT. ALVAR'M'l'fOTO
noiseless wash- basin
Tuberculosis
63
   7  Alvar Aalto. Kinkomaa tuberculosis sanatorium project (not realized), perspective drawing, 1927
7
  Alvar a nd Aino Aalto. Paimio Sanatorium,
  1929-1933
  a Uppersun terrace with patients taking the fresh-aircure, 1933 g Upper sun terrace with patients 10 Drawing of chaise longue designed by Aino O.alto for Paimio Sanatorium,1932
64
Rather, sanatoriums modernized architects. Aalto was a neoclassical architect before his “conversion to functional-ism“inthe 1927 competition entry for a tuberculosis sanatorium at Kinkomaa, Finland—an unrealized project of horizontal lines arid wide terraces for the cure that anticipates Paimio.5ne.7
      For Aalto, the sanatorium was not architecture jn the service of medicine, but integral to medicine as such—an apparatus devised asa meansoftreatment:
      The main purpose of the building is to function as a medical instrument.... The room design is determined by the depleted strength of the patient, reclining in his bed. The colour of the ceiling is chosen for quietness, the lightsourcesare outsideofthe patient’s field of vision, the heating is oriented towards the patient's feet, and the water runs soundlessly from the taps to make sure that no patient disturbs his neighbour.8 fig.h
Aalto himself had been sick at the time of the competition for the building and claimed that havingto lie in bed for an extended period oftime had been crucialto his understanding of the problem.Architecture always had been conceived forthevertical person, but here was a client permanently in the horizontal.
      The whole design of the room and the building had to change accordingly. Light fixtures could not remain in the ceiling, irritating the eyes of the occupant lying in bed, for
Tuberculosis
65
n Orawing byAlvarAalto of an ordinary room for a"vertical person"anda room in Paimiofor a ‘horizontal person"to illustrate his 1940 article Ihe Humanizing of Architecture," November 1940
66
whom the ceiLing had all of a sudden acquired maximum importance—a new kind of facade, one couLd say. The view through the window to the forest outside also had to be calculated from the point of view of the bed. In the terrace, the low parapet and tjiin rail above allowed the eye of the horizontal personto travel far above the forest. Even when in movement, the patient oftenvemained horizontal iria sanatorium. ELevators encased in transparent gLass, placed at the end of the corridor to avoid disturbing patients in the rooms, allowed the traveling patient. in a bed on wheeLs, a horizontal cross-section view of the architecture and the landscape beyond. The unconstrained horizontal view was itself a medical instrument, calming the eye and brain.
     The colors of the room and the buiLding had to be thought in these terms too—soothing, “quiet, dark hues" of bLue for the ceiLing, the waLls in Lighter shades, Bright canary yeLLow in the reception booth by the entrance and in the LinoLeum of the lobby, staircase, and corridors evoked “sunnyoptimism even in cold, cloudy days." HO.«Just as heating by radiant ceiling panels was directed at the patients’ feet, and not their heads, windows were of special construction so th e coLd outside air wouLd enter diagonalLy through the window boxes in which the intake openings were "as far as possible away from the patient:’7 “MechanicaL ventiLation does not enter the picture because natural ventilation with fresh, ozone-rich air is of the utmost importance in the healing process," Aalto wrote.8 Psychological factors were also to be carefulLy considered:
Tuberculosis
13
68
14
Alvar Aalto, PaimioSanatorium, 1929-1933
12 Patient roomdoorhandle designed not to catchdoctor's lab coat sleeves
13  Mainstaircase
14  Qiagramcf the sun rays and heating rays in a patient's room
15  Diagram showi ngthe heat environment in a patient's room
      An extended period of confinement can be extremely depressing for a bed-ridden patient. Furthermore, conventional hospital rooms are never designed for constant bed-ridden patients. The contrasts in color and mass between vertical walls and horizontal ceilings resulting from both natural and artificial light are not particularly well-suited for patients who are especially sensitive because oftheir illness. ...Atuber-eulosis sanatorium is, to all ntents and purposes, a house with open windows.®Fies. 14,15
Architecture was not only part of the treatment, it had to address the patient's way of life. Living in a sanatorium for long periods makes it home.The hospital had to be thought as a new kind of house. And in reverse, the generic house needed to be a sanatorium. Aalto later wrote:
     I was able to discover that special physical and psychological reactions by patients provide good poi nters of ordinary housing. If we proceed from technical func-tionalism,we shalldiscoverthata great many things in our present architecture are unfunctional from the point of view of psychology, or a combination of psy-chologyand physiology. To examine how human beings react toforms and constructions, it is useful to use for experimentation especially sensitive persons, such as patients inasanatorium.i°
Tuberculosis
69
16
The bodily and psychological sensitivity of the sick person was used to recalibrate architecture. Even the specialized furniture became ordinary everyday pieces. If the cantilevered birch-wood Paimio chair, for example, was designed to open the chest of the patient, allowing him or her to breathe easier, soon enough, that chair became everybody's chair. Likewise with the rest ofthe furniturespecially designed for Paimio: “The sanatorium needed furniture which should be light,flexible, easy to clean and so on.After extensive experimentation in wood, the flexible system was discovered .. to produce furniture which was more suitable for the long and painful life in a sanatonum.“11 A workshop was set up with a local company to carry outthe first experiments, and in 1935, barelytwoyears after completing Paimio,Alvar and Aino Aalto founded the Finnish furniture company Artek, fig.17 with “the ambition to support and nourish human beings’ physical and psychological wellbeing“i ht is not by chance that theofficial time line of thecompanystarts with Paimio Sanatorium, since it is there where the first experiments in modern furniture by the Aaltos took place. The Aaltothat became known as one ofthe so-called masters of modern architecture did so byengaging with disease. Aalto designs, after Paimio, had the aura of health,
      The reference pointwasthe seriously ill.Aalto claimed that the architect had to design for the person in the "weakest position" The tuberculosis patient becomes the model for modern architecture. In other words, sickness was no longer seen as the exception, butasthe norm—and varying degrees of sickness were seen to define the human condi-
70
16  Paimio Sanatorium lounge recreation room with Paimio chairs. 1933
17  TheArtekstore in Helsinki.1939
is Engraving after a drawing byRobert Koch of fresh bacilli from the lungs of a tuberculosis patient. asseen under the microsope
i9 Engraving after a drawing by Robert Koch of tuberculosis bacilli, after two weeksgrowth under a culture, as seen under the microscope
tion. The modern subject has multiple ailments, physical and psychological, and architecture is a protective cocoon not just against the weather and other outside threats, but in modernity, more notably against internal threats: psychological and bodily ailments..
      Symptomatically, Aalto compared his experiments in Paimio andtheirapplication to everyday useto the“exagger-ated’forms ofanalysis thatscientists use “inorderto obtain clear more visible results," such as “stained bacteria" for microscope examination^3 He saw design as a form of medical research, with the sanatorium acting as a kind of research lab for modern architecture—a way of testing architecture, looking more closely, in a rigorous examination, and experimenting-looking at what has been hidden, exposingthe invisible forces.
THE INVISIBLE CLIENT
Sigmund Freud, the X-ray, bacteriology, and the germ theory of disease all emerged in the same short period of time, and they are all about looking inside, acknowledging the invisible: the unconscious, the skeleton, the microelement of bacteria and the bacillus of TB. Architecture, likewise, turns itself inside out: the threat is no longer outside, but inside, in the “invisible.’The micro scaleofbacteria becomes the base for furniture, rooms, houses, and cities: the micro and the macro; the bacterium and the city. Cities were suddenly thought to be teeming with unseen occupants that in a sense became the new clients of modern architecture
' “       • Jf; v
BACtlU AFTER TWO SCOTS’          tTKDBR Tllt
and urbanism. figs.i8,i9
Tuberculosis
71
20
72
2á
20 Josef Hoffmann.Purkersdorf sanatorium, original design, west facade.
1903
21  Otto Pfleghard and Max Haefeli, with engineer Robert Mai llart, Queen Alexandra Sanatorium. Davos, 1907
22  OttoWagner,project for Palmschoss heliotherapy center, Brixen, Italy, 1914
23  Bernard Bijvoetand Jan Duiker, Zonnestraal sanatoriu m, Hilversum, 1927. postcard
24  Richard Docker, Waiblingen sana-torium,1925-1928
The architect-doctor became a bacteriologist, generating design principies out of thelaboratory scrutinyof microbes. Architecture itself became bacterial. As Le Corbusier put it:
      We need a diagnosis-and a line of conduct. In 1922 I tried todelve into an analysis, I did some laboratory work. Isolating my microbe. I watched it develop. The biology of my microbe appeared in indisputable clarity. Certitudes acquired; diagnosis. Then, by an effort of synthesis, I drew up the fundamental principies of modern city planning.14
Microbes were both the literal and metaphorical basis of a new architecture and urbanism. Modern architecture paradoxically had to represent this new invisible order with bright, transparent images, seen as clean,clear, and healthy in a kind of visual hygiene. The whiteness of modern architecture is unambiguouslythat ofthe hospital, surfaces that, as itwere, demonstrate theircleanliness.
      The history of modern architecture is full of sanatoriums: Josef Hoffmann’s Purkersdorf outside Vienna (1903) F(G_2o; Otto Wagner's Steinhof, Vienna (1907) and project for Palmschoss heliotherapy center in the mountains near Brixen in Italy (1914) FiG.22; the Queen Alexandra Sanatorium in Davos (1907) FiG.21, bythe architects Otto Pfleghard and Max Haefeli and engineer Robert Maillart; Jan Duiker and Bernard Bijvoet’s Zonnestraal in Hilversum (1925-1928) FiG.23; Richard Docker's sanatorium in Waiblingen (19261928) fiG.24; Werner Hebebrand and Willi Kleinertz's Sonnen-
Tuberculosis
73
25 Pablo Zabalo, Sanatorio deLeza.
Alava. Spain, 1934, postcard
26 William Gansterand William Pereira,
Lake CountyTu berculosis Sa n atorium,
Waukegan, Illinoi s 1939
27 ^rner Hebebrand and Wilhelm Kleinert2, Sonnenblick Sanatori um.
Marburg, 1929-1931
28  Cover ofthe Revista Noc/ona( de Arqu/tectura 126,June 1952. with an imageof LakeCountyTuber culosis Sanatorium superimposed on an X-ray of lungs
                                       sanatorium in Marburg (1929-1931) Fia.27;Jaromir Krej -car’s Machnac sanatorium in TrenCianske Teplice (19291932) F13.29; Josep Lluis Sert's Dispensario Antituberculoso ir Barcelona (1934) and hillside sanatorium project for Barcelona (1936); Pablo Zabalo’s Sanatorio de Leza, Alava (1934) fig.2s; William Ganster and William Pereira's Lake CauntyTuberculosis Sanatorium inWaukegan, Illinois (1939) Fias.26. 2s; so on and on. Many modern architects did a sanatorium at some point, and often it defined them. The sanatorium was the testing ground of new materials and tech-n ques of construction and often involved experimental collaborations between architects, engineers, and doctors.
                                       The sanatorium buildings were typically disconnected from cities. floating like ships on mountainsides, in forests. by lakes, or at the coast, with their row upon row of sun terraces treated like little beaches—sometimes linked to artificial beaches on the inside of the building or to real beaches on the outside. FIGs.30,31 This sense of floating outside its normal urban habitat and angling itselfto the sun to heal fragile bodies challenged thedefinition of architecture. It is as if architecture itself took the cure.
                                       In fact, the sanatorium modernized architecture. It is not a traditional building with balconies added to it to catch the sun, but a set of deep sun terraces understood as the crucial medical instrument to be propped up and serviced by a transformed building. The whole building ultimately adjusted itself into a solar device, sometimes stacking itself at a steep angle, as with Marcel Breuer and Gustav Hassenpflug’s 1930 project for a 1100-bed
74
Tuberculosis
75
76
29   Jaromir Krejcar, MachnâC, sanatorium in TrenCianskeTepll ce, 1929-1932
30   Artificial beach,Aix-Les-Bains
31   G. Lubarskij, Tuberculosis sanatorium near Odessa, 1930
32,34 Jean Saidman,revolving sanatorium ,
Aix-les-Bains, Irance, 1930
33 Jean Saidman, Ranjitl nstitute of
Poly-Radio-Therapy, revolving sanatorium
Jamnagar, India, 1934
35   Inclinedbed for treatment, revolving
sanatorium.Aix-les-Bains
Tuberculosis
77
36
37
                             sanatorium, fig.37 or at an even steeper angle with the elevator behind moving up at the same angle, as in Nicola Visontai’s 1934 project for the Italian Alps. fig.36 This attitude was taken to its extreme by the collaboration between the radiologist Jean Said man and the architect André Farde to make a twenty-five-meter-long revolving solarium sixteen meters above the ground that always faced the sun for tuberculosis patients at Aix-les-Bains in 1930. figs.32,34 It was the first ofthree such revolving sanatoriums that they made (the others were in Jamnagar in India fig.33 and Vallauris on the Mediterranean) with sophisticated retractable glass panels and specialized focusing instruments to increase the exposure. Even the beds were suspended in metal frames that enabled themtobe rotated upto asteep angleto be aligned with the instruments. fig.3s
                                  The sanatorium had from the beginning been a laboratory for incubating new attitudes toward form, spatial organization, interior design, furniture, fittings, lighting, plumbing, air, equipment, surfaces, colors, materials, and construction methods. Take Josef Hoffmann’s Purkersdorf, with its purified white surfaces, radically sharp lines, cubic furniture, Hennebique construction in reinforced concrete and iron, and use of glass and electricity, all considered part of the hygienic program. Even its gridded ferroconcrete ceiling structure was exposed and painted white.14 fig.« Not only was electricity considered more hygienic than gas as a means of illumination, ostentatiously displayed with visible cables, but it was also used for all kinds of experimental therapies, including electric massage machines,
78
36  Nicola Visontai, project for a sanatorium in the Italian Alps, 1934
37  Marcel Breuer and Gustav Hassenpflug. project for a 1100-bed sanatorium. 1930
36 Dr. Richard von KraffL-Ebingand his wife. MarieLuise
39  Dr. Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Ober gesunde und kranke Nerven (On healthy and sick nerves), 1885,cover
electric baths, and chairs for strengthening the nerves. At the time that the Pu rkersdorf was built, critic Ludwig Hevesi described it as“the naked Hoffmann building;’ whose walls were lined with white porcelain tiles— “a white-painted or white-tiled 'washable world..'"16 Hevesi was so enthusiastic as to check himself into the sanatorium to test personally some of its therapeutic devices in the “mechano-therapy room": in “this elegant white hall, full of artificial devices, with which I rapidly made closer acquaintance, [including) the electric mB.ssage machines—everything is electric.”^ ns.« Electricity itself was understood as a medical instrument.
     The building, commissioned by the industrialist Viktor Zuckerkandl, was constructed as an addition to an earlier sanatorium complex founded by neuropsychiatrist Dr. Richard von Krafft-Ebing figs—who died before the Pu rkersdorf was completed—but it was influenced by his theories. Krafft-Ebing had argued that the modern metropolis was damaging the nerves of its inhabitants and that air, light, nature, and simplicity were the most effective therapy. In 1885, he wrote Ober gesunde und kranke Nerven (On healthy and sick nerves) fis.39 and a year later Psychopathic Sexuafe He coined the term “masochism" (after the author Leopold von Sacher-Masoch) and popularized the term “sadism” Here, once again, health was understood in psychosexual and architecturalterms.
     The Purkersdorf was frequented by a notable circle of patients including Gustav Mahler,Arnold Schoenberg, Hugo von Hofmannsthal, and Koloman Moser, who had designed
Tuberculosis
79
41
                                 :he furniture. fig.42 Even the architect of the building, Josef -loffmann, checked himself in now and then. He had suffered from and was treated for a "nervous disorder" prior :o thecommission of the'Purkersdorf and was sympathetic to Krafft-Ebing's ideas. Accordingto Eduard Sekler, that was why Hoffmann was inclined to accept thecommission.,BThe Purkersdorf accepted patients with a wide range of medical conditions including "nervous" disorders, neurasthenia, eating disorders, substance abuse, and hysteria. The sanatorium had become a new kind of social space for the Viennese upper classes. Hospitals until the end of the nineteenth century were almost without exception for the poor. Members of the upper and middle class were treated at home, and hospitals were seen as abject placesforthe destitute.19 But starting in the 1880s, the aristocracy and upper classes began to spend summers in sanator urns and curative spas, largely to deal with nervous disorders and other illnesses of modernity. Bertha Zuckerkandl,20 journalist and art critic of the Wiener Allgemeine Ze/tung, characterized the Purkersdorf as a "cross between a modern hotel and a modern therapeutic centre."2’ And Karl Kraus described it as a "healing-swindle-institution" (Heilschwinde/onstolt)“ figs.4o,si
                                      Critics hailed the building as one of clarity and truth. The success of the institution owed enormously to the modernity of the architecture. "Modern" was becoming a new and sophisticated taste among the bourgeoisie and the intelligentsia, who were supposed to dine around a single white table at the Purkersdorf fig.u (as a kind of talking cure), sleep in spartan white rooms, Fio,*e and subject them-
80
40  Karl Kraus. Die Pocket 1.1899
41  Karl Kraus. 1908
42  Koloman Moser, 1903
selves to regimes of treatment in white spaces. The association of cubic white for ms with mental and physical heaLth was already strong enough for architecture to act as an effective placebo.
      The idea had made its way into literature. Thomas Mann’s short novel Tristan, written in 1903, the sameyear as the construction of the Purkersdorf, is set in an imaginary sanatorium, the Einfried, "a long, white, rectilinear buiLding,” "warmLy recommended for lung patients,” but also “for patients of aLL sorts": “sufferers of gastric disorders ... people with defective hearts, paralytics, rheumatics, nervous sufferers of aLL grumblings." When one of the patients, Herr Kloterjahn’s wife, asks another, “Why are you in Einfried, really? ...What cureareyou taking, HerrSpinell?” he answers:
       Cure? Oh, I’m having myself electrified a bit. Nothing worth mentioning. I wilL tell you the real reason why I am here, madame. It isa feeLi ng for styLe....
       Obviously, people feel one way among furniture that is soft and comfortabLe and voluptuous, and quite another among the straight Lines of these tables, chairs, and draperies. This brightness and hardness, this cold, austere simplicity and reserved strength, madame—it has upon me the ultimate effect of an inward purification and rebirth.23
"Style,” is the true cure of whatever ails Herr SpineLl, who wears a “white jacket" and "white hat” in this aLl-white buiLding, in a “spotless white region" aLL covered in snow, with
Tuberculosis
81
Josef Hoffmann, Purkersdo/f sanatorium, 1904 1905
43 Electromechanotherapy room, 1905-1906
44 Oining room, 1905-1906
45 Main hall, 1905-1906
46 Patient r^oom 1905
82
Tuberculosis
83
47 Cami llo Sitte, manuscript page ofhis 1889 book DerStddtebou noch seinen künstlerischen Grundsätzen (City Planning according to Artistic Principles), 1899
                           “white-enamelled" armchairs, “white folding doors," "white-painted gallery,” inhabited by the “white, slightly bloated" faces and “white hands“ of the patients with their "white-veiled desire, by passion driven.”24 Whiteness is the most insistent feature of the building, the landscape, and the patients in the Einfried sanatorium.
                           SADO-MASOCHISM
                           Krafft-Ebing's ideas seem also to have influenced other architects and urban planners, such as Camillo Sitte, who criticized the design ofthe modern city because in his view, it was causing agoraphobiaand other nervous conditions. In his 1889 book City Planning according to Artistic Principles, fig.47 he advocated intimate urban spaces that, as in a medi-evalcity, protectthe inhabitant.Adolf Loos,also a studentof masochism—there are multiple references inhis writings— argues that the "man with modern nerves" can't tolerate ornament. In 1926, he gave four lectures in German at the Sorbonne,inParis.Thewholeseries was entitledOerMensch mit den modemen Nerven (The man with modern nerves) CHAPTERi, fig.39 and dedicated to how to live one’s life appropriately: how to walk, how to sit, how to lie down, how to eat, how to sleep, how to dress. and how to inhabit.23 The subject ofthe nerves had preoccupied Loos all his life and permeated his writings from the turn ofthecenturyon.
                                ForLoos,the rejection of ornament is not an aesthetic theory, but a physiological reaction, as he put it when discussing the English military uniform as a model for modern dress: “The nerves of the modern man rebel against
84
47
Tuberculosis
85
48
49
                                                                                                           Glasarchitektur
         Paid Sc:beerbarl
     4tT St^„/B«U W9 1514
a demand to go back twenty, fifty, or a hundred years."26 He argued that human biology had evolved to give modern rran a whole new set of nerves with their own needs27 In “Ornament and Education" (1924) he wrote: “Modern Man, the man endowed with a modern nervous system, doesn't need ornament. On the contrary, he loathes it. Every object that we call modern lacks ornament. Our. dresses, our rrachines, our furs. and every object of everyday use don’t have—since the French Revolution—any ornament."28
      But the obsession with nerves wasn'tjust a Viennese hang-up. In his Glasarchitektur of 1914, Paul Scheerbart wrote: “Sanatoria also will want glass buildings; the influence of splendid glass architecture on the nerves is indisputable."29 fiss.48, 49 Scheerbart was obsessed with hygiene and the removal of dust, pollen, and insects, advocating the use of the recently invented vacuum cleaner at home and in the streets. Heeven saw building materials intheseterms, enlisting doctors to further hisarchitectural polemic against brick: “The discovery of the brick bacillus" means that “now the doctor also has a major interest in finally ousting the cult of brick."30 The polemic against brick was now supported by medical arguments. In his telegram novella, “The Oceanic Sanatorium for Hay Fever," he imagines:
48 Pad Scheerbart, Glasarchitektur, Berlin,1914,cover
49 Pad Scheerbart, 1897
50 Publicity brochureforthe Waldsanatorium, Davos, Switzerland. 1911
51 Schatzalp sanatorium, Davos. ca.1900. postcard
       Floating islands with breezy, colorful glass pavilions ... floating cities with grass tennis courts, sea terraces, and many other things.... Everyone in America is plagued by hay fever.. ..So during the flowering season, we'll have to live in the middle of the ocean.... Our
86
Oceanic Sanatorium Society fo Hay Fever has found just the right thing: floating islands that will always drift hundredsof miles awayfrom dryland and natural islands. On our islands, dirt will be nonexistent.31
Scheerbart saw modern technologies as both the cause and the cureof illnesses. He writes of“nerte doctors" prescribing the calming-effect of colored light insanatoriums, The idea was to counteract the “nervous effect of very bright light" that he saw as responsible in part for"the nervous ailments of our time."32 Already in 1901, he speculated about "air-sanatoria” flying in the sky to deal with the nervous disorders produced by modern traffic^ But air technology, which is at the centerof all Scheerbart’s utopian novels, is both cure and cause. In a prewar manifesto for pacifism written in 1914, he predicted that air warfare, as the epitome of modern machinery, would produce "general insanity":‘:.Justthink-ing about all these military techniques can have a deleterious effect on one’s nerves." 34 For him, at least, it was prophetic. He suffered a nervous breakdown over the carnage of World War I and starved himself to death in 1915, seemingly in protest. Since he had net taken part in the war, it was as if“justthinking”had indeed provoked his death.
THEARCHITECTURAL CURE
Davos in Switzerland was famouslythe epicenter ofthe phenomenon of the modern cure. fig.6o In 1910, there were as many as twenty-six sanatoriums and forty-six hotels that cateredto“consumptives."TheSchatzalp, fig.bi builtbetween
Tuberculosis
87
52  "Liegekur" (lying cure) onthe terrace of the Villa Pravenda, Oavos,ca. 1900
53  Lying cure, Oavos, ca. 1910, postcard
54  Katia Mann with her children (Monica, Golo, Michael, Klaus.Elizabeth. and Erika), ca. 1920
53
Liegekur
ARTIST. A'ftLlER ll. CUGG:tYn&Ul *GO,. :tD1T£URS. Z'OlUCH NO. 4658. D6pOS6.
88
1899 and 1900 and the only sanatorium identified by name in Thomas Mann's The Magic Mountain, was a collaboration betweena doctor, Lucius Spengler, and twoyoungarchitects from Zurich, Otto Pfleghard and Max Haefeli, with the engineer Robert'Maillart, yvho was then working for Francois Hennebique.34 The first building in Switzerland to be constructed of concrete and steel, it became the model for the modern -sanatorium. It had steam floor heating and a flat roof with inside drainage. The most advanced medical treatment coincided with the most advanced technology in architecture.
     The architecture of the Schatzalp is brutally modern in its horizontality and abstraction. With its 100-meter-long facade and endless corridors, the building is like an ocean liner. All parts are subordinated to terraces intended as therapeutic spaces, dimensioned for a patient reclining in a specially designed chaise longue, a cure to be undertaken from 7:00 a.m.to 10:00 p.m., in winter as well as in summer. A period photograph shows a group of patients lying in chairs packed closely together on the terrace, covered in a thick blanket of snow, yet seemingly happy. fig.53
     Thomas Mann, always sensitive to architectural detail, describes the therapeutic chaise longue with care, evoking a philosophy of life on the edge in the horizontal. This therapy of the horizontal also was central to the Waldsanatorium, also in Davos, where Katia Mann, Thomas’s wife, stayed and that inspired him to write The Magic Mountain. Mann’s novel evokes the social life in this very modern building, where everything was wrapped in white,
Tuberculosis
even the patient, who was wrapped in white to receive hydrotherapy. FIG.40
      Katia Mann was in fact one of the first patients in this brand-new sanatorium. She fell ill in 1912, a year after the birth of her fourth child. Her mother was convinced that Katia was suffering not from tuberculosis, but from exhaustion, having had four children and two miscarriages in less than fiveyears, managing a large household, and even typing Mann's manuscripts.36 Katia had been studying mathematics and experimental physics—with Wilhelm Rontgen, the discoverer of X-rays, no less—but her mother had encouraged her to abandon her studies to marry Thomas Mann at the age of twenty-one. Whatever her ailment, she stayed inand outofseveral sanatorijms up to 1914. Katia had no doubt that it was tuberculosis. As she wrote in her memoirs, it was “an old tubercular spot that seemed to be arrested;’ but she claimed she was ‘not seriously ill“ and perhaps the “whole thing would have cleared up by itself if we hadn’t been able to afford a sanatorium. It was the custom. ifyou hadthe means, to go to Davos or Arosa."37
      Tuberculosis was often confounded with nervous disorders, and its inevitable melancholy meant the standard curewas also a psychological one. Sanatoriums offered not just an escape from the city, but an escape from normal domestic life, with the comfort of a controlled regime and asteady, yet distracting daily rhythm in the companyof new friends. The hyperdesigned spaces of the clinic even represented a new form of domestic elegance. Katia Mann said the experience had strengthened her so that she could
90
55  Zonnestraal sanator ium, Hilversum, 1931, postcard
56  ”Laat licht, lucht en zon." poster for the Zon nestraal Sanatorium, ca. 19 28
“stand itaU."3® Andthere was a lotto stand:World War II, exile to the United States, the suicide of her favorite son, Klaus, and laterof her son Michael. fig.s4
     The modern ocean-liner envirorment for the rich and fabulous became democratized with sanatoriums such as Zonnestraal (1925-1928) in Hilversum, fig.ss twenty miles outside Amsterdam. Zonnestraal means “sunbeam" iri Dutch. It was designed by JaO Duiker and Bernard Bijvoetas a sanatorium for the General Diamond Workers’ Union of the Netherlands. In this white building of reinforced concrete, the medical properties of the architecture are taken to the extreme, almostas a manifesto. fig.57
     Zon nestraal was a health machine—a factory for the manufacturing of healthy bodies. Its slogan: “Laat Licht, Lucht en zon” (Allow light, air, and sun). fig.ss Here, patients were wheeled out of their independent rooms and onto the terrace. which was no longer a social space, as in earlier sanatoriums. There was less interactio n among patients. who seem in period photographs to keep their heads inside the room and inside their books. Fis.ssThe real interaction was only with the sun and with machines, complex instruments such as the latest respiratory analysis devices. fig.59 The individual rooms seem to have been an advance in a working-class sanatorium, but reading Thomas Bernhard. who spent many years in and out of sanatoriums as a tuberculosis patient. which infiltrated all his writings, one becomes aware that there was nothing more terrifying to a sanatorium patient than being moved to an individual room.That could mean onlyone thing.39
                                                                                                                      bat licht Jucht en zon
f Al'
uw harne-r volop hinnex/sfroomen !
Tuberculosis
91
92
Bernard Bijvoet andJan Duiker, Zonnestraal sanatorium. Hilversum, 1925-1928
57  Exterior view, 1928
58  Patients on theterrace, 1931
59  Treatment ofTuberculosis with respiratory analysis device.ca.1928
Death itself was hidden. Sanatoriums in Davos and in other places did not accept very ill patients. “The sanatorium is intended for incipient and curable cases," advised the British Journal of Diseases of the Chest in 1908, when giving an overview of reputable sanatoriums available in Europe for prospective patients.40 A death was a spot on their reputation. They even exaggerated their rate of curfo. Subterranean-tunnels carried the dead away, out of view.41 And at the- Schatzalp, 300 meters above the town of Davos, the bodies of the dead were sent down the mountain on toboggans in winter. as Thomas Mann describes in The Magic Mountain.
      Already in Tristan. Mann had written: “Sometimes a death takes place among the ‘severe cases....' When this happens no one knows it, not even the person sleeping next door. in thesilence of the night, the waxen guest is put away and life at Einfried goes tranquilly on, with its massage, its electric treatment, douches, baths; with its exercises, its steaming and inhaling, in rooms especially equipped with allthe triumphs of modern therapeutic." 42
      Paimio, which did not admit very ill patients, either, confined the most serious cases—presumably those who got worse while atthe sanatori um—tothe basement ofthe building. So much for the sun-and-air therapy. Architecture mayhave been seen as a medical instrument, butthe patient was removed from view when the instrument didn’t provide the expected results. Modern architecture represented cure but couldn’t face failure. It was a bright representation of optimism inserted in place ofthe fear of disease.
Tuberculosis
                           Death in modernity is hidden. Visual hygiene also means designing what you don't see or don’t want to see. In Otto Wagner’s plan for the Groszstadt (1911), Fis.eo high-speed trains (what was the rush) were to remove the dead, transporting corpses in their coffins from specially designated mortuary stations to the cemeteries in the outskirts of the city: “Every large city will soon be in a position to limit the transportation of corpsesto railroads, and it see ms therefore proper to provide each ward with a mortuary station for this purpose."43
                           DOMESTICATINGTHE SANATORIUM
                           More significantthan the architecture ofthe sanatorium as medical instrument is the impact of medical thought on all of modern architecture. the constant preoccupation with ventilation, sunlight, hygiene, and white walls that turned all buildings into medical equipment. As Ulrich puts it in Robert Musil's The Man without Qualities, a novelabout 1913 Vienna, written between 1930 and 1943: “Modern man is born in hospital and dies in hospital—hence he should also live in a place like a hospital."This maxim, headds,"had just been formulated by a leading architect. and another one, a reformer of interior decoration, demanded movable partition walls in flats.”44 figs.si,6j
                                Musil was probably referringto Otto Wagner, who had alreadyformulated the idea that modern man should live in a place like a hospital when he claimed thatthe hotel room should not be very different than the hos pital room: clean white surfaces should replace the upholstered interiors of
94
60  Otto Wagner, XXIInd Viennese district, published in Die Gros^s^t, 1911
61  Robert Musil(i880M942)
62  Robert Musil, Der MannrtolmaEr1J8n
         (The Moo wiihourOua/ities), 1stedition,1943,cover
the nineteenth-century hotel, where dust accumulates and iLlness is Latent. Instead of the “pri ncely apartments" usualLy requested, he proposed minimum, hygienic rooms with functional equipment that, in his view, “wouLd give far greater comfort.”45'The medipaL and the domestic were interconnected. He thought “the architect has tokeepfully abreast of this field [hygiene] too becausethese modern achievements demand truly new artistic forms."46 New medicine called for a new architecture and a new idea of comfort. “Comfort isoLates," WaLter Benjamin wrote, "on the other hand, it brings those enjoying it closer to mechanization.“47 Intimacy with equipment produces detachment from the world, the very principle of the hospital room.
      Wagner’s Lectures argued for domestic architecture to be a fusion of the machine and the hospitaL. As his students. recallinghis teachings, put it:
      The buildingmustfunction like a ::>erfectLy constructed machine; it must in its installation beon the level ofthe wagons-lit; and it must in matters of hygiene and cLeanliness, of all objects for use, be up to clinicaL demands. What is needed is a synthesis of hospitaL, sLeeping-car and machine... It shouLd be evident that the probLem is not one of good tasteor aesthetics, but entirely of technicaL and constructional execution.... The technical servants and helpers in our life, the lifts for food, for people, for goods, light and sound signals, cold and hot running water, centraL heating, internaL telephones—aLL those mechanicaL and electric sys-
Tuberculosis
95
63 Otto Wagner, HotelWienon the Ringstrasse, 1910, rendering of double room
64 Wald-Oberschule in Berlin-Charlotenburg, 1904. postcard
                                   tems which are the nerves of the building give it a certain apparatus quality, quite apart from the kitchen in the basement which looks like a boilerhouse, from the laundry, the domestic offices and the store-rooms, all essentially in the basement.48
                              It is symptomatic that nerves are invoked once again. The nerves of the building have to be taken care of as much as the nerves of the occupant. But Wagner's nerves were not like those of Sitte or Krafft-Ebing. Wagner thought that the modern individual had become accustomed to the abstraction of long avenues and uniform facades and preferred the anonymity of the metropolis to claustrophobic, small-community life. According to him, the modern eye had lost its feelings for "small and intimate proportions, it has grown accustomed to less varied images, longer and straighter lines, larger areas and greater masses."49 City dwellers, he believed, prefer to disappear in the crowd, to become a “number." The point of city life, for Wagner, is to make it possibletoavoid social contacts8
                                   To hark back to tradition, to make “expression“ or picturesqueness the controlling consideration in designing homesfor the manofto-dayis absurd inthe lightof modern experience. The number of city dwellers who to-day prefer to vanish in the mass as mere numbers on apartment doors is considerably greater than of those who care to hear the daily, “good morning, how are you"from gossipy neighbors insingle houses.51
96
63                                          66
Both the word “hospital" and the word “hotel" derive from the Latin hospes, the guest or the host.52 Wagner thought of the hotel room in much the same way he thought of the hospital room: “What is required of hotel accommodation in nearly all case? is a quiet, clean, hygienic room, where the guest is able to sleep undisturbed and attend to his physical needs."53 The ro.omsfor his Hotel Wienjn the Ringstrasse (1910) were rendered with the sparse furniture and ascetic aesthetic of a room in Hoffmann’s Purkersdorf: simple' white bed, table, and chairs, without any draperies or carpets. In the foreground of one of the renderings, a woman in uniform appears to be vacuuming the floor, as if to emphasize the cleanliness, the dust-free environment. fig. S3
      In fact, every building, and not just hotels, became a kind ofsanatorium.Take, for example, the Open Air School in Amsterdam, fig.67 built in 1929, a couple of years after Zonnestraal. lt was designed by the same architects, Duiker and Bijvoet, who now applied its principles of light, air, and sun to healthy children. They were placed inside a glass machine and even required to sit up on the roof, heads against the glass parapet, in the bright sun, with their sunglasses on. fig.65 The buildingwasconceived as a lightdevice like those used for light therapy in the 1930s. fig.66 Modern architecture went from being the cure for tuberculosis to being an apparatusfortheprevention oftuberculosis.
      The open-air school was an international movement, starting with the Wald-Oberschule in Berlin, Charlotten-bu rg, which opened in 1904for“pretubercu lar"children. fig.64
Tuberculosis
97
65
65,67 Bernard Bijvoet.Jan Duiker,OpenAir School for Healthy Children, Amsterdam,
1927-1930
66 French children duringan indoor heliotherapy session. 1937
Eugene Beaudouin, Marcel Lods, Eco/edeplein oir (open-air school), MontValerien, Suresnes (a commu ne outside Paris), 1931-1935 68 Cowrof album of postcards of the Eco/e depleiooir
69,7i Postcards of children resting and bathing in the sun inSuresnes open-air school 70 Cl<ssroom with retractable walls
98
Illllllin
68
Tuberculosis
99
Richard Docker. Terrossentyp, 1929
72 Otto Bartning, Children's Hospital in Lichterfelde, Berlin, terrace with patients, 1927-1928
73 Cover
74 Richard D6cker. Waiblingen sanatorium, 1926-1928, washing area in the patient rooms
75 Secti ons of terraced sanatoriums showingimproved sun penetration
Itthen spread around the world with architecture ranging from lightweight structures in the forest with no walls to metal-and-concrete buildings with the bones of the structure fully exposed. The open-air school Ecole de plein air, built by Eugene Beaudouinand MarcelLods atMontValerien in Suresnes (a commune outside Paris) from 1931 to 1935, presented an uncanny resemblance between the body of the building, organized like a series of lungs, and the body ofthe breathingoccupants. figs.s9-71
      Modern architects were not the only ones advocating life in a sanatorium; their promoters. the critics, and their historians were, too. Take, for example, Sigfried Giedion’s 1929 little book Befreites Wohnen (Liberated dwelling), fis.7* subtitled Licht, Luft, Oeffnung (Light, air, opening), almost like the slogan of a sanatorium. Between the covers of a book about the modern house we find more than half of the illustrat ions dedicated to hospitals and sports: Richard Docker's sanatorium in Waiblingen (1926-1928),fig. n Bijvoet and Duiker’s Zonnestraal, sanatoriums in Davos, fig.79 mountain lodges, seaside resorts, sports stadiums, images of gymnastics, sunbathing, tennis.... fig.tb By the time we finally get to the houses, we may have forgotten that we were actually reading a book on the modern house.The few that G:edion included have effectively been turned into sanatoriums, with convalescents resting on long chairs on terraces (as in a picture ofa Max Haefeli house in Zurich of 1928 fig.si) orgyms,as in Marcel Breuer’s bedroomfor Piscator in Berlin (1927-1928), Fia.2eAndre Lurcat’s rooftop gym on the Guggen-buhl House in Paris (1926-1927), fig. wand Richard Doc ker’s
100
Il
terrace with exercise equipment in his Weissenhofsiedlung house in Stuttgart (1927). fig.«
     And Giedion was not the only one. Another influential book ofthattime, Docker's Terrassentyp of 1927, fig. n follows thedevelopmentofthe terrace in modern architectu re from the sanatorium to the home, starting with Docker's own sanatorium in Waiblingen figs.24, 74, n and proceeding to Zonnestraal; Davos, arid so on, delineating a seamlesstran-sition from the terraces of sanator ums fig.n to those of modern houses. Diagrams showthe penetration of sunrays in modern sanatoriums and in modern terrace houses showing how to maximize the exposure. fig.7s The book concludes with a series ofphotographs ofdomestic terraces furnished with exercise equipment, as in Docker's apartment in the Weissenhof in Stuttgart, Le Corbusier’s terraces, and the terraces of Robert Mallet-Stevens's Villa Noailles (19231927) in Hyères.
     Villa Noaillesis a symptomatic casestudy. In one ofthe first articles about the house in Art et Décoration (July 1928) it is described as organized by a “cult of hygiene": sunlight, exercise, and fresh air take precedence over traditional forms of comfort. figs.83,84 Bedrooms are modest in size, but each is connected to its own bathroom and its own terrace for outdoor sleeping. The master be Groom's open-air sleeping loft was designed by Pierre Chareau, with a metal bed suspended inthe air, “à l’américai ne,’’fiG.ss as thearticle in Art et Décoration describes it, and metal sliding doors by Jean Prouvé. The Noailles were collectors of Surrealist art, and their paintings were kept dust free with a sliding storage
TERRASSEN
                                                       TYP
KRANKENHAUS ERHOLUNGSHEIM HOTEL BÜROHAUS EINFAMILIENHAUS SIEDLUNGSHAUS MIETHAUS UND DIE STADT
Tuberculosis
101
Sigfriec Giedion.öefre/tes Wohnen (Liberated Dwelling). 1929 76 Cover
11  Richard Docker, Waiblingen sanatorium. 1928. w th patients on the terrace
78  Woman in tennisoutfit. 1920s
79   Otto Pfleghard and Max Haefeli, Queen Alexandra Sanatorium in Davos. sun terrace with patients. 1907
eo André Lurcat.gym on the terraceof tleGu^enbilhl House. Paris. 1926-1927 at M. E. Haefeli. house in the Wasserwerkstrasse. with patient on the terrace. Zun'ch,1928
102
77
Tuberculosis
103
82  Marie-Laura de NoaiUes. portrait by Man Ray, 1933
system organized Like a vertical fiLing cabinet. A covered swimming pool had a mechanism, probably designed by Prouvé, that allowed the enormous glass walls to retreat into the ground, opening the pool to the vast outdoor exercise area. The house even had asquash court, where Charles de Noailles played with Luis Bunuel.5' There was a personal trainer for the owners and their guests, Monsieur Taré, who features in afilm byJacques ManueL, Biceps etbijoux (1928), Fia.ss comm issioned by theclients. They aLso commissioned Man Ray to make a film, Les Mystères du Château du De (1929), using the house as a set for endless exercise confused with Surrealist play, with the clients and their guests themselves as actors in striped exercise gear.55 oss^ea
     But health, for Marie-Laure and Charles de Noailles, was morethan a creative obsession. Likemanyofthe“f ragile people" who came to Hyères to “soften“ their illnesses, t hey sought airand sun. In fact, Marie-Laure, Fioe born in Paris as the daughterof German Jewish bankers and a descendent on her mother’s side from the Marquis de Sade, had for heaLth reasons been raised in a viLLa in Grasse, France. Her father had died of tubercuLosis when she was a baby. The radicaL house she commissioned from Mallet-Stevens is sited and shaped by theshadow ofthedisease itaims to resist.
     The association of the modern house with hospital sometimes confused even professional critics and historians. Richard Neutra's Lovell Health House (1929) in Los AngeLes, for exampLe, a domestic project for a private client, was referred to as a “nursing home" by architecturaL historian Leonardo Benevolo58 The house was another doctor-
104
architect collaboration, this time between Neutra and Dr. Philip Lovell. fig.90 Design operates for Neutra at the intersection of biology and psychology as a therapeutic defense against the "disastrous effects" of all the accumulated conditions of modern life. He writes about how the "warm, moist air practically stationary, saturated with airborne bacteria, and recirculated thro ugh many lungs, had made tuberculosisendemiCand ofthe need for design to address both “pathology, the manifest spreading of disease,"and psychological comfort, what he calls, earlier in the book, "nervous health ,”57
      Neutra's sensitivity to nervous illness is autobiographical. ln a letterto her mother, Dione Neutrawrites that Richard suffered from “terrible depression,’ a recurring condition throughout his life. Ironically, it was the stresses of complet-ingthe Health House and dealing withthe Lovells that seems to have caused the physical and mental exhaustion that Neu-tra'swifementions inthisparticular letter. ForNeutra, mental and physical health were always intertwined. He insisted, for example, that the success of his own tropical classroom design was notjust that “airborne bacteria no longer hover in the classroom" and "expectoration dries promptly. quickly diminishing in contagiousness." It is equally in the calmingand delightful sensation ofcool air passing across the skin asthe large fold-up doors extend the possible classroom space.5» Neutra provides both bacteriological and nervous order, each understood as either cure or preve ntion of disease.
      It is important to note that Neutra himself had tuberculosis and spent ayear in a sanato rium in Switzerland. His
Tuberculosis
Robert Mallet-Stevens, Villa Noailles, Hyeres, France, 1923-1927
83  Swimmingpool
84  Terrace
85  Pierre Chareau, open-air roominthe Vila Noailles. ca. 1926
sa Mane LauredeNoa lleswith her gymnastic professor, St-Bernard, Hyeres,
1928
87.88 Man Ray.film stills from Les Mystöres duChdteoudeDd, 1929
106
tuberculosis
                         brother, a doctor, had tuberculosisfrom t he age of nineteen and eventually died from the disease. Several of Neutra's clients had tuberculosis—Howard Bald, for example, who was brought to Los Angeles at theageof eightfor thecure.ln fact, Southern California was tuberculosis central. Many people migrated there for the cure—as did modern architecture. Even the great critic of modern architecture, Esther McCoy, originally came to California for the cure. fig.»9
                              Modern architecture thus is occupied 'by and organized around two emblematic figures: the fragile tuberculosis patient seeking a cure and the athletic figure seeking prevention from the diseases of modernity. Even the body of the architect becomes part of the project. A photograph ofAino Aalto lying on the chaise longue she designed on the terrace of the sanatorium at Paimio shows the architect in the position ofthe patient. fg.91 And a photograph of Duiker flipping into a pond portrays the architect in the active position of the healthy amateur athlete in the outdoors. fig.sz Neither is exactly the typical heroic pose of the architect in front of a building.
                              Not only did modern architects emphasize health and exercise in oppositiontothe dangersofdisease, sometimes presenting themselves as models, but their architecture was understood that way. The buildings became unconsciously identified with the need to produce a healthy body. For example, Mies van der Rohe’s Tugendhat House (19291930) in Brno, which had been abandoned during the German occupation of Czechoslovakia,59 was turned first into a physical education institute of Karla Hladka, fis.ss then
108
s9 Esther McCoy
90  Or. Philip M.Lovell. Physical Culture Center, Los Angeles
91  Amo Aalto lyng in the lounge chair she designed for the Paimio Sanatorium, ca.1934
92  Jan Omker divingintoa pond. 1917
91
92
Tuberculosis
109
Ludwig Miesvan der Rohe,Tugendhat House,ca. 1945-1950
93 Living room of theTugendhat House transformed into rehabilitation center for children, 1966
94 Roofterrace onthe upper floorwith theTugendhat children
95 View from the garden
96 Children exercisingon the terrace of the physical education institute of Karla Hladka dancing school
into a government gymnasium for children with orthopedic problems FIG.93 by Communist bureaucrats who presumably were unaware that the house had been photographed in its early days inexactly thát spirit. s°fig.94 Early 1930s photographs of naked Tugendhat children playing in the sun on the terrace are uncannily echoed in the 1950s images of children exercising in the living room-gym and on the terrace.
      The Tugendhats may have understood the house as a machine for health, too. In response to architectural critic Justus Bier, who had polemically asked the question, “Is the Tugendhat house habitable?" in the pages of thejournal Die Form, 61 FritzTugendhat symptomatically invoked Davos: “After almost a year of living in the house, I can assure you without hesitation that technically it possesses everything a modern person might wish for. ...On clear and frosty days, one can lowers its windows, sit in the sun, and enjoythe view of a snow-covered landscape, like Davos."62 fig.ss
      In winter, the family would sit by the big glass wall in the living room, which could be lowered into the ground until it disappeared completely, taking the sun and the fresh air with the snow outside, “like Davos," a sanatorium. Photographs of the family by amateur photographer and filmmaker Fritz Tugendhat show the children playing and running around naked in the outdoor spaces of the house, evoking ideasofthe Lebensreform movement. GreteTugendhat, according to Irene Kalkofen, nanny of the Tugend hat children, was always afraid of the children falling ill, and whenever oneofthem was sick,they were isolated in Irene’s
110
Tuberculosis
97
room while she slept in another child’s room to avoid contagion.63 The idea of a separate space to quarantine sick children was a standard part of a modern bourgeois house, as inAdolfLoos’ Muller House in Prague.
Fritz Tugendhat himself was not in good health atthe time ofthe com mission, Mies recalls: “He was a very careful man and he was sick. He did not believe inone doctor only; he had three."64 What Mies didn’t seem to realize is that this was not that unusual. Uncertainty in the early twentieth century aboutthe new scientific medicine made it commonplace among the bourgeoisie to consult different kinds of doctors and alternative practitioners and to follow multiple kinds of advice. In a sense, the architect was added as yet another medical consultant.
                                    Even proposals for a modern city were imagined in health terms: from Ebenezer Howard's Garden City (1898) to Arturo Soria y Mata's Ciudad Lineal (1897), to Otto Wagner's Die Groszstadt (1911) to Le Corbusier's Radiant City (1935). Tony Garnier’s influential proposal for an Industrial City (1904), for instance, featured the heliotherapy building fig.97 of the hospital complex occupying the highest point of the plan. dominating the city from the hillside, with the sports center right in the middle of town, as if replacing the cathedral of medieval times. Health had become a new form of religion. and modern architecture built its temples.
                                    Giedion describes Garnier’s heliotherapy project in Buildingin France, Building in Iron, Building in Ferroconcrete (1928), FiG.9s his first book on modern architecture:“Elevators carry the convalescent in his bed to the generous terraces to
12
97   Tony Garnier, heliotherapy building in Une crie industrielle, 1904
98   Lâs2l6 Moholy-Nagy, cover ofSigfried Giedion’s Bauen in Fronkreich, 8ouen in Eisen. Bauen in Eisenbeton. 1928
which the roofs have been converted. Despite the heaviness of 1      -:r details of the design, the eye, through the inter-
play of the various horizontal surfaces, has an impression of the air always separating and hovering,just as ourfuture cities will be' shaped.”®5 Giedion’s passing comment that the therapeutic horizontality designed for the convalescents will soon shape all future cities suggests a completely new explanation for the relentless horizontal framing of modern architecture. Could it in fact be related to the horizontality of thei occupant—the tuberculosis convalescent lying on the chaise and the psychoanalytic patient on the couch, the paradigmatic clients of modern architecture? As Erich Mendelsohn put it:“Modern man, amidst the flurry of his fast moving life, can find equilibrium only in the tension-free horizontal."66 The horizontal itself becomes emblematic of health. Both the horizontal view from the inside and the view of horizontals from the outside induce health. The sanatorium aesthetic was itself medicinal— ableto transform any building into a form oftherapy.
Tuberculosis
113
1  While thesanatorium is often attributed to AlvarAalto alone, as early as 1933 he acknowledged the collaboration with hiswife, Aino Marsio-Aalto, and the participation of the Norwegian architects Erling BJertnas and Harald Wildhagen, as well as the Finish architects LauriSipila and Lars Wiklund.Alvar Aalto, “Paimion Parantola" (Paimio Sanatorium), Arkkrtehti 1933, pp. 79-90.
2  Sigfried Giedion,Spoce, Time ond Architecture: The Growth ofo New Tradition (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1949), 8th enlarged printing,
pp. 463 and 466.
3  In rny first visit to Paimio in 1994, I was told by the person in chargeof the building that the upper terrace of the san a-torium was off-limits and in response to my insistence claimed that it had been closed to prevent suicide. No amount of reasoning, arguments about research,
or about how living i nNewYork that offers much better opportunities for leaping from high buildingsgotmeanywhere, but I was otherwise freetoroamthe building. When l reached the topof the stairs, the door oftheterrace wasactually open, and I took the air. I have not seen other refer-encesto suicide in Paimio, but in literature, it's a common place to commit suicide while ina sanatorium.ln Thomas Mann’s Magic Mountoin,two characters commit suicide.
4  Thediscoveiy ofantibiotics discredited the sanatorium movement, which was
all of a sudden seen as lacking scientific proof. I ndeed, therewas never a scientific study of its value: "Thegreat sanatorium movement ... was never subjected to a scientific trial of its effectiveness. But there is abundance of indirect evidence to suggest that such general measures
would not cure a patient who was seriously infected. In rnild and early cases, it seems likely that life could be prolonged and that thecourseof the disease could be slowed down, allowing the body's natural defenses a better chance of healing.“ Frank Ryan, Tu bercu/osis: The Greatest Story Neever Told (Bromsgrove: Swift,. 1992), p. 27.
5  Goran Schildt,AlvorAolto: The Complete Catologue ofArchitecture, Design and Art, trans. Timothy Bin ham (New York: Rizzolr, 1994), p. 68.
6  Alvar Aalto, in a lecture in Italy describing Paimio, 1956, quoted in Schildt. Alvor Aolto: The Complete Cotologue, pp. 68-69.Text in the AaltoArchives.
7  Kart Fleig and ElissaAatto, eds.,
Alvor Aolto: Dos Gesamtwerk I Lte uvre complete/The Complete Work, vol. 1, 1922-1962 (Basel: Birkhauser, 1963), p. 39.
8  Ibid.. p. 31.
9  Ibid.
10   AlvarAalto, “The Humanizing of Architecture,1' Technology Review (November 1940).Also in Architectural Forum 73 (December 1940), pp. 505-506. Reprinted in Goran Schildt,Aalto inHisOwn Words (NewYor k:Ri2zoli, 1998), pp. 102-106.
11   Aaito,"TheHumanizingof Architecture," p.16.
12  ; 'The Artek Manifesto," Artek Company, Helsinki. See also Alvor Aolto, vol. 1,
pp. 43 and 66.
13  Aalto.'The HumanizingofArchitec-ture," p. 15.
14   Le Corbusier,Precisions On the Present Stote ofArchitecture and Urbon Planning. trans. Edith Schreiber Aujame (Cambridge, MA: MITPress, 1991). p.143. Translation of Le Corbusier, Precisions sur unetot presentd'orchitectureetds lurbonisme, (Paris: Crès et Cie, 1930).
1 5 Aboutthe Purkersdorf,see the detailed study of Leslie Topp, "The Purkersdorf Sanatoriumand theAppearance of Science,” in Topp, Architecture ond Truth in En-da Siècle Vienno(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), pp. 63-95.
1 6 Ludwig Hevesi, "Neubauten von Josef Hoffmann. Purkersdorf. Hohe Warte. Brüssel”1 in Altkunst-Neukunst: Wien 1894-1908 (Vienna, 1909), translated and reprinted in PeterVergo, Art in Vienna, 1898-1918: Klim t. Kokoschka, Schiele and Their Contemporories'tLondon; Phaiion, 1975), p. 135.
17  Ibid.
18   Eduard Sekler, Josef Hoffmonn: The Architectural Work (Princeton:Princeton U niversity Press, 1985), p. 235.
19  See Adrian Forty, "The Modern H os-pital in England and FrancerTheSocial and Medical Uses of Architecture;'
in Buildings ond Society: Essays on the Sociol Development ofthe Built Environment, ed.Anthony King(London: Routledge. 1980).
20  She was married to EmitZuckerkandl. a professor ofanatomy, acolleagu e
of Krafft-Ebing, and the brother of Viktor Zuckerkandl, the industrialist who developed the Purkersdorf.
21   Quoted in SabineWi eber, “Sculpting theSanatorium;Nervous Bodies and Femmes Fragiles inVienna 1900," Women in German Yeorbook 27 {2011}, p. 77.
22   Karl Krauss, Die Fockel, no. 167 October 26,1904, p. 1 .
23   Thomas Mann, Tristan, in Stories
of Three Decades, trans. H. T. Lowe-Porter (London; Martin Seeker and Warburg, 1922). p.141.
24   Ibid., p. 154.
25   AdolfLoos,Der Menschmitden modernen NeNen, February 17, 22. and
114
25  and March 8, accord ing to theposter announ ci ng the lectures.
26   Adolf Loos,“Dieenglische Umform; WNeuesS Uhr-B/otf, May 24,1919.
27   Adolf Loos.“Wohnen lernen!,*
Neues Wiener TTogbUatr. May 15,1921.
Loos cites landscape architect Loberecht Migge on men who pos ses s modecn nerves.
28   Adolf Loos, "Ornament und Erziehung“, (1924), in Sämtliche Schriften, ed,. Frank Glück, vol. 1 (Vienna: Herold, 1962),
pp. 392-93.
29   Paul Scheerbart, Gloss Architecture, trans. James Palme (New York: Praeger, 197), P- 62;translationofScheerbart, Glcsorchitektur (Berlin: Verlag der St urm,
1914).
30  Ibid.. p.67.
31   Paul Sctwerbart, ”Das Ozeansanato-num fur HB\Jkranke Telegramn-N^ove!ette; DerSturm 3, no. 123-24, (August 24,
1912). trans. by Erik Born.
32  Scheerbart,Gloss Arc hitecture, p.68.
33  Paul Scheerbart/Das Luft-Sanatorium," Gegenwort 76 (October 1909), pp. 781-82,
34   Paul Scheerbart, “The Development oF Air Militarism andthe Dissolution
of European Land Armies, Fortifications, and OceanFleets,'' quoted in Peter Springer, Hond ond Heod; Erns tLudwig Kirchner 's Self-Por troit as Soldier (Berkeley: University of California Press,
2002), p. 61.
35  The Schat2alpisconsidered Robert Maillaifs first large bui ldi ng, It
woth this building that Maillart was able to launch his independent practice.
36   Katie. ned Katherina Hedwig Prings-heim. was the granddaughter of Hedwig Dohm, afamous Gorman feminist and author, who was di sap poi nted when Katie
abandoned her studies of physics and mathematics to marry Mann. Katie Mann, Unwritten Momones, ed. Elisabeth Plessen and Michael Mann, tans. Hunter Hannum and Hildegarde Ha nnum (New York: Alfred Knopf, 1975), p, 5.
37  In tact. after six months in Devos, she spent several months the follo wing year in Merano andArosa. Afterthewar, she went again for treatment toClavadel, near Devos. Ibid., p, 68.
38  KarinAndert, Moniko Monn.Eine Biogrofie (Hamburg:Mare, 1910).
39   See, tor example.Thomas Bern hard, Wittgenstein's NePhew:A Fnendship, trans. David McLintock (New Yo rk:Alfred A. Knopf, 1988) and Bernhard, Gathering Evidence:A Memoir; trans. David McLin-tock(NewYork.AlfredA. Knopf, 1985).
40  British Journol of D*seo!X!s of the Chest 2 (1908), p. 129.
41  Du ring the recent renovation of the Schatzalp building, a secret tunnel was discovered that used to cariy the dead dectlyfrom the sanatorium to thefunrcular station.
42  Mann, Tristan, p. 134.
43  Otto Wagner, “The Development of
a Great City,"Architectural Record 31. May 1912, p. 494,
44  Rcbert Musil, The Mon without Quoli-ties. tran s. Eithne Wilkins and Ernst Kaiser (New York: Capricorn Books, 1965),
p.16.
45   Heinz Geretseggerand Max Peintner. Otto W^ner 1841-1918:The Expanding City,, fhe^^hn/ngofMfodernArch^^thre, tians. Gerald Onn (LondonAcademy Editions, 1979). p. 140.
46   OOtWagner,ModerneArchitektur (Vienna:Verlag von Anton Schroll, 1896). Translated inEnglish from the 1902 third edition as Modern Architecture:AGuide-
     for His Students to this Field of Art, trans. Harry Francis Malgrave (Santa Monca: Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities. 1988), p. 113.
47  Walter Benjamin, “On S^ome Motifs in Ba udelareT trans. Ha ny ZOhn,
in Whiter öenjomin.S^^tedW^^, Vol.4, 7938-1940, ed.Howard Eiland and Michael W. Jennings (C ambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.2003). p. 328.             .
48  01toWagner's students published theirimpression of his theories in the journalAus cferWognerschuie. Extract from student Karl Maria Kerndle, quoted by Otto Antonia Graf, “Wagner and the Vienna SchoolTinThe Anti-Rationalists, ed. Nikolaus PevsnerandJ. M. Richards (London: Architectural Press, 1973), pp.95-96.
49  Otto Wagner. De Boukunsfunserer
     dem ßoukunsjiJ/ngerwm Führer aufdtesem KLinsrgebiete. 4th ed. (1914; Vienna: Löcker. 1979). p.87.Quoted in Geretsegger and Pemtner, Otto Wagner 1841-7978,  43.
50  Geretseggerand Peintner, Otto Wagner 1841-1978, p.37.
51  OttoWagner, "The Development ofa Great City,'' p. 500. Wagnerhad also personal reasons to prefer anonymity.
He fathered two children outside his marriage and never recognized them, ultimately di vorcin g hiswife to live withthe ggovemess of his legitim ate dau^ghter..
52   Nikolaus Pevsner,A HistOty of Building ypeses (Princeton: Princeton Uni^reity Press, 1976), p. 139.
53  Wagner, quoted in Geretsegger and Peintner.Otto Wagner 7847-1978, p. 140.
54  The Noailtes weresponsors of many artists, including Bunuel, Salvador Dali, and Man Ray,They produced the film
Tuberculosis
115
L.:4ge dbr (1930) byBunuel, with script by Buñuel and Dali.Thefilm was banned by the police shortly after its premiere. following attacks by a right-winggroup.
55  Film was notsimplyadded to the house, but was p art of its logic f rom the beginning.The Noailles had offered the commission firsttoM i es vander Rohe, who claimed to be too busy, and then to Le Corbusier, bu t ultimately selected Mallet-Stevens, who atthat point had built onlyfilm sets.
56   Leon ardo Be nevolo.History of Modern Architecture, vol. 2 (Cambridge, MA: MITPress. 1977). p. 640. Benevolo refers in a picture caption to Neutra's house
as "Dr. Lovell's nursing home." I am grateful to Thomas Hines for pointing thisout to me.About Neutra's work, seeThomas Hines, Richord Neutro ond the Seorch for Modern Architecture (New York: Rizzoli, 2006) and Sylvia Lavin,Form Follows Libido: Architecture and Richard Neutro in oPsychoanalytic Culture (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).
57  Richard Neutra, Survival though Design (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953). pp. 320 and194.
58  Ibid .. p.322.
59  The Tugendhats went into exile in St.Gallen,Swiuerland, on March 12.1938, the dayof the annexation of Austria. The house was confiscated by the Gestapo
in October 1939,and the property was transferred to the Reich n 1942. Daniela Hammer-Tugendhat, lvo Hammer,and WolfTegethoff, Tugendho t House: Ludwig Mies vonderRohe (Basel: Birkhauser.
2015), pp. 95-98.
60   Soon after the withdrawalof Soviet troops in 1945. Karla Hladka took over the house forher private danceand rhythmic classes. in 1950, the house wasregistered
in the Czechoslovakian Communist state under the governmental institution for physiotherapy. The house became part of a children's hospital, and the living room was turned into a gym for children with orthopedic problems. Ibid . . p. 144.
61  Just usBier, “Kann man im Haus Tuge ndhat wohnen?," Die Form, October I5,1931,p.392.
62  Fritz Tugendhat. Die Form, November
1931, pp. 437-38.
63  “IreneKalkofen Remembers," extract from a four-hour interview with June Fin-fer. Chicago. 2004. Tugendhot House, p.87.
64   “Interview with Miesvan der Rohe," Architectural Association Journal, July-August 1959, quoted in WolFTegethofCThe Tugendhat ‘Vil1a':AModern Residence in Turbulent Times," TugendhotHouse, p. 94.
65  Sigfried Giedion, Building in France, Building in iron. Building in Ferro-concrete, transJ. Duncan Berry(1928;Getty Center for the History of Art and the Humanities. 1995), p. 163,
66   Erich Mendelsohn, "Dynamics and Fu nctio n” (1923), in Pogroms ond Ma ni-festoes on 20th-Centu yArchitecture,
ed. Ulrich Conrads. trans. M ichael Bullock (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971).p. 7 . Health was thoughtof in terms of equilibrium. in Mechonization fakes Command, Sigfried Giedion concludes his critique ofmechanization bytalki ng about the need for“equipoise; aform of equilibrium in “perfect health" He gives a detailed account of the nervous systems in the body and the importance of nervous dy-namicbetween body and psyc he. Sigfried Giedion,Mechonization Tokes Command: A Contribution toAnonymous History (1948; NewYork: Norton 1969), pp. 714-23, He questions the very commitment to modern architecture that he had champi-
oned before the war. Architecture as a technical instrument was damaging the body and brain. Functionalist architecture was unhealthy in theend.
116
CHAPTER3
X-Ray Intimacy
"The TB sufferer is a wanderer," Susan Sontag wrote in one her notebooks, preserved in her archives.There is a “geogra-phyof health:’1 The patient travels to find a cure.This nomadic figure is also the paradigmatic client of modern architecture, for whom entering m0dern buildings is like entering anyother medical apparatus. Architecture hereis less about shelterand more about exposure—X-ray exposure. /
      As X-rays became indelibly associated with tuberculosis, the tuberculosis patient became the paradigm of this new way ofth in kingabout bodies, objects,and psychologies. In Illness as Metaphor, Sontagwrites:
      TB makes the body transparent. The X-rays which are the standard diagnostic tool permit one, often for the firsttime,toseeone's insides—to becometransparent to oneself. While TB is understood to be, from early on, rich in visible symptoms (progressive emaciation, coughing, languidness, fever), and can be suddenly and dramatically revealed (the blood on the handkerchief), in cancer the main symptoms are thought to be, characteristically, invisible—until the last stage, when it is too late. The disease, often discovered by chance or through a routine medical checkup, can be far advanced without exhibiting any appreciable symptoms. One has an opaque body that must be taken to a specialistto find out if it contains cancer. What the patient cannot perceive, the specialist will determine by analyzing tissues taken from the body. TB patients may see their X-rays or even possess them:
117
     the patients at the sanatorium in The Magic Mountain carry theirs around in their breast pockets. Cancer patients don’t look attheir biopsies.2
Indeed, patients in the sanatorium in The Magic Mountain even carry the X-rays of their loved ones in their breast pockets. When Clavdia Chauchat, Hans Castor’s love object, leaves the sanatorium she gives him her X-ray as a memento:
     Then he flung himself into his chair, and drew out his keepsake, histreasure,that consisted,thistime, not of a few reddish-brown shavings, but a thin glass plate, which must be held toward the lightto see anything on it. It was Clavdia’s x-ray portrait. sh owing not herface. but the delicate bony structure ofthe upper half of her body, and theorgansofthethoracic cavity, surrounded by the pale, ghostlike envelope of flesh.
          How often had he looked at it, how often pressed it to his lips in the time which since then had passed and brought its changes with it—such changes as. for i nstance, getting used to life up here without Clavdia Chauchat, getting used, that is, to her remoteness in space!3
The X-ray is a kind of self-exposure, a new, more intimate kind of portraitof oneself orofsomeone close to you. To analyze the canon of modern architecture in these terms is to do a kind of X-ray of the canon, a disciplinaryself-exposure.
118
1  WilhelmRontgen’s first publication of the X-rays discovery, December 28,1895
a wayof getting closer to our object by allowingarchitecture to see itself, to see what is always there, but overlooked.
A NEW TRANSPARENCY
When Wilhelm Conrap Röntgen first published his very recent-discovery of the X-ray in December of 1895 in an artice translated the following month as “On a Ngw Kind of Rays, a Preliminary-Communication,” fig. 1 he wrote about a newform of transparency in which "bodies behave to the X-rays as turbid media to light."4 The invisible rays are described as a "medium" that penetrates objects and is revealed on screens. A technical surface acts as the most intimate witness of the otherwise hidden interior. In the early decades of the twentieth century architects, histori-ans,andtheorists quickly absorbed the new paradigm, with its inversion of the classical relationship between inside and outside, developing an entire logic ofthe invisible that remains largely in place, anarchitecturewe still live with in our countless screens monitoring endless invisibleflows.
     This new concept of transparency is intimately linked to the idea ofa “screen." The screen that Röntgen describes was actually made of a piece of paper coated with a thin layer ofbarium platinum cyanide, which glows fluorescent when exposed to X-rays. He marvels at the fact that paper itself is very transparent, so the “fluorescent screen" is really just the thin layer of barium platinum cyanide. But it is not just a sheet of paper that is transparent. Even “a thousand-page book“ placed behind the screen becomes transparent “Thick blocks ofwood are stilltransparent:’ It takes
X-Ray Intimacy
119
2
s
many layers for tinfoil to barely cast a “shadow" on the screen, and it takes a very thick sheet of aluminum to reduce the fluorescence. figs.2,3
      Rontgen’s discovery was a radical transformation of the concepts of materiality and solidity, inverting the conventional understanding of what is visible and invisible. Rontgen's screen showed, in the words of his first report, that “all bodies possess this same transparency, but in very varying degrees.”5 Transparency, therefore, is a property of seemingly opaque bodies, including the human body. In other words, transparency is not an effect. The X-ray is notsomething done to an object. The object isalreadytrans-parent, and the X-rays allow us to see it as such.Thewhole world is now understood to be transparent. More than simply affecting architecture, Rontgen’s discovery was a transformation of space.
      Having studied the transparency of many materials, including glass itself, which paradoxically is more opaque (because it contains lead), Röntgen looked through the human body: “If the hand be held before the fluorescent screen," he writes,“the shadow showsthe bones darkly, with only faint outlines of the surroundingtissues."6The famous X-ray image ofthe hand of his wife Bertha Röntgen, with her wedding ring onthemiddle finger, taken onlyfivedays before he submitted the article for publication, is used as an illustration— as proof ofthe astonishing revelation7 fig.4
      The story of this image, which was crucial to the popular success ofthe invention, isthat Röntgen, afraid of revealing his stunning discovery to his colleagues, brought his
120
2  First X-ray images of Wilhelm Röntgen, 1895, as published in the English translation ofRontgen's article
3  Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen
wife to the laboratory the evening of December 22, 1895, after months of experimentation with inanimate objects, and exposed her hand to the X-rays for fifteen minutes, producing the first X-ray of a human body. Upon seeing the image of her' hand, Bertha -Rontgen famously said, “I have seen my death,”8 anticipating a common popular reaction tosuch exposures—like seeing a ghost, or even seeipg yourself as a ghost.    '
     Rontgen's article stimulated an enormous double response. Scientists all around the world seized on the idea and tried to replicate the experiment. The popular press ignited a huge speculation about the possible uses and meaning ofthese images. Newspapers were galvanized by the idea of an invisible world. The image of Bertha’s hand gave way to a whole genre ofsuch images in both scientific and popular publications. Countless X-ray images of hands were made by Rontgen himself and others soon after the article was published. In his first public lecture about the discovery, delivered in Würzburg on January 13, 1896, Rontgen exposed the hand of Professor Albert von Kolliker, fig.6 afamous anatomistand presidentoftheWürzburg Physical and MedicalSociety. Summoned to Berlin by the emperor to reporton thediscovery, heX-rayedthe hands ofthe Emperor Wilhelm II and the Empress Augusta Victoria. Later, he also did the hands of the Duke and Duchess of York and the Emperor and Empress of Russia, among many other notables. fig.6 The hand X-ray had become a new kind of intimate portrait and the icon ofa new worldview in which everything, no matter how seemingly impervious, becomes intimate.
X-Ray I ntimacy
4
■■
4  Wilhelm Röntgen.X-ray photograph of thelet: hand of hiswrfe Anna Bertha Ludwig with wsdding ring. 22 December 1895 s Wilhelm Röntgen, X-ray photograph of the hand of Professor Albert von Kolllker. January 1896
6  X-ray ofthe hand and wrist of Alexandra. EmpressofRussia,ca.1898
7  X-rays ofthe hands of KingGeorges and Ocean Maiy, plate from the Illustrated London News. April 30,1896
122
A poem in Life magazine on March 12, 1896, captures this new intimacyas the body becomesa '"lalo,“misty in line":
     Lines on an X-ray Portrait of a Lady
     She is so tall, so slender; and herbones—
     Thosefrail phosphates, those carbonates of lime— Arewell produced bycathode rays sublime, Byoscillations, amperes, and byohms.
     Her dorsal vertebrae are not concealed Byepidermis, but are well revealed.
     Around her ribs.those beauteoustwenty-four, Herflesh a halo makes, misty in line,
     Her noseless, eyelessface looks into mine,
     And I butwhisper, “Sweetheart, jet'adore."
     Her white and gleamingteeth atme do laugh.
     Ah i Lovely, cruel, sweet cathode-a-graph!
X-Ray Intimacy
123
Röntgen had named the mysterious phenomenon “X-rays" because he didn't know what they were. Koliker had proposed. after Röntgen's Würzburg lecture, thatthe new rays be called “Röntgen rays,'' but self-effacing Röntgen preferred to continue to call them X-rays. The justification of the term “rays,” he claimed in that first article, lay in the “shadow pictures" produced by interposing a body between the source ofthe X-rays and a photographic plate or a screen. He wrotethat in the two months before he X-rayed his wife’s hand, he had “observed and photographed manysuch shadow pictures,'' including a set of weights inside a wooden box and a compass card and needle completely enclosed in a metal case.9
      Röntgen considered this ability to make photographs of the “shadow pictures" on the screen of “special interest,” because it made it possibleto “exhibit the phenomena so as to exclude the dangeroferror."10The main advantagefor him, therefore. was to provide proof, to confirm the observations already made multiple times with the fluorescent screen. Soon after its initial publication, he sent reprints ofthe article together with prints ofthe X-ray images he had taken to many scientists, including Emil Warburg in Berlin and Henri Poincare in Paris.11 Warburg immediately added the X-ray images to an exhibition that was mounted on the occasion of the anniversary of the Berlin Physical Society at Berlin University. This was the first public exhibition of X-ray images.
      Without these images, the discovery of the X-rays would have had less of an impact in both scientific and lay circles. It was front-page news in many newspapers world-
124
wide. fig.7 OnJanuary 5, 1886, Die Presse in Vienna was the first to report on the discovery, with an article entitled “Eine Sensationelle Entdeckung" (A sensational discovery).*2 in their haste, they misspelled Rontgen’s name as “Routgen.’’ The nextday,The Standard newspaper in London cabled the following news release to the world, repeating the misspelled name and misidentifying Bertha's hand as^that of a man:
      The noise of war's alarm should not distract attention from the marvellous triumph of Science which is reported from Vienna. It is announced that Professor Routgen of Wurzburg has discovered a light which, for the purposeof photography, will penetrate wood, flesh and most other organic substances. The Professor has succeeded in photographing metal weights which were in a closed wooden case, also a man’s hand, which shows only the bones, theflesh being invisible.'2
When The Standard reported on the story in the newspaper of January 7, 1896, they felt obliged to add: “The Presse assures its readers that there is no joke or humbug in the matter. It is a serious discovery by a serious German Professor."*4 The Frankfurter Zeitung published the news, also on January 7 and was thefirstto print the images. Newspapers around the world, from Le Matin and L'Illustration in Paris, to the Krakow-based Czas, to the New York Times, St. Louis Dispatch, and Sydney Telegraph, among many others, continued to sensationalize the discovery and anticipate its
X-Ray Intimacy
8,9 Josef Maria Ederand Eduard Valenta, Photographie mittelstder Rontgen-Strohien, 1896, cover and Chamaleon cristatus
10 Spread from L. Moholy-Nagy, Moierei, Fotografie Film, Bauhausbucher 8, 1925
medical uses, something about which Röntgen was skeptical. Since only text could be sent by cable telegraphy, most o" these early overseas reports where not illustrated. also P'ompting skepticism among readers andjournalists. Czas, for example, wrote: “the problem, although it seems an All Fools’ Day joke, is seriously considered in serious circles:'15
A MAGIC SCREEN
Following Röntgen's invention, many people developed tech-n ques for photographing the X-ray effect. Röntgen had refused several offers to patent hisdiscovery, declaring that it belonged to humanity. Sadly, he died in nearpoverty. From the beginning, he provided detailed accounts of his method, allowing others to experiment. Within a month of Röntgen's publication, Josef Maria Eder (director of an Austrian institute for graphic processes and author of an early history of photography)16 and the photo chemist Eduard Valenta published Versuche über Photographie mittelst der Ront-gen'schen Strohlen (Research on photography with Röntgen rays), fig.b an album of fifteen photogravures made from X-rays, in which theydescribed in great detailthe procedure used and the improvements they had made to Rontgen's apparatus.17 Human hands and feet, fish, frogs, a snake, a chameleon, fig.9 a lizard, a rat, and a newborn rabbit were among the images in this album, a kind of zoo echoing nineteenth-century naturalist albums of animals, insects, and plants, but also anticipating the “new vision” of photography of Moholy-Nagy and others in the 1920s. Fia.io This new vision ofphotographywould alsobecomeencyclopedic.
126
X-Ray Intimacy
127
11 Annie Sesant, theosophistand women’s nghts activist, 188s
12 Anme Besent end C.W. Leadbeater, "Forms Produced by Pendulums," illustration in ^^^t-Forms. 1901
13 L Aubert, “RadioscopicShadow
of aThorax in Expiration," in La Photo-^^iie de tt^nvts/ble: Les rayons X suiVId'unglossorre, tes liVresdbr de to soence, 1898
14 L. Aubert, “Shadow on a fluorescent screen of a frog fixed with pins on
a sheetof cork”
15 L. Aubert,1o Photographier* tlnvisibie. Les rroyoinsXsuivi dun glossa ire, les livres d'or de to science, 1898. cover
16 August Dittmer, Prof. Rontgen's “XR4YS ond theJfopapotions in the NNewPhotoergphy 1896
                            It was as if the whole world had to be seen again, or more precisely, as if it were a whole new world. Moholy-Nagy would later write:
                                The passion for transparencies is one ofthe most spectacular features of our time. In x-ray photo s, structure becomes transparency and transparency manifests structure. The x-ray pictures. to which the futurist has consistently referred, are among the out standing space-time renderings on the static plane. They give simultaneously the inside and outside, the view of an opaque solid, its outline, but also its inner structure.18
                            What interests me here is how X-ray images had transformed the visual field long before the so-called avantgarde. The X-ray was a new kind of realism, a realism that was in no way in opposition to a new kind of mysticism or spiritualism. William Crookes, the scientist who developed :he cathode-ray tube used by Rontgen, was the president of the Society for Psychical Research and within a year of ihediscovery of X-rays annou need that th ey produc ed a new sense of reality based not on outer surfaces, but inner vibrations, closer to consciousness itself, as Linda Henderson has pointed out_19 The Theosophist and women's rights activist Annie Besant wa s l ikewise trying to gi ve visible form to the invisible. Not by chance, many of the images of what she called “thought-forms” have the appearanceofX-rays.20 figs. 11,12 The X-ray was an optical and philosophical revolution that swept the world at astonishing speed. The first
128
13
surgery with X-rays was carried out in the United States within two months ofthe discovery. and thefi rstfu lly fledged department of radiology was established at the Glasgow Royal inti rmary within a year. fig.17
      It is imp6rtantto note that in thealbums of X-rays that proliferated everywhere at the tu rn of the century, X-rays were still presented as images.of screens. Eve n booksaimed at popularizing science, such as the 1898 French-book La Photographie de /'invisible, fio.-iu carefully note below each image that it is' a "shadow on a screen." For example, under the X-ray of a frog we read: "shadow on a fluorescent screen of a frog fixed with pins on a sheetof cork” FIe.u or “shadowof a hand on a screen of platinum cyanide of barium.”21 The caption is needed because the screen itself disappears, since the paper support of the screen ias the same color as the page in the publication. The caption reminds the reader that there is a screen there, a screen that was originally chemicalson paper.The "shadow image”takesthe place and the modality of a drawing, a ghostly trace hanging before theviewer and offering a deep gaze intothe secrets of a body or even of the cosmos itself. fig.is The floating, disappearing screen becomes the most powerful of instruments.
      Röntgen was fascinated that he could also produce the efFect directly on a photographic plate. fig.is Within a year of the discovery of X-rays, Eastman developed a special plate for X-rays and a thin transparent surface would eventually take over the responsibility of the screen when Eastman introduced film, replac i ngthe glass photographic plate. But the doubling, the eerie status cf the shadow image,
X-Raylntimacy
129
130
17  Surgical operation duringWorld War I using a fluoroscope to find embedded bullets. 1917
18  Experimenter (toprightl examining his hand with fluoroscope. 1890s
is Fluoroscopy of thechest. New York Medicol Journal. February 23,1907
remained. The photograph of Bertha’s hand was the image of an image. the proof of what Röntgen had seen countless times on the screen. It is still the image of the screen. This magical and threatening screen effect rippled through society, becoming a new fQrm of spectacle. It was as if nothing could be seen the same way. Everything needed to be rethought . Every field seemed.to be affected by the magic screen—science and medicine. of course, but also policing and entertainment, religion and spiritualism, where many seized upon theX-ray as proof of what they believed all a lo ng.
     The screen was a site of intense speculation. From the very beginning, this visual revolution was understood as an assault on privacy and even a form of indecency. fig.is The London newspaper Pail Moll Gazette wrote in 1896: "We are sick of the Röntgen rays .... I t is now said that you can see other people's bones with the naked eye.... On the revo Iting indecency of this there is no need to dwell.”52 Cartoons and comical poems explored the new spaceof exposure.The fear that X-rays would allow people to seethrough clothing was there from the beginning. Another poem of 1896, this time in Electrical Rev/ew goes:
     X-ACTLY SO'
     TheRoentgen Rays.the Roentgen Rays,
     What is this craze?
     Thetown's ablaze
     With the new phase
     Of X-ray’s ways.
X-Ray Intimacy
20
                                    BEFORE LEAVING THE EXHIBITION •• ••
                                      THE WONDROUS
 X RAYS
                                            The
                                     Greatest Scientific Discovery of the Age.
                                             8y lh> aid of the New LJhc )'oil are enabled » MM
■ THROUGH 8 SHEff OF fflETBL "
“ TH^r-^E A BLOCK OF WOOD ■
                                          "SinI ihe Coins wilhin slim Purse:' ADMISSION - 3d.
                                               OPEN ALE. DAV.
X RAY PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN.
                               I’mfuUof daze,
                               Shock and amaze;
                               For nowadays I hear they'll gaze
                               Thro' cloak and gown—and even stays,
                               These naughty, naughty Roentgen Rays.23
                          Shortly after the invention, merchants offered X-ray-proof underwear (as happened again in more recent years when customs and security introduced full-body scanners in airports). And a New Jersey assemblyman is supposed to have introduced a bill to ban X-ray opera glasses, should they ever be invented. Thomas Edison, who exhibited X-rays to the public in the New York Electrical Exhibition of 1896, even imagined thattheX-ray would eventually read people’s thoughts.
                          TheX-raywas alsoan immense form of entertainment.There were X-ray machines in every scientific and popular fair. A leaflet distributed at an 1896 exhibition at the Crystal Palace, London, reads: "BEFORE LEAVING THE EXHIBITION, ‘SEE’, THE WONDROUS X RAYS. The Greatest Scientific Discovery of the Age.... X RAY PHOTOGRAPHS TAKEN." fig.io In Paris, the Grands Mogasins Oufoyei alternated demonstrations of an X-ray machine with demonstrations of the Lumière brothers' moving pictures. fig.21 Customers could have an X-ray taken of their hand or their feet as a souvenir.
                               In fact, cinematography and X-rays were discovered within a few months of each other, in late 1895.X-ray equipment was bought not just by scientists, but by entrepre-
132
zo Leaflet announcing X-ray demonstrations, distributed at a 1896 exhibition at the Crystal Palace. London 21 Ad^rtisement cf the Grands Magasns Oufayel, announcing daily cinematographic and X-ray performances, ca. 1880
21
X-Ray Intimacy
133
22  Customs officers usingX-raysto inspect luggage in Paris, 1897
23  Atechnician takes an X-ray of a patient in 1940. This image was used to argue that radiation exposure duringX-rayingwas negligible
24  X-raydevice isused to expose a women hiding a bottle of liquor under her dress, 1897
                           neurs, some of whom believed that X-rays would offer more entertainment value than the cinema. Business trade journals carried ads from impresarios trying to exchange their movie projectors for X-ray equipment.24 In 1896, Blooming-dales hired Columbia University physics senior Herbert Hawks to conduct public demonstrations of the X-rays. There were X-ray studios in all major cities. Coin-operated X-ray machines were installed in Chicago, where you could have an X-ray for one dollar.
                               It was a nervous kind of entertainment. The X-ray had undone the logic of what is private and what is public. It represented a complete transformation not just of privacy, but also of public life. Changing what is seen is equ ally a changingofwhat is shared—willingly or not. lnthatsense, it was a shock to social life and unleashed fears of intrusion and control.
                           BUILDING THE NEW VISUAL FIELD
                           X-rays were almost immediately used for policing in customs checkpoints, where suitcases and people were subjected to exposure. In Paris railways stations,the police subjected passengers and their luggage to X-rays as early as 1898. FG.22 An illustration ina Parisian newspapershows how a woman hiding a bottle of liquorunder her dress is exposed by the machine as the glass with lead becomes visible next to her femur in the X-ray. fig.24 What is crucial here is the architecture of the scene. She is suspended behind a floating screen held in place by the assistant. She is occupying a new spaceof radical exposure.
134
  The X-ray thus was architectural from the beginning and remains so, as can be seen in image after image, like the photograph of an attractive blond woman behind a screen made in 1940 as a publicity imageto reassure the publicthat radiation from X-rays vyas negligi ble. fig. 23
      She is occupying a new technological space defined by a screen, rather than by..walls, a glowing screen with its shadow image. We are still in theterritory of Bertha Röntgen and the ur-image of her hand. The mysteries of the i nte-rior are brought to the surface by a screen, and the flesh becomes just a faint outline. The body is literally turned insideout.
      Western architectu re, at least since the Italian Renaissance, has mod eled itself on the human body, butthe body is inverted with the arrival ofX-ray—withthe inside becoming the outside. Modern architecture absorbed the logic of the screen and even of the shadow image. Glass architecture echoes the logic of the X-ray. There is an outer screen that disappears in order to register a ghostly image of the inside. It is X-ray architecture. As with Rontgen’s transformative images, X-ray architecture is an image of an image—the effect of an X-ray, rather than an actual X-ray. It's not so much that the inside of the building is exposed, but that the building represents exposure, and this exposure occurs on a screen. Glass is called on to simulate transparency.
      ThisX-ray effect was integral to a new discourse about transparency. Arthur Korn’s extraordinary 1929 book Gias im Bau und ais Gebrauchsgegenstand (Glass in construction and as a commodity), fig.26 translated into English as Glass
24
X-Ray Intimacy
135
25  Walter Gro pius, Bauhaus Dessau, 1920s, illustration in Arthur Korn, Giosim Bou und ols Gebrouchsgegenstond, 1929
26  Arthur Korn, Gios im Bou und ols Gebrouchsge&nstond. 1929,cover
in Modern Architecture, catalogues the new use of glass in architecture in 181 remarkable images, including not just architecture, but some furniture, light bulbs, and laboratory equipment. Korn notes, as ff surprised:
      The outside wall is no longer the first impression one gets of a building. It istheinterior, the spaces in depth and the structural frame which delineates them, that one beginsto noticethrough theglass wall.This wall is barely visible, and can only be seen when there are reflected lights, distortions or mirror effects.... Glass is noticeable yet not quite visible. It is the great membrane, fullof mystery, delicate yet tough.25
This sense of mystery, which X-rays share, infuses Korn's book, as in a photograph of the Bauhaus building in Dessau where the glass wall is a kind of ripple. fig.2s The volume of the building within looms without definition, an effect found throughoutthe book.
      Korn's discussion oftransparency is an uncanny echo of Rontgen’s discussion of new forms of transparency in the first publication of his discovery of X-rays. Just as the body of the Bauhaus building appears, in this photograph, strangely blurry through the not-quite-visible glass, Röntgen writes about the flesh becoming a kind of mysterious shadow while the bones are perfectly visible.
      Modern buildings even started to look like medical images.The impact of the technology of the X-ray is evident in the work of many avant-garde architects of the early
136
decades of the twentieth century. Mies van der Rohe wrote about his work as “skin and bones" architecture and rendered his projects for the Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper of 1919 and his Glass Skyscraper of 1922 as if seen through an X-ray machine. FiG.2*,Mies was deeply interested in X-ray imagesand used them as illustrations in his articles, as in the April 1926 issue of G, wherethesilhouette of the bead of a woman appears next to the X-ray of the same head.26 fis.2? He even put an image of a bone alongside his glass skyscraper in an issue of the magazine Merz to drive the point
home.J7FiG.29
      Mies was not alone. Books on modern architecture are filled with images of glowing glass skins revealing inner bones and organs; they look like albums of X-rays, reminiscent of the X-ray atlases that proliferated in the early decades of the twentieth century.28 Think, for example, about Le Corbusier’s project for the Glass Skyscraper (1925) fig.3i, Walter Gropius and Adolf Meyer’s Bauhaus (1925-1926), Brinkman and van der Vlugt's Van Nelle Factory (1925-1927) in Rotterdam fis.33, Erich Mendelsohn’s Schocken Department Store (1926-1928) in Stuttgart fig 32, Buckminster Fuller’s 4D Tower (1928) fis.36, George Keck's Crystal House (1933-1934) at the World’s Columbian Exhibition in Chicago Fie.3s, Paul Nelson’s Suspended House (1935), Frits Peutz’s Schunck Glass Palace (1935) in Heerlen fig.37, Jaromir Krej-car’s Czech pavilion at the International Exhibition in Paris (1937) FiG.ao, and countless otherexamples.This is morethan a dominant aesthetic. It is a symptom of a deep-seated philosophy of design deriving from medical discourse.
X-Ray Intimacy
138
27  Silhouette and X-ray of thesame head, used as illustration m Mies van der Rohe's article in G: Zejtschnft fureiemeotere Gesfolfung, no. 5-6. April1926
28  Mies van der Rohe, Glass Skyscraper. Serlin, 1922. photomontage
29  Double spread of Merz.no. 8-9, April—July 1924. pp. 81-82
X-Ray Intimacy
139
3q Jaromir Krejcar. Czech pavilion at the Paris World Exhibition of 1937
31  Le Corbusier's projectforthe Glass Skyscraper, 1925
32  Erich Mendelsohn, Schocken store, Stuttgart, Germany,l926 1928
3 3 Brinkman and van derVlugt's Van Nelle Factoiy in Rotterdam,l925-1927 34 Bernard BijvoeL and Pierre Chareau, Maison de Verre, Paris, 1932
35  George Keck, CrysLal House. 1933-1934. exhibited at theWorld’s Columbian Exhibition in Chicago,
1934. A Dymaxion car by R. Buckminster Fuller is parked in the garage.
36  R. BuckminsLerFuller, Streamlined Dymaxion Shelter prototype, 1932
37  Frits Peut2, Schunck Glass Palace, Heerlen. the Net her lands.1935
X-Ray Intimacy
141
38
39
Maison deVerre,the house and clinic in a Paris courtyard for the prominent gynecologist Dr. Jean Dalsace, designed by Bernard Bijvoet and Pierre Chareau from 1928 to 1932, is especially emblematic of this resonance between architecture and medicine,with the internal elementsofthe building revealed like organs through the translucent glass-block facade in a ghostlyX-rayeffect. fig.34 Not bychance, Dalsace was very engaged with radiography and published articles on it in medical journals during the house's construction.29
     The development oftheX-ray and that of modern architecture coincide; they evolved in parallel. Although experiments with glass were numerous in the early years of the twentieth century, they still tended to be isolated esoteric projects by avant-garde architects—many developed as temporary buildings for fairs. Only by the mid-twentieth century did the see-through house become realized in Mies’s Farnsworth House (1945-1951) in Plano, Illinois, fig.3b
38 Mies van der Rohe,Farnsworth House, Piano, Illinois, 1949
39 PhilipJohnson, GlassHouse,
New Canaan, CT. 1949
40 "He.ping those who helpthesick,'' advertisement for mobile X-ray unit published in Life magazine, December 1945
41 Or.Scholl's Fluoroscopic Shoe X-Ray, 1940s
42 "Cooking Taught with Loving Care." advertisement for Pyrex, 1940
43 Ad for transparent plastic wrap Pliofilm, developed by Goodyear in 1934
and Philip Johnson’s Glass House (1949) in New Canaan, Connecticut, fig.39 for example. Just astheX-ray exposes the inside of the bodyto the public eye, the glass house exposes its interior. This exposure became a mass phenomenon with the ubiquitous picture window of the suburban American house at midcentury, perhaps not by chance at exactly the sametimethattheX-ray itself becamea massphenomenon.
     By midcentury, the mass X-raying of US citizens on a regular basis was established. With this development, the now-visible interior of the body became not just a tool for diagnosis, but also the site of a new form of public sur-veillance.The postwar mobilization againstTB included pro-
142
40
41
grams for the massX-ray surveying ofthe entire popu lation using mobile X-ray machines in places such as department stores, industries, schools, suburban streets, and public markets. fig.4o Over a period of a half century, an experimental medicaltdol had bee n transformed into a mechanism of surveillance forthe whole population.
     This was more than a ^dical paradigm. Shoe stores, for example, used X-ray machines for shoe fittings without any kind of protection from radioactivty. fig.41 The machines were not banned inthe United States untilthe 1970s.X-rays had evolved from being radical images representing the hidden truth of things to become almost routine elements of everyday life.
     At exactly the same time, everything, not just the house, all of a sudden needed to be see-through: from Pyrex cookware and Saran Wrap to windows in ovens and washing machines that expose their contents. figs.42,43 Likewise, everything had to be subjected to X-rays—even cars, as in a 1946 image of a Jeep featured in Life magazine as the “World’s Biggest X-Ray"30 fig.4s and appropriated by the Independent Group to be used in the exhibition “Parallel of Life and Art" at the Institute ofContemporaryArts in London in 1953. The front cover of the catalogue of this exhibition was a 1941 X-ray image of a man using an electric shaver, taken from Laszlo Moholy-Nagy’s 1947 book Vision in Motion, where it is described as the work of T:wo doctors in a New Jersey laboratory. fig.44 The image hc;d been published in Mechanix Illustrated, which is where Moholy-Nagy found it. But he also took images of X-rays from a 1923 issue of
43
X- Ray Intimacy
143
144
44  Catalogue ofthe exhibition Porollel ofLifeondArt held at thelnstitute
of ContemporaryArtâ, September 11 toOctober 18,1953
45  “World's biggest X-Ray: life size X-ray image of a jeep,Life magazine. March 25. 1946
46  Stills from Highlights ond Shadows byJames Sibley Watson, Jr., Kodak, 1937
                                                                    46
Wendingen magazine. Infact, architectural magazines had an eye on X-ray images from early on. It is as if X-rays had steadily infiltrated and transformed diverse popular, profes-sional,scientific, and artistic discourses—virally expanding from a new way of seejng the world to a new world, from diagnosis to symptom, or even as generator of symptoms.
GLASSTERROR
The association between X-rays and glass houses became commonplace in midcentury popular culture. For example, in Highlights and Shadows, a 1937 Kodak Research Laboratories film on the virtues of X-rays for disease prevention by the filmmaker-radiographer James Sibley Watson, Jr., a woman wearing a swimsuit is shown strapped to a laboratory table while her body is subjected to X-rays. As her photographic image gives way to the image of her X-rayed body, the narrator declares: “This young lady, to whom henceforth a glass house should hold no terrors, will after an examination of her radiographs, be reassured that she is indeed physically fit.“31 fig.46 The glass house acted as a symbol of both the newform of surveillanceand health.
     A similar set of associations can be found in the discoursesurrounding canonical worksofmodern architecture. In an interview in House Beautiful, Edith Farnsworth, a successful doctor in Chicago, compared her famous weekend house, designed by Mies in 1949,to an X-ray:
     I don't keep a garbage can under my sink. Do you know why? Becauseyou can seethe whole“kitchen"from the
X-Ray Intimacy
145
47
road on the way in here and the can would spoil the appearance ofthe whole house. So I hide it in the closet further down from the sink. Mies talks about “free space": but his space is very fixed. I can't even put a clothes hanger in myhousewithoutconsidering how it affects everything from the outside. Any arrangement of furniture becomes a major problem, because the house is transparent, like an X-ray.35 F1G5.47,4B
47 Mies van derRohe. Farnsworth House, 1949. exterior view of kitchen
48 Mies van der Rohe, Farnsworth House. 1949. interior view of kitchen 48 Stills from Moss Radiography. 1944 so Advertisement forVictor Roentgen Stand, Model3.1920
Modern architecture was again understood as a piece of medical equipment. While the house was for Farnsworth likean X-ray, the nearby village thoughtofthewhite building full of glass as a sanatorium. Farnsworth goes on to claim: “There is already the local rumor that it’s a tuberculosis sanatorium.”33
                               The association was not accidental. Modern arch itec-ture not only thought of itself as providing sanatorium conditions for everyday life, but even thought of buildings as diagnostic instruments with the power of an X-ray. As Le Corbusier already had put it in L'Art décoratif d'aujourd'hui in 1925: “If the house is all white ... everything stands out from it and is recorded absolutely, black on white, it is honest and dependable.... I t is rather like an X-ray of beauty.^
                               The metaphor of the X-ray was not accidental, either. Diagnosis of tuberculosis continued to be difficult in the 1920s. Physicians often confused it with other illnesses, including bronchitis, chronic indigestion, malaria, neurasthenia, and typhoid fever. To evaluate the condition, they needed to see inside the body. X-ray technology, which had
146
49
50
                                                          VICTOR ROENTGEN STAN() Mo:elJ
been available in sanatoriums since the beginning of the centujy, became by the 1920s a routine part oftheexamina-tion of those with visible symptoms. Screening the body for tuberculosis meant optically penetrating areas of the body previously invisible. X--rays created a new kind of vision, a new paradigm of the inside/outside relationship. hlothing could havebeen more architectural
      The discourse about transparency in modern architecture is an echo of the discourse about transparency that was part of Rontgen’s first scientific paper announcing the discovery of X-rays in 1895 and immediately captivating the popular imagination.The abilityto see through material challenged all assumptions and social protocols about privacy and psychological well-being and therefore all architectural concepts of shelter and comfort. Everyone became a permanent patient in need of a new kind of medical domesticity. The intrusive logic of medical and police surveillance, with the body unable to resista newly penetrating gaze, gave way to a tender intimacy. The attempt to disci-plinethe body—with a new regime of synchronized medical, technological, and architectural protocols—also produced new psychological, social, philosophical, and emotional interactionsto which architects responded. FIG5.49-S1
      Just as the X-ray exposes the inside of the bodytothe public eye, the modern building exposed its interior. What was previously private is now subjected to public scrutiny. But the X-ray is not simply an image of the body. It is an image of the body being imaged. The X-ray is not simply about showingan inside. The exterior envelope is still a kind
X-Ray Intimacy
147
51 Winningmodels Marianne Baba (left), Lois Conway (center) and Ruth Swensen (right)standing next to plates of their X-rays during a chiropractor beauty contest, Life magazine. May 1956
148
  of shadow or a blur, and you feel yourself looking through it. To look at an X-ray is to feel your eye penetrating the surface ofthe body.The very act of lookingis exposed.You feel the eye moving through space. It is inevitably voyeuristic. Perhaps that’s what attracted architectsto the X-rays from the beginning. In glass architecture, the glass is never completely transparent. Even ;-T .  :l. you feel the outer limit
  ofthe building and your eye passingthrough thatlimit. You feel the exposure. Modern architecture exposes itself, but not by revealing everything. Rather, it stages the act ofexpo-sure,callingthe eye in.
       The seemingly fragile cloudy space of the X-ray becomes an architecture in its own right that can be inhabited and is inhabited. All the ostensible sharpness and clarity of modern architecture gives way to soft layers of reflections and translucencies. X-ray architecture is an occupiableblur.
X-Ray Intimacy
1  Susan Sontag Archives, UCLA, Box 43.
In illness os Metaphor (NewYork: Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 197 7), p. 33, she wrote: “The TB sufferer was a dropout,awanderer”
2  Sontag, /(loessos Metaphor, p. 12.
3  Thomas Mann, The Mogic Mouttoin (New York:Alfred Knopf, 1945), pp. 348-49.
4   Wilhelm Rontgen,“Ona New Kind of RaysT Nature. January23,1896, p. 275; English translation of the 1895 original text "Über eine neue Art von Strahlen" published in Sitzungsberichte derPhysikolisch-Medizinischen Geselischoft in Würzburg 137, December 28. 1895. pp. 132-41.
5  Rontgen. “On a NewKind of Rays." p. 274.
6  Ibid. p.274
7  The original article did not include illustrations, butthe English version published in Nature a few weeks ater did.
8   Mu ltiple sources repeat this story, including Gottfried Landwehr and A. Hasse, eds., Rontgen Centennial:X-raysin Natural and Life Sciences (Singapore:World Scientific, 1997). pp 7-8,
9  Rontgen, “On a New Kind of Rays." p. 276
10  Ibid., p. 274
11   Rontgen also sent the reprint and images to the Arthur Schuster in Manchester, Friedrich Kohlrauch in Gottingen, Lord Kelvin in Glasgow, and Franz Exner in ienna.
12   It was Franz Exner who alerted the Vienna newspaper to Rontgen’s discovery.
13   Electrical Engineer. New York,January 8, 1896, quoted in Otto Glaser, Wilhelm Conrad Rontgen and the Early History of the Roentgen Rays (San Francisco: Norman, 1993), p. 199.
14   The Standard (London),January7,1896, quoted in Glaser, Wilhelm Conrod Röntgen ond the Earty History ofthe Roentgen Rays,
p. 200.
15   Quoted in A. Urbanik, "Historyof Polish Gastrointestinal Radiology." Journal of
Physiology and Pharmacology. 54, no. 3 (2003), p. 211, and in "The Beginnings ofRadiology in Poland—19th Century,” Polish Medical Society of Radiology, polradiology.org., https://archive.li/z7zh
16  Josef Maria Eder.Ausfuhrliches Handbuch der Phatngraphie (Halle:
W. Knapp, 1884).
17  Josef Maria Eder and Eduard Valenta, Versuche i\berPhotogrophie mittelst
der Rontgerischen Strohlen (Vienna:
R. Lechner; Halle, Wilhelm Knapp, 1896}.
18  Laszl6 Moholy-Nagy,“Space-Time Problems^' first published in American Abstract Artists Yearbook (New York. 1946). Reprinted in Moholy-Nagy, Vision in Motion (Chicago: PTheobald, 1947), p. 252.
19   Linda Dalrymple Henderson,Duchomp in Context: Science ond Technology in the Lorge Gloss and Related Works (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1998). See also Tom Gunning, “lnvisible Worlds, Visible Media,' in Brought to Light: Photography and the invisible 1840-1900, ed. Corey Keller (New Haven:Yale University, 2008).
2 0 Annie Besant and C. W. Lead beater, Thought-Forms (London:TheTheosophical PublishingHouse. 1901 ).
21  L. Aubert, Lophotographie de 1‘invisible: Les royonsXsuivid’ungiossaire (Paris:
Les livresd’or delascience, 1898), from s-piece and p. 65.
22  PollMaU Gazette. March 1896,quoted in Jon Queijo, Breakthrough!: How the
10 Greatest Discoveries in Medicine Saved Millionsand Changed Our Viewofthe World (London: FT Press, 2010),p. 99.
23   Wilhelma, Electrical Review, April 17, 1896, quoted in Akash Ganguly and Rezaul Ka rim, Essential Physics For Radiology and /maging(Kolkata: Academic Publishers. 2009),p. iv.
24   Gunning, "Invisible Worlds." p. 52.
25  Arthur Korn, Gloss in Modern Arch!• tecture (London: Barrie & Rackliff, 1967), p6.
26   Mies van der Rohe. “ThePure Form is theNatural."G, no.5-6.April1926.
27   Merz, no. 8-9,Aprii-July 1924,
pp.81-82.      .
28   Rudolf Grashey's TypischeRi5ntgen-bilder von norma/en Menschen. for example, went through six printings between 1905 and 1939.See Lorraine Oaston and Peter Galison,”The Image of Objectivi ty," in “Seeing Science." spEIC:ialissue, Representations 40 (Autumn 1992), pp.81-128.
29   Emma Cheatle, Port-Architecture:
The Maison de Verre, Duchamp, Dom esticity and Desire in 1930s Paris (London: Routledge. 2017), p 112 n.83.
30   ‘'World's Biggest X-Ray:Huge Machine Records Life-Size Image of Jeep," Life, March 25,1946, pp.84-85 .The X-ray taken at the University of Rochester laboratory was twelve feet, one inch long and four feet high.
31   James Sibley Watson,Jr., Highlights and Shadows, Kodak, 44 mins., black and white,35mm, 1937,quoted i nLisa Cartwright, Screening the Body: Tracing Medicine's Visual Culrure(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1995), p.155.
32   Edith Farnsworth. quoted inJoseph A. Barry. “Report on the American Battle between Good and Bad Modern,” House Beautiful, May 1953, p. 270.
33   Edith Farnsworth. “Memoirs"(unpub-lished manuscript), quoted inAlice T. Friedman, Womenondthe Makingofthe Modern House:A Social andArcNtecturai History (New York:Abrams, 1998),p. 143.
34   Le Corbusier, L'Art decorotif d'aujourd'hui (Paris: G. Cr£s et Ge, 192 5), p. 190, my translation.
150
CHAPTER4
Blurred Visions
Transparency is not what it seems. The very act of looking through glass destabilizes the eye. Space now “fluctuates," as Gyorgy Kepes put it in his Language of Vision (1944): “Transparencymeans a simultaneous perception ofdifferent spatial locations. Space not only recedes but fluctuates in a continuous activity."1 Forms “interpenetrate" ambiguously without dissolving each othe.c,They vibrate, forcingthe brain of the viewer to speculate on what is there without ever being g.bleto pin things down. In reverse. overlappingforms produce an effect oftransparency. I n Colin Rowe and Robert Slutzky’s canonic reading of Kepes: “By definition. the trans-parentceases to bethat which is perfectly clearand instead becomes that which is clearly ambiguous.”2
      For example, at first sight, the work of SANAA, the office of Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa, appears as the perfect case of transparency in architecture and has been celebrated as such. ln this sense, SANAA has inherited the Miesian tradition of radical transparency, absorbing and refiningtheX-rayeffect.Taketheir Glass Pavilion (2006) in theToledo Museum ofArt. fig. i an all-glass pavilion for allglass objects in the “GlassCity,"Toledo, Ohio. Inthe standard publicity image of the project, the white-trimmed pavilion sits in the park, uncannily echoing some of Mies’s canonical projects, particularly the Farnsworth House and the Fifty-by-Fifty House. fig.2 Mies famously deployed sheer glass wallsto expose the interior. Butwhat really fascinated architects such as Mies and those inspired by him, such as Philip Johnson, was not the way the gaze passesthrough theglass, butthe way itseems to get caught in the layers of reflection.
151
152
  1  SANAA, rendering of the Glass Pavilion at the Toledo MuseumofArt.Ohio, 2006
  2  MiesvanderRohe,modelofFifty-by-Fifty House. 1951-1952
  3  Reflections rnthe Glass House. PhihpJohnsor, NewCanaan, Con^ticu t. 1949
  4   5 Mies vander Rohe, model of the Glass Skyscraper, Berlin, 1922
  In canonical photographs, Johnson’s Glass House (1949) becomes opaque, clad in what he described as “wallpaper." FiG.3 In a 1961 television interview, Johnson said that the Glass House “worksvery well for the simple reason that the wallpaper is so handspme.lt is perhaps a very expensive wallpaper, but you have wallpaper that changes every five minutes th roughout the day.._and surrounds you with the beautiful nature that sometimes, notthis year, Connecticut gives u.s,”3
       For Mies^ and John son, reflections consolidate the wall’s plane. Complex lines of reflected trees become like the veins of marble in Mies's buildings. When explaining his Glass House, Johnson cited Mies' words from twenty-five years earlier, when Mies said: “I discovered by working with actu al glass models that the important thing is the play of reflections and not the effect of light and shadow. as in ordinary buildings.' Mies must have beer referring to the glass model of his Glass Skyscraper that he had repeatedly photographed in a garden in Berlin Fios.4,s before arriving at the few canonical images released in 1922 that quickly went viral internationally in architectu ral magazines and books. It is hard to find an avant-garde magazine that didn't include at least one of the images. Most professional magazines feature them, as does every book on modern architectu re. Not by chance, they are theopening images of Arthur Korn’s 1929 book Glos im Bou. The images rapidly became an icon of modernity itself. The eye is pulled into the center of the image, through the glass to the skeleton, but the skeleton is not crystal clear. It is a kind of amorphous, murky presence.
Blurred Visions
153
mini i
6  Miesvan der Rohe, Friedrichstrasse skyscraper project, 1921-1922
7  Miesvan derRohe, Friedrichstrasse skyscraper project, 1921
8  Mies van der Rohe.Sketchfor a glass houses" a hillside, 1934
9   Charlesand RayEames, model of first version of Case Study House 8, which they called "Bridge House.“ 1948
10,11 Reflection s oftrees on the glass facade ofthe Eames House, Pacific Palisades, California, 1949
The center of the image is totally obscure.The image stages exposure, but finally what is exposed is unclear. It is precisely this qualitythat makes it an X-ray.
     TheX-rayeffect is nofa sharply defined structure seen through an almost invisiblesurface, but rather a mysterious irner reality suspended in the ghostly medium of atranslu-cent mass—an effect perfectly captured in the photomontages and even the huge charcoal renderings of the Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper of 1921 and the Glass Skyscraper of 1922. Fias.6,7
     Charles and Ray Eames also went to considerable trouble to study the reflections of tie trees by placing a glass model of the initial project of the Eames House, the a.l-glass Bridge House of 1948 fig.9 (which had been directly inspired by the unbuilt 1934 Glass House on a Hillside project by Mies), fig.8 on the site of their future house in Santa Monica and photographing itfrom all angles.5The interior of the house becomes mysterious and blurred with the reflected exterior of trees and sky. The whole point is again not transparency, but blur. With the builtversion of the Eames h::>use,the EamesestookMies’sexperimentone step further. The glass plane is now broken, and the reflections of the eucalyptus tree endlessly multiply and relocate. The house dissolves inthe playof reflections.As Ray said afterth i rteen years of living in the house, "The structure long ago ceased to exist. I am not aware of it."6 They lived in reflections and the reflections of reflections.7 nes.io, 11
     SANAA goes even further in producing a layering of reflection on the inside as well as the outside. The blurring
154
Blurred Visions
155
12
156
15
SANAA
12 Renderingof the Glass Pavilion at the Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio, 2006
13 Novartis Pharma Headquarters, Basel,
2002
14 Plan of theGlass Pavilion at theToledo Museum of Art, Ohio, 2006
15 Rendering of theGlass Pavilion at the
Toledo Museum of Art, Ohio, 2006         h-
16 Motel study of ChristianDior Building,
Tokyo, 2001-2003
17 Christian Dior Building, Tokyo,
2001-2003
no longer stopsatthe space's outside limit.Thewhole space is the limit. fig.13 There is no clear-cut boundary between inside and outside.Thespace is neitherinnorout, butseems to extend infinitely. In such a space, walls are not optical barriers, but 'optical intensifiers. They are exposed, along with the people and the objects. FIa.u In the Glass Pavilion, the inner and outer edges of the wallare revealed, a.nd the inaccessible-gap between them takes over to become the real space of the project. fig.is The double line of the wall establishes and then undoes any sense of solidity. fis.h
       SANAA's vision is far from crystal clear. In fact, their work appears to be more interested in further blurring the view, softening the focus, fig.is than in sustaining the supposed transparency of early avant-garde architecture. Within SANAA's architecture, structure is never revealed. Their buildings are optical devices without any visible mecha-nisms.The real view is not just from the outside looking in or the inside looking out, it is from the inside looking even further inward, not to discover the inrer secret of the building, butto be suspended in the view tself. The visitors are often literally between walls of glass or acrylic. What they see,through the shiny layer in front ofthem, is another layer and then another and then another, with the juxtaposed reflections off each surface dissolving any line between inside and outside. Peering through all the layers, vision softens and distorts,withthe cu rves and ripples of the glass accentuating thedistortion.FIG.n
       IfSANAA is the inheritor of Miesian transparency, the latest in a long line of experiments, they are the ultimate
Blurred Visions
157
18
19
mtmrnkm
158
SANAA
i b Rendering of the Glass Pavilion at the
Toledo Museum ofArt> Ohio, 2006
19 Rendering of Lumiere Park Café,
Almere, the Netherlands, 1999
20  'Transparéncia nipona,"clipping from Newspaper Avui, Barcelona,dune 14,2010
Miesians, leaping beyond his investigation of transparency into a whole new kind of mirage effect. After centuries of architecture organized by the straight lines of the viewing eye, we now have an architecture formed by the soft distortions of the gaze—a more tactile experience of vision. To enter a SANAA project is to be caressed by a subtle soften-mg or the territory. Even the reflections of trees in thg outer
layer of glass have a delicacy that one does not find-in M ies ■s Transparencia nipona work, whether in the renderings or the one-to-one scale models fis. is
      With such a tactile sense of vision, models are crucial.
In the working of the studio, countless models are made of every possible solution in order that the effects can be felt before being fixed in a drawing. Indeed, SANAA seeks variations whose effects are unclear. As they put it in an interview:
“We try not to select options for which we can already imagine the outcome.“8 Theirs is an architecture of deliberately unclear vision, fig.i9 Mies’s experiments in the garden to see the shift in what is seen get multiplied. The lack of transparency of glass is used to expose glass that exposes glass in a kind of vertigo of vision. SANAA.’s architecture is not so much layerings of glass and acrylic as layerings of opacity— blurs, ratherthan lines.
CHOREOGRAPHED OPACITY
SANAA’S installation in the Barcelona Pavilion in 2008 was the ultimate encounter, since SANAA is widely considered the inheritor of Miesian transparency Fis.20—“a challenge,“ as Sejima admitted in an interview—a return to the scene of
Blurred Visions
159
21 ViewofSANAA's installation in the Miesvander Rohe Pavilion, Barcelona, 2008
22 PosterforSANAA’s installation in the Mies van der Rohe Pavilion, 2008
                             the crime, one could argue. The installation carefully marks off a part of the pavilion with an acrylic curtain acting as a kind of crime-scene tape, leaving, as SANAA put it “the existing space of the Barcelona Pavilion undisturbed.” And yet a completely new atmosphere was created.
                                  We decided to use acrylic to make transparent curtains. We imagined-an installation design that leaves the existing space of the Barcelona Pavilion undisturbed.
                                      The acrylic curtain stands freely on the floor and is shaped in a calm spiral. The curtain softly encompasses the spaces within the pavilion and creates a new atmosphere. The view through the acrylic will be something different from the original with soft reflections slightly distorting the pav lion.9 FIG.22
                             But what crime has been committed here? What has been cordoned off? Is it the freestanding golden onyx wall at the center of the pavilion? Orthe two Barcelona chairs for King AlfonsoXIII and Queen Victoria Eugenia ofSpain,wherethey were to sign the golden book duringthe building’s opening ceremony?FiG.2i Or is itthespace outside thespiralthat has been marked off, preserved, “undisturbed"?
                                  Inany case, the cordon is loose, the spiral is open. fig.24 We can walk in, but not so easily. Fi'st we have to find the entrance. slide around the outside of the curtain. Only when we are on the other side, having squeezed between the acrylic curtain and the front glass wall of the pavilion,
160
21
22
The Fundaciô Mies van der Rohe presents the installation by the architects Ka2uyo Sejlma-and Ryue Nishizawa until the 18th January 2009 at the Mies van der Rohe Pavilion. Avinguda Marquès de Comilas s/n, Parc de Montju'ic
#lWe decided is use acryticto make transparent curtains.
We miagined an installation design that leaves the existing space of tie Barcelona Pavilion undisturbed.
The acrylic curtain standsfreelyon the foor and is shaped in a calm spiral.
The curtain softly encompasses the space within the pavilion and orestesa new atmosphere.
The view through the aciylic will be something different from the original with soft reflections slightly distorting the pavifon’1.
SANAA
26.11.2008 - 18.01.2009
mies i 1 Mb Barcelona
Blurred Visions
161
       can we suddenly fold back into the spiral by making a 180-degree turn, which echoes the two 180-degree turns already required to enter the Barcelona Pavilion. Just as Mies narrowed the entrance down, subtly constraining the visitor with a folded path, SANAA spins and squeezes the visitor between the narrow planes of acrylic that curve around until suddenly one is inside, facing the two Barcelona chairs-or rather, the chairs are facing us, as if the king and queen were still there, sitting down, presiding over everything.
            There is a newchair, as iffor us.Itis theSANAA plywood chair with two asymmetrical bunny ears: fig.23 whimsical, childlike, fragile, uncomfortable, funny—a kind of inexpensive school or cafeteria chair facing the wide, ceremonial, orthogonal, plush, leather-and-chrome chairs of Mies as in some kind of playful challenge. Another bunny chair is placed outside the acrylic curtain, behind the Barcelona chairs, as if guarding the crime scene. The new chair represents SANAA just as much as the old one represents Mies. The bunny belongs to the acrylic curve, while the Barcelona belongs to the onyx plane. As with Mies, is the new chair for sitting in and looking from? Or is it what is looked at: a solitary object suspended in the play of reflections, as unattainable as a royal appointment? Or is it the inexpensive, antiaristocratic chair, a subversive objectthat has infiltrated the luxury space? Or is it some kind of prisoner ofthe spiral? Or a kind of calling card left by SANAA? In any case, therole of Mies’s heavyfurniture in lightof hisblurringof the visual field is called into question. Each chair is like a kind
162
of ship floating in the liquid reflections of the shiny floor, walls, and glass. X-ray vision surely means a shift in the status of objects. SANAA turns the pavilion itself into a ready-made object, even a piece of furniture, that can now be seen differently.
      But what does SANAA mean when they say that the space of the pavilion is left Undisturbed"? Something has changed. In- fact, everything seems to have changed. The simple spiral makes a new pavilion out of the old one—a pavilion inside a pavilion, each transforming the other to produce a whole new architecture. The most famous pavilion of the twentieth century becomes something far from itself, but contained within itself. All the classic images imbedded in the brain ofevery architect now have additional layers of reflections. fib.2*
      SANAA returns the curtain to the pavilion—or is it the pavilion to the curtain? The acrylic freestanding curtain recalls the Velvet and Silk Café, figz the brilliant collaborative work of Lilly Reich and Mies for the Exposition de la Mode in Berlin, two years before Barcelona,where draperies in black, orange, and red velvet and black and yellow-lemon silk hung from metal rods to form the space. In its radical approach to defining the space by suspending sensuous surfaces, the café was a kind of prototype ofthe pavilion. In the pavilion, the richly veined onyx surfaces took over the role of the curtains—the hard surfaces absorbing softness. In fact, Mies pretended that they were curtains, denying their structural role, even if we now know better. Theforensic work for the reconstruction revealed many veiled secrets of
Blurred Visions
23, 26,27 View of SANAA'S installation in the Mies van der Rohe Pavilion, Barcelona. 2008
24   Plan of SANAA's installation in the Miesvan der Rohe Pavilion. 2008
25   Mies van der Rohe and Lilly Reich,
Cafe Samt und Seide.Modeder Dome exhibition, Berlin, 1927
164
Blued Visions
165
28  Mies vanderRohe withKing Alfonso XIU, Barcelona Pavilion opening, May 27,1929
29  Lilly Reich in the Barcelona Pavili on, 1929
30  Francisco de Goya.£( Rey Fernondo VII con Monto ReoI, 1814
                             the building—the theatrical quaLity of its main polemical effects,the illusion of modernity. Thatthewalls are curtains may also explain why we don’t enter the Barcelona Pavilion frontally, but at an angle, as if enteringfrom backstage.
                                  SANAA's project reminds us that the Barcelona Pavilion comes from curtains, from a soft material. The beginnings of architecture were textile. It is a Semperian idea of architecture, beautifully adopted by Adolf Loos, who wrote:
                                  The architect’s general task isto provide a warm and livable space.Carpets are warm and livable.Hedecides for this reason to spread one carpet on thefloor and to hang up four to form the four walls. But you cannot build a house out of carpets. Both the carpet on the floor and the tapestry on the wall require a structural frame to hold them in the correct place.To invent this frame isthe architect’s second task.10
                             The space that SANAA has wrapped with the new transparent curtain is precisely the centerofthe pavilion, the throne room with its poignantlyempty chairs for the king and queen of Spain. In old photographs, the space is marked by a black carpet on thefloor, which nobody dares to step on—as in the image of the mysterious woman (is it Lilly Reich?) fig.29 sta nd-ing outside its border, her back to the camera, looking in. SANAA’s curtain is the invisible cloak that further protects that space—a kind of royal transparent cloak. fig.3o The garment moves. It billows outward, allowi ng us toenter between its folds. Space is defined in a kind of invisible movement,
166
neither limited nor unlimited, a paradox that the spiral has alwayscommunicated.
       “My house," writes Georges Spyridaki, “is diaphanous, butit is not ofgla,ss. It.is moreofthe nature ofvapor. Its walls contract and expand as I desire. Attimes, I draw them close about me Uke protective armor...> But at others, I let the walls of my house blossom out in their own space, which is infinitely extensible.” Spyridaki's house breathes. First it is a coat of armor, then it extends ad infinitum, which amounts to saying that we live in it in alternate security and adventure. It is both cell and world. Here geometry is transcended11
  SANAA's diaphanous curtain preserves the pavilion by allowing it to breathe. It is a kind a life support in a moment in which the subtlety of Mies’s pavilion might so easily be forgotten precisely because the building is so insistently celebrated.The single curtain slows us down, allowing usto enter the pavilion again, as if on the day of its opening. fio.28 Once again, the factthat Mies and Reich did so little, when asked so much (represent Germany in Barcelona), can be appreciated. Yet what allows SANAA to take us back, or to bring the pavilion again forward toward us, is that the curtain is precisely not transparent. What is added is not a clear window or a magnifying glass, but a delicate veil. SANAA's acrylic, like their glass, is never neutral.
                                                      The modern discourse of X-rays—cutting through the outer layers to reveal secrets—gives way to inner translu-
Blurred Visions
167
31 Philip Johnson'3 Glass House in the snow, Mew Canaan, Connecticut,1949
32 Miesvan der Rohe.Farnsworth House flooded, 1950-1951
                             cent layers, endlessly folded and overlapping, intensifying the mystery, rather than removingit.The X-ray logi c absorbed by modern architecture culminates in a dense cloud, of ghostly shapes. The clearest of glass is now used to undermine clarity. With the acrylic curtain in Barcelona, the ghost is unambiguously modern architecture, preserved, rather than transformed, by subtle deflections. It. is the disturbance that allows things to returnto us undisturbed.
                                  The effect ofthis architecture is not unmediated transparency, but rather a visionthat is more blurry, veiled, nebulous, vaporous, as if in a snowstorm or a dense fog, seeming-lyinfinite.This architecture is much lighterthanthatof Mies, Johnson, or even the Eameses. ft is as if the architecture wants to disappear. to evaporate.
                                  In one of the most evocative accounts of the Glass House, Johnson describes it as a “celestial elevator in which when it snows, you seem to be going up becauseeverything is coming down."12 fig.31 The house levitates in the snow, but remains a box. SANAA's glass pavilions are permanently in a storm, as if producing their own weather. Theirs is a more oceanic view, a liquid architecture. It is not by chance that lately, their own language also expresses this feeling. I n the La Samaritai ne project, they describethe “soft waves ofthe glass"; in Nishizawa’s Office Building in Hatsudai, the “undulating mesh"; in Louvre-Lens, the play of reflections that “allows the building to dissolve in its surroundings" and the glassfoyerthat allowsthepark“toflowthroughthestructure." In reverse. the interior is “spilling outside, blurring the bound-ariesof the museum itself.^2 Everyth irgbecomes liquid.
168
31                                                                              12
 Liquidity was already part ofthe modern project. Inhis book on Mies accompanying the 1947 exhibition at MoMA, Johnson described the Farnsworth House type as a “floating self-contained cage."14 fig.32 He later used the same metaphor for his 6wn house. describing it as floating on the sea, even ifhe apparently hated the sea:“That’s why I don’t like theseaside.There’s nothingtbere,unless it’s a boat. fthere's a boat, it's O.K. In the East River [of New York] wonderful barges go by. But God keep me from the Atlantic Ocean. There are a lot of glass houses thatface the ocean, and people likethem. But I say there’s nothing there."15
      The glass houses of Mies and Johnson are sealed floating boxes. A SANAA building is “porous." It is no longer a sealed box onthe move. It breathes. Ereathing-this is what was missing in Mies’s and Johnson’s glass houses, which in the summer had to leave the doors open to let fresh air in, even ifthe mosquitoes also camein,because screenswould spoil the effect. SANAA loves screens, filters, slits, membranes, curtains, mesh. The flows are not just optical. One breathes the landscape. The building “dissolves in its surrounding,” absorbing “the colors of the sky and vegetation, its appearance changing with the season and the time of theday"16
 BUT WHY IS ARCHITECTURE DISAPPEARING?
 The light footprints of Le Corbusier's pilotis, of Mies’s glass walls, of thin walls, big windows, roof gardens, and so on have given wayto ever more ethereal structures. Junya lshi-gami, for example, not by chance coming out of the SANAA
Blurred Visions
169
                            studio, takes this dissolution to the extreme by imagining a barely visible architecture of the most delicate threads. Has this dematerialization ofarchitecturetodowith aworld increasingly mediatized? Old media made modern architecture modern.17 New media makes it disappear.
                                 With the X-ray and glass architecture, the most inner secrets of our bodies and private life were exposed in public. Kodak understood this new paradigm. Their 1937 film Highlights and Shadows implied that there was nothing to fear in glass houses. The X-ray had acclimatized us to living in a new, mediated condition. The threshold of the private was no longer the outside limit of a building. It had relocated. Privacy was now, paradoxically, established in public, some-thingthat isalltooobvioustoday with theuseofacell phone, for example, to create an intimate space in the heart of a public space, or in the opposite direction, projecting from the supposed privacy of the interior, or even the bed, the most intimate detailsofone’s life to a widerand wider audience through social medial®The most inner secrets of our bodies, movements, sexuality, medical histories. domestic life, and finances are now public. The X-ray effect has migrated toall dimensions ofcontemporary life. The role of architecture is once again chal enged. In aworld ofextreme exposure in which walls no longer offer privacy, new strategies emerge by entering the mechanisms of exposure to find the blind spots.
170
1  Gyorgy Kepes. Language of Vision (Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1944), p. 77.
2  Colin Roweand RobertSlutzky, 'Transparency Literal andPhenomenal; Perspecto 8 (1963), p. 45.
3  Philip Johnson, in "The Architect
(Philip Johnson ana Lou is Kahn).’Accent, CBS,May 14, 1961.             '
4  Mies van der Rohe, FriiMcht 1, no.4, 1922.quoted in Philip Johnson.Mies von der Rohe (New York: MoMA. 1947). p. 187.
5   Charles and'RayEames. photograph ofthe model offirst version of Case Study House 8, which theyoalled Bridge House, Arts &Archhitecture, March 1948,cover.
For more on this project and its relationship to Mies van derRohe'sGtass House on a Hill side(1934), see my Domesticty at War(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2006).
pp. 100-101.
6  RayEames quoted in Esther McCoy, Modern California Houses, 1962, reprinted as Case Study Houses 1945-1962
(Los Angeles: Hennessey & Ingalls. 1977), p. 54.
7  See my Domes ticityot Wor chapter 3.
8  Kazuyo Sejima, interview about the Rolex Center.
9  Kawyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa,
Intervention in the Mies van der Rohe Po ■   (Barcelona; ACTAR, 201 0). p.8.
10  Adolf Loos, "The Principle of Cladd ing" (1898), in Spoken into the Void; Collected Essays 1897-1900, trans.JaneO.Newman and John H. Smith (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1982), p. 66. Compare with Gottfried Semper statement: "Hanging carpets remained the truewalls, the visible boundaries of space. The often solid walls behind them were necessary for reasons that had nothingto do with thecr eation of space: they were needed for security, for supporting a load, for
their permanence. and so on.Wherever the need for thesesecondary functions did not arise, thecarpets remained the original means of separating space.
Even where building solid walls became necessary, the latter )Nere only the inner, invisiblestructure hidden behind the trueand legitimate representatives of the wall, the colorful woven carpets."
. Gottfried Semper,“The Four Elements of Architecture: A Contribution to the Comparative Study of Architecture"'
(1851 }, in Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings, trans. Harry Francis Mallgrave and Wolfgang Herrmann (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,1989). p.104.
11  Gaston Bache lard, ThePoetcs ofSpoce. trans.MariaJolas (Boston: Beacon Press. 1969}, p.51.Bachelard is quoting Georges Spyridaki,More lucide (Paris: RSeghers, 1953), p. 35.
12  Quoted in Kenneth Frampton,"The Glass House Revisited." Cotologue 9. September-October 1978, reprinted in David Whitney and Jeffrey Kipnis.eds., Philip Johnson: The Gloss House (New York, Pantheon Books, 1993). p. 99.
13  Kawyo Sejima, Ryue Nishizawa, in SANAA 2011-2015. El Croquis 179-180 (2015), pp. 68, 369. 55.
14  PhilipJohnson,Mies vonderRohe (New York: Museum of Modern Art. 1947), p. 1 54.
15   Quoted/n Rosamond Bernier, ‘improving His V/ew,’1 in House & Gorden, June 1986; reprinted inWhitney and Kipnis, eds.,Pii(ipJohnson, p. 149.
16   SANAA, “Louvre Lens;' SANAA 20112015, El Croquis 179-180. p. 47.
17   Beatriz Colomina, Privacy ond Publicity: Modern Architecture os Moss Med id (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1994).
18  Beatriz Colomina,“Privacy and Publicity inthe Age of SocialMedia,” in 2000+: The Urgencies of Architectural Theory, ed.James Graham (New York: GSSAPBooks, 2015).
Blurred Visions
171
CHAPTER5
Hyperpublic: An Afterword
At the turn of the twenty-first century, the CAT scan (Computerized Axial Tomography), also known as CT (Computed Tomography) may have been for architects what the basic X-ray was early in the twentieth century. Like the X-ray, the CAT scan is n'otan image of.the body, but ofthe body being imaged: In fact, the CAT scan (invented in 1972 and widely available in hospitals since '980)1 is simply multiple X-ray images compiled by a computer to generate cross-sectional views and three-dimensional images ofthe body’s internal organs.Theword “tomography"comes from the Greektomos, meaning “slice" or “section" and graphia, meaning “writing" and “drawing," as in the word “photography,” meaning “drawing with light.” UnlikeX-rays,the CT makes visible hard and soft tissues insidethe body. A large donut-shaped machine takes X-rays at many different angles around the body as the body, lying horizontal, is moved slowly through the apparatus. fig. 1 The camera effectively spirals around the whole body. A typical medical brochure describes the procedure thus: “Imagine the body as a loaf of bread and you are looking at one end of the loaf. As you remove each slice of bread, you can see the entire surface of that slice from the crust to the center." The crust, skin, or envelope has become an almost invisible line. What matters is the dense interior, which is rendered like a new, more complex kind of facade.
      As with the X-ray, architects were quick to respond to the new technology. While architectural publications from the beginning to the middle ofthe twentieth century were full of X-rays—from Mies and Le Corbusier to Alison and Peter Smithson—and their architecture reflects this
1 CAT scan section, from patient's brochure, ca. 1999
173
174
5
6
2  Greg Lynn, Embryonic Space, ca.1998
3  Page from UN Studio, MOVE Vol. 2,
1999, showing photographs of fetuses i n different states of development
4  Page from UN Stud io. MOVE Vol. 2.1999, showing CAT scans ofthe brain
s Cover of catelogueJose Luis Moreo, MAPorchtecfs with CAT scan of the brain 6 CiyoseCional images from theVisible Male, US National l.ibraiy of Medicine
interest, architectural publications at the turn of the twenty-first century were full of ^T-scan images. A 1992 catalogue of an exhibition of Josep Lluis Mateo's work, for example, shows a CAT scan of a brain on the cover ne.s and insists inside that “the a rchit<ect has to act with the callousness of the medic: he cuts, analyses, researches. But he must never m ummify an orga nism-that lived once.”2 Likewjse, UN Studio showed CAT scans of the brain alongside their projects in their 1999 book Move.3 fig.4 The Renaissance obsession with the brain continued into the twenty-first century, as did interest in the fetus, as evidenced by the “embryological" work done by so-called “digital archite cts > Has.*,3This new generation of architects, emerging in the late 1990s, started to produce experimental work under the influence of computer-assisted technologies that allowed complete three-dimensional modelingof the inside of the body.
      Not by chance, these architects were also fascinated by another medical procedure that parallels the scan, the Visible Human Project, FIG.s completed in 1995, which acts out physically the operation of the CAT scan, cutting a body in one-millimeter sections, which are then used to generate an animation moving steadily through the whole body.Just as with the Renaissance dissect io ns, the invaded male body is that of a criminal, who in this case donated his body to science. The female dono' remains anonymous. Architecture has always referenced the medical body, but the human body now is a digital artifact in its own right. experienced from the inside and generating new kinds of thinking about the interior.
Hyperpublic: An Afterword
175
8
The influence of the CAT scan and of the MRI scan, invented a few years later to provide more detail of soft tissue, is reflected in architectural envelopes. In the Bibliothèque Nationale competition entry of 1989 by OMA (Office for Metropolitan Architecture), figs.7-9 the Miesian exposure of a s keleton behind a glass skin gives way to translucent bodies, revealing organs as inan MRI, without any visible envelope. The winning entry by FOA (Fore gn Office Architecture) in the Yokohama PortTerminal’s co mpetition of 1995, on the other hand, seems to follow the logic of the CAT scan: fig.io an endless series of section cuts was used to assemble a three-dimensional body that can be thought of as e ither all envelope or no envelope. fig.h There is no simple opposition between the outside and the inside. Its dream is to be a c ontinuously folded surface where structure and skin are one and where there are no bones or discrete organs. fig.12
      When Alejandro Zaera Polo interviewed Frank Gehry’s team in 1995, he asked where they had obtained the 3-D digitizers that were in use in the office, and they answered that they were originally used for guidinglasers i n brain surgery.5 The state-of-the-art medical technology was being used in an architectural studio to generate 3-D models on the computer. A series of 3-D po ints is taken from the physical model, and the computer interpolates the surfaces between them to build the precise geometry of the building. The model is treated like a body about to be operated on, rebu ilt through a kind of plastic surgery.
      Today, there are new instruments of medical diagnosis, new systems of representation. The latest techniques
176
7-9 OMA.Très Grande Bibliothèque, Paris, France, competition 1989 io-12 Foreign OfficeArchitects. Yokohama Port and FerryTerminal. YOkohamaJapen, 1995
Hyperpublic:An Afterword
177
13
>1£A
l*$i0ETHE M2A,. CaPSUK
representyet another radical transformation of ourthinking between inside and outside. For example, the M2A camera ag.13 thatwasapproved bythe FDAin 2001 is aone-inch-long disposablecamerathat isswallowed as a piLL and snaps two color pictures a minute for eight hours as it passesthrough the twenty-two-foot-long digestive tract. “M2A” is short for “mouth to anus." A recorder, advertised at the time as being “:he size of a Walkman," collects 57,000 color images while a person goes about his or her normal day. The images are then downloaded to a computer to oroduce a video of the camera’s trip through the digestive tract.
      Much of this technology began with the military, entertainment, communications, and consumer electronics industries. The M2A was the brainchild of an IsraeLi missile researcher who applied his knowledge of video systems used as smart bombs and took advantage of the miniaturization developed by NASA. Sothe M2A is a mergingofspace and military technology, and in fact, it looks like a little spaceship. Fie.uScientists in laboratories have been developing microscopic nanomachines that supposedly one day will prowl through the human body like “miniature repairmen,” fixing whataiLs us.
      Like the 1966 movie Fantastic Voyage, fig.is starring Raquel Welch, in which a team of scientists is shrunk and injected into the body to repair a brain inju ry, the M2A transforms the body into an occupiable interior. The body is turned inside out, making the skin irrelevant. All that remains is an endLess interior, bathed in the light from the little capsule’s video camera. The capsule itself looks like
178
t3,t4 M2Acapsule endoscope
is Still from Richard Fleischer (director).
Foolo5tc^llo)'lge. 1966
a hybrid of the buildings inspired by X-rays and CAT scans. A translucent envelope exposes the outlines of the inner mechanisms, while a transparent head acts as the viewing apparatus. This hybrid displaces both the transparent and translucent systems iQ favor of the skinless body, one no longer even experienced as a body.
      All this is somehow reminiscent of Frederick Kiesler, and it is not by chance that so many “digital architects“ have echoed his fluid geometries, and in particular, his Endless House, which Heexplicitly understood asa digestive system, giving architectural form to the first mouth-to-anus system. But with Kiesler and with much of the computer-generated architecture of the turn of the twenty-first century, the skin is turned into the structure. the whole building becoming a kind of flowing, self-supporting skin, a hyperenvelope. What the M 2A camera creates, on theother hand, isthe possibility of the radically skinless body, the skinless building, the building turned completely inside out to such an extent that it maynot be clear that it is a building.
      Whatexa ctly this complete loss ofthe envelope means forarchitecture is unclear, but in an age in which the public/ private distinction has been so radically dissolved, an architecture without envelope may very we.l be upon us.
      Privacy is increasingly defined by a kind of blur within a hyperpublic space. The intentional olurring of the airport scan that strips the outer layer of clothing away to look for hidden weapons or contraband is supposed to protect those worried about the loss of privacy. Privacy is no longer established bya line but by a blurring withinthe most public space,
Hyperpublic; An Afterword
16 Fo-ward-looking infrared radar (FUR)
and one can hidefor a while within that blur. This blur might be treated as a kind of space, a new kind of interior that can be designed.
     The space of the airport is no longer defined by the building, but by the layers of surveillance machines that carveout a new kind ofspace,a seemingly public space that can be occupied only by surrendering private information about the body, bank account, history, movements, employment, family, and friends. The scarner that: literally acts as the doorway is reinforced by explosives sniffers, retina scans, heat sensors looking at the face for evidence of contagion, facial-recognition software, fingerprinting, and so on. The body does not simply pass through an airport, but through multiple devices and through the space of data.
     Architecture is increasingly defined by these new instruments for looking, being looked at, and looked into. Multiple descendants of the X-ray machine are dispersed through the contemporary city, patrolling and defining the limits of existing architecture, but also defining new architectures.
     Today, new forms of advanced surveillance technologies operate in the city, and these models of vision act as the new paradigms for transparency. Hand-held scanning devices capable of seeing through clothing, walls, and buildings are in use by the military and, increasingly, also bythe police. These devices effectively make solid walls behave like glass. and they open up the possibility, even the inevitability, of new kinds of architectural experiments.
     Forward-looking infrared radar (FUR), for example, detects the electromagnetic frequencies at which heat
180
radiates from organisms and structures, exposing heat-emitting bodies. fig. is Seemingly solid walls no longer offer privacy. Indeed, FUR scans reveal activities that have already finished. One can be exposed even after one has left, because heat signatures remain for a while.This time delay is incorporated into a new kind ofvision. Bodies are treated the same as buildings.Just a-s theairport scanners strip the body, the KAYA lens fitter that can be attached to a regular camera or even a cell-phone camera can see through clothing by concentrating on the infrared spectrum. These technologies are controversial. The backscatter X-ray machines installed in all US airports were removed a few years later because of the failure to blur the images of naked citizens, and the use of passive millimeter imaging (PMI) machines instead has been restricted to the production of a cartoon image ofthe body dueto the privacy concerns. fig.17
      The midcentury fear of loss of privacy in the glass house and with the X-ray has reappeared. It seems as if each new technology that exposes something private is perceived as threatening, then quickly absorbed into everyday life. The fear of the glass box or X-ray seems quaint today. Even the grainy images of video surveillance cameras seem less invasive now, almost reassuring. Perhaps today’s scanning technologies will also seem quaint inthefuture as each new technology delves deeper and deeper into the private. With each new invasion, our definition of “private" changes.
      All of these shifts in the technologies of viewing take their meaning relative to the massive levels of personal exposure through data mining today. Not only is the m ost
HyperpubliciAnAfterword
private information transiting through vast networks and being mined by companiesand governments,buttheprivate itself is now staged in a hyperpublic. The line between private and public is no longe'r drawn around a body,a relationship. a social group, or a buildin . Rather, it is drawn in the space of data, with multiple forms of privacy continuously established and violated. The body itself is now suspended in data. The medical body around which architecture has alwaysorganized itself is at onceflesh and information.
     The point of this small book is simply to show that in -changing our definitions of public and private, the new medical technologiesthat emerged in the early years ofthe Last century changed our understanding of architecture. The question now is not how transparency is dislocated into other fields, or how architecture affects other fields, but how architecture absorbs transformations of public and private and reflects on those transformations.
“Every age has its signature afflictions," Byung-Chul Han writes in The Burnout Society:6 We can now add that each affliction has its architecture. The age of bacterial diseases—particularly tuberculosis—gave birth to modern architecture^ white buildings detached from the “humid ground where disease breeds," as Le Corbusier had put it,7 smooth surfaces, big windows, and terraces to facilitate taking the sun and fresh-air cure. When the discoveryofanti biotics put an end to that age, in the postwar years, attention shifted to psychological problems. The same architects once concerned with the prevention of tuberculosis became
182
obsessed with the psyche, with the house seen as not just a medical devicefor the prevention of disease, but as a way to provide psychological comfort, what Neutra called “nervous health”swith the architect as a psychologist.
      The twènty-first pentury, according to Han, is the age of neurological disorders: depression, ADH D, borderline personality disorders, and burnQLJt syndrome. What is the architecture of.these afflictions? Not by chance the turn of the twenty-first century is also the age of the sick building syndrome, in which modern buildings turn on their occupants, literally rendering them unhealthy. It is the age of allergies, the age of the "environmentally hypersensitive" unable to live in the modern world and its buildings. Never at any one time in history have there been so many people allergic to chemicals, buildings, electromagnetic fields (EMF), fragrances.... Since the environment is now almost completely man-made, we have become allergic to ourselves, to our own hyperextended body in a kind of autoimmunedisorde .
      What do these developments mean for design? Architecture finds itself increasingly unable to present itself as a cure. Escapingarchitecture becomes the only architectural strategy. There are communities of the afflicted living in a kind of replay ofthe 1960s in bubbles, tents, and old cars that have been "cleaned"of alltoxic materials, usually inthe desert or far away from civilization-nomads moving at the very sniff of a chemical coming from a shifting wind that brings “whiffs of industry, detergent, fabric softener, fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides ... exhaust from cars," as Oodie Bellamy puts it in “When the Sick Rulethe Wortd."9
Hyperpublrc: An Afterword
Implied in all ofthis is a different city—and new questions for design, orveryancient questions about the limits of the body and mind, and how to take shelter in a threatening world.The correlation of architecture with the medical body has finally come full circle with the rise of the “sick building syndrome." The type of architecture that was meant to inoculate its occupants against disease has become a source of disease. We are becomi-ng physically allergic to buildings. New bodies will probably have to be designed. A new theory of architecture is likelyto follow.
1  Computer Tomography (CD was invented in 1972 by two people working independently; British engineer Godfrey Hounsfield of EMI Laboratories, England, and South Africa-born physicist Allan CormackofTufts University, Massachusetts.Hounsfield andCormack were later awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for their contributionsto medicine and science.
2  Josep Uuis Mateo—MAPArchitects (Barcelona; Oragados yConstrucciones, 1991), exh.cat. Arch itekt urgaleri ee.V, Munich,1991.
3  Ben van Berkel, Caroli ne Bos. UN Studio, MOVE (Amsterdam,The Netherlands: Goose Press, 1999).
4  See for example Greg Lynn’s Embryological House (1997-2001).
5  AlejandroZaera-Polo.“Information Tec hnology at Frank O.Gehry Associates," Frank 0. Gehry: 1991-1995, E/Croquis 74-75 (1995), p. 153.
6  Byung-Chul Han. The Burnout Society (Stanford; Stanford University Press,
2015), p.1.
7  Le Corbusier, The Radiant City (1935; Orion Press 1967), pp. 55-56
8  Richard Neutra, Survival through Design (New York: Oxford University Press, 1953). p. 194.
9   Dodie Bellamy, When the Sick Rule the World (South F&sadena:Semiotext(e), 2015). p. 35. On the other side of the spec-trum,there is the"burnoutsociety" that Han writes about—those who, in working for themselves, push themselves harder than anybody else could have pushed them. This is what Han calls "the achievement-subject," who turns out to be much more disciplined than “th eobed ience-subject," despite the fact that he obeys only himself—master and slave conflated. No one can be as brutal with anyone
as withoneself. Pushing the limits of the imaginable, this creature does not experience the brutality as pain or as obli gation, butas self-reali2ation. The horror of fascist controlof body and brain from the outside has given way to a kind of dictatorship of these If.
184
17 Passive millimeter imaging (PMi)
Hyperpublic An Afterword
185
Beatriz Colomina is the Howard Crosby Butler Professor of the History of Architecture in Princeton University School of Architecture and a 2018-2019 fellow at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin. She has written extensively on questions of architeqture, art, sexuality and media. Her books include Sexuality and Space (Princeton Architectural Press, 1992), Privacy and Publicity: Modern ArchiteQture as Moss Media (MIT Press, 1994), Domesticity at War(MITPress, 2007),. The Century of the Bed (Verlag für Moderne Kunst, 2015), Manifesto Architecture: The Ghostof Mies (Sternberg, 2014), Clip/Stamp/Fold: The Radical Architecture of Little Magazines 196X-197X, with CraigBuckley(Actar, 2010), and Are We Human? Notes on an Archaeology of Design, with Mark Wigley (Lars Müller Publishers, 2016). She has cu rated a number of exhibitions including Clip/Stamp/Fold (2006), Playboy Architecture (2012) and Radical Pedagogies (2014). In 2016 she was co-curator of the third Istanbul Design Biennial. Coiomina was born.in Madrid and lives in New York. She has a professional degree in architecture and a Ph.D. in the History andTheory ofArchitecture from the Polytechnic University of Barcelona. in 2018 she was appointed doctor honoris causa by the KTH, Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm.
187
Index
Aalto,Aino 61. 63, 70. 108.
   709.114n1, nS-13 Aalto, Alvar 61, 65, 67, 69-71, 114n1
   Kinkomaa tuberculosis sanatorium project 64,65 PaimioSanatorium 61-71, 61-66, 68-70,93. 108,
   114n1
Aalto, Elissa 114n7 Accademia delleArti del Disegno 15
Achievement-subject 184n9 AOHD 183
Aesthetics (aesthetic) 10. 32-33,44, 58n21,58n24, 58n26. 84, 95, 97,113, 137 Agoraphobia 7,84 Ailments 8, 36.71.87, 90 Air 7. 8, 9, 22, 30, 44, 48, 63,
   64,  67, 78, 79. 87,91,97, 100, 101, 105.110,113, 114n3, 169.See olso fresh air, fresh-air cure, open-air sleeping
Air-and-sun therapy 63, 91, 93, 97, 104. 110, 182 Air-conditioning 44 Airport 132, 179, 180-181 Air-sanatoria 87 Air warfare 87 Aix-les-Bains76,78 Alava 74.74 Alcohol48
Alfonso XIiI King of Spain 160, 167 Ailen, Woody 51 Allendy, Dr. 26, 30 Allergies (allergic) 44,
   183-184
Alternative medicine 26, 48,112
Aluminum 42,120 AmericanAcademy in Berlin
   8-9.8
Anatomy 15, 114n20 Andert,Karin 115n38 Anesthesia 31-32, 55, 58, 58n22
Animation 175 Antibiotics 51, 114n4, 182 Anxiety18.See also neivous disorders
Architectural discourse 13,
   52, 54, 55, 135,137. 145, 147,167
Architectural theory 13, 15, 51,54, 184 Arosa 115n37 Artek 70,71, 114n12 Arthritis 52
Artificial beaches 74,76 Art therapy 54 Arts & Architecture 56 Asthma44
Athlete (athletic) 26, 30. 43, 108
Atmosphere 160 Aubert, L. 128, 150n21 Augusta Victoria (German empress) 121 Autoimmunedisorder 183 Avant-garde 9-10,26. 128, 136,142, 153,157
Bachelard, Gaston 171 n11 Bacillus 16. 71,71,86 Bacteria (bacterial) 71,73, 105
   Bacterial disease 182 Bacteriology (bacteriologist) 71,73
Bald, Howard 108 Ban ham. Reyner 9. 11n2 Bannister, John 14 Barborella 51
Barcelona 7, 74, 159, 167. 168 Barium platinum cyanide 119 Barkow, Frank 8,8 Barry,JosephA. 150n32 Bartning,Otto Children's clinic 101 Barzman, Karen-Edis 58n3 Basketball22 Baudelaire 33 Bauhaus building Dessau.
   See Walter Gropius Baumeister, Willi 18 Beaudouin, Eugene 99,100 Beauty contest. See chiropractor beauty contest Bed 28, 63-64, 65-67,69,69, 74,75, 77. 78,97,112,170 Bellamy, Dodie 183, 184n9 Benevolo, Leonardo 104, 116n56
Benjamin, Walter 31 -33,36, 54. 58n23-27, 58n29, 59, 95, 1!5n47
van Berkel, Ben184n3.See oiso UN Studio Berlin 8, 8. 27. 28. 47. 100,121, 124, 738, 153.153, 163,766 Berlin-Charlottenburg 97,97 Berlin-Lichterfelde 107
Berlin Physical Society 124 Bernhard, Thomas 91,
   115n39
Bernier. Rosamond 171n15 Besant.Annie 128. 128, 150n20
Bier, Justus 110, 116n61 Bijvoet, Bernard
   Maison de Verre (with Pierre Chareau) 140, 142 Open Air School (with Jan Duiker) 97,98 Zonnestraal sanatorium (with Jan Duiker) 73, 73, 91. 91-92, 97,100-101 Biography 11
Biologist 16, 26,30, 58n16 Biology 11, 18,51,86,105 Biopsies 118
Bircher-Branner. Maximil-ian35
Bjertnas, Erling 114n1 Bloomingdales 134 Blur (blurry) 136, 149,154.
   157. 159, 168, 179-180 Body 11,13,15-16,18-19, 25-27,32,38,42-44, 46-47.49,51,53-55, 59n48, 61,63, 114n4. 117, 119-121,129,135,145,147, 149,170,173,175-176, 178-184
   and brain 116n66 and psyche 116n66 of thedead 93 Bodybuilding27, 51. See also exercise
Bos. Caroline 184n3.Seealso UNSludio
Bourgery,Jean-Marc Traite complet de l 'onotomie de Lhomme 15-16, 15 Boxing 22,24
Brain 13, 15, 75. 43, 175, 178 Brain surgery 176 Brain tumors 52 Breathing 26. 167, 169 Bressani, Martin 58n4 Breuer, Marcel 1100-bed sanatorium (with Gustav Hassenpflug) 74,78
   Hilde Levi apartment (with Gustav Hassenpflug) 27,28
   Piscator apartment 27, 28,
   100
Brick86
   Brick bacillus 86
Brinkman,Johannes 27,29. 137, 740
British Journo l of Diseases of the Chest 115n40 Brixen 72. 73
Brno, Czechoslovakia 10B Bubbles 183 Buck-Morss, Susan 33, 58n24,58n26 Bunuel,Luis 104,115n54 Burnout syndrome 183,
   184n9
Calm 31,67, 87,106, 160 Cancer 18,20,22. 36, 44, 52, 117-118
Canon (canonical) 7 9, 63,118, 145,151,153 Carpet 97, 166,171 n10 Cartoons 131 Cartwright, Llsa 150n31 Case Study House 8. See Charles and Ray Eames Castor, Hans 118.Seealso Mann,Thomas: Magic Mountain Casts 15
Cathode-raytube 128 CAT-scan 173, 175-176. 179 Caves 43,44 Cellphone 170, 181 Cemeteries 94 Central heating95 Cermak, B. 16 Cesariano, Cesare 13 Chaise longue 64, 89, 108,113 Chareau.Pierre 101, 706.
   140, 142
   Maison deVerre 140,142 Cheatle. Emma 150n29 Chemical183 Chenal, Pierre 20-22 Chicago 137
Children 24, 30, 36,53, 55, 89, 90,97,98, 101, 108,110.110, 171.112, 116n60 “pretubercular” children 97 Chiropractor beautycontest 143
Chuey, Josephine and Robert 51
ClAM 19
Cinematography 132 City planning73 Claustrophobia 7,96 Clavadel 1 15n37 Clean (cleanliness, cleanse)
   8, 19, 22, 30, 40, 63, 70, 73, 86, 94, 95, 97, 183
188
Client 11,13. 30, 71,104, 117
Cocaine,3l
Colds44
Coldwar56
Collaborations 20. 61,74, 78, 89.104, 114n1
Color 37. 67, 69, 78, 86,87,169, 171n10
Columbia University 134 Comfort 90.95,101.105,
   147,183
Communism (communist) 108, 116n60
Computer 175-176,178-179 ComputerTomography ((CT).
   See tomography Concrete 10, 78, 89,91, 100, 112
Conrads.Ulrich 116n66 Consciousness 128 Constipation 38. 41, 49 Consumption 13.,19. See also tuberculosis
Contagiousness (contagion) 105,110,180.
Convalescents 100.112-113 Cormack, Alan 1,84n 1 Cortona, Pietro Berretine da 14'
Cosmetics 51 Cosmic 43 Cosmos 129 Couch 113
Creig)iton. Thomas H. 59n36 Critic 11
Crookes, William 128 Crowd 33,96 Crystal Palace 132,132 Cure 8-9, 9, 18,20, 22, 51, 52, 55,59n49, 64, 65, 74, 80, 81, 87,88, 89,90, 93,97, 105, 108. 114n4, 117, 182, 183 Curtains 160, 162-163, 166-169
Customs 132, 134, 134 Cuvier, Georges Leçons d'onatomie comparée 15. 7 5 Czas125-126 Czechoslovakia 16. 108, 116n60
Dali. Salvador 115n54 Dalsace,Jean 142 Dance and rhythmic classes 24,711, 116n60 Daston, Lorraine150n28 Data 180-182 Data mining 181
Davos 72,73,86, 87,88,89, 93,100-101,103, 110, 1l5n37
Death (the dead) 53,87.
    93-94, 1l5n41, 121 Dematerialization 170 Department stores 143 Depression 16, 69,105,183 Design 13, 31,33,37,40,49, 52.54-55.71. 105 Design schools 15 Desire 52, 84, 150n29,
Dessau 61, 136 De Stijl 42
Diagnosis 16, 19,20, 55, 73, 142,145, 146, 176, Diaphanous curtain 167 Die Form, 110 Die Presse 125 Diehl, Digby 59n53 Diet 26, 40, 48, 51, 59n49 Digestion 38.45 , Digitalarchitects 175,179 Disease9-10, 16, 18-20, 25, 55,93,105,117,182-184 diseases of modernity 108 Disinfect 2 2
Disorders 7, 37, 40,45,80-81,
    87,90.183
Dissection 14, 15-16,58n3, 175
Dittmar,August 128 Docker, Richard
    Terrassentyp 101, 101 Waiblingen sanatorium 73, 73, 100-101, 101, 103 Weissenhofsiedlung Stuttgart 78. 29,100-101 Doctor 13, 15, 20, 26, 30, 45, 51,53,61,63,68, 73-74, 86-87,89,104-105,112, 143,145
Doct o^-archtect collaboration 74,104 Doesburg, Theo van 42 Dohm. Hedwig, 115n36 Drugs(drugless) 48, 49, 59n49
Duchamp 150n29 Lorge Gloss 150n19 Duiker,Jan 108. 109 Open Air School. See Open Air School, Amsterdam Zonnestraal. See Zonnes-traal sanatorium Duke and Duchess of York 121 Dust 22, 63, 86, 95 Dust-free 97, 101
Eames, Charles and Ray 52-55,57. 59n53. 154, 168, 171n6
   Bridge House 154, 155 Eames House(Case Study House 8) 57, 59n4, 154,
   155,171,171 n5 wartime splint 53, 53 Eastman 129 Eating 43. 45 Eating disorder 40,80 l.cole de plein air 99 Eczema 49
Eder,Josef Maria 126. 127.
   150n16-17 Edison. Thomas 132 Effenberger, Theo
   Werkbund exhibition in Breslau (192 9) 27, 29 Egg42-43
Eiland, Howard 115n47 Electrical discharge 52 Electrical Engineer 150n13 Electrical Exhibition,
   New York(1896) 132 Electrical Rev/ew 131,
   150n23
Electricity 78,79 Electrified 81 Electric baths 79 Electric massage 79 Electric shaver 143 Electric systems 95-96 Electric treatment 93 Electromagnetic fields (EMF) 183
Electromechanotherapy room82 Elevators 112 Emotions (emotional) 16, 38,147
Emperor and Empress of Russia 121. 122 Enema 49
Engineer 19-20,45, 74 Entenza.John 53 Entertainment 131,132, 134, 178
Envelope 173, 176.179 Equipoise 116n66 Erotic 38 Esoteric 142 Excrement 45
Exercise 16. 18, 20-22. 26-27, 37.48, 51.101, 104,108,110 Exercise equipment 27,101 Exhaustion 13, 22, 90, 105. See olso fatigue: burnout syndrome
Exhibitions 16,18, 27,28, 38, 41,41, 124,132,137,140, 141, 143,165, 169,175 Exhibition ofContemporary Culture in Czechoslovakia, Brno(1928) 16 Exile 91,116n59 Exner, Fran2 150n12 Experience 31-32,33,38, 44, 58n23.90, 96.159.184n9 Exposition de la Mode 163 Exposure 37, 78,101,117-118, 121, 131, 134-135,142, 149, 154, 170. 176, 181
Facial recognition 180 Fallout shelter 56 Fantastic       178. 178
Farde.Andr£ 78 Farnsworth, Edith 145, 150n32
Fascism 19, 25. 184 n9 Le Faisceau 25 Fatigue 18-20, 22, 44, 52, 58n7 x
FDA (Food and OrugAdminis-
   tration) 178         ■
Fear 1$,134, 181 Feeling31-32.81,96 Feminism 115n36, 728, See also Besant, Annie;Dohm, Hedwig
Femmes fragiles 114n21 Ferroconcrete 78 Fetus 774, 175 Fever 44,86-87, 117, 146 Film 7, 20,20-22, 51. 104,
   107. 115n54, 116n55, 145,
   145,170
Fingerprinting 180 Fishman, Robert 58n15 Fleig.Kart 114n7 Flesh 42. 118,123,125, 135. 136,182
Flint, Austin 58n5 Flows (Flowing) 119, 168-169. 179
Fluorescence (fluorescent) 119-120, 124,129, 129 Fluoroscope 130, 130 Fluoroscopic Shoe -ra ,
   See X-ray
FOA (Foreign Office Architects)
   Yokohama Port Terminal 176, 177
Folded surface 176
Food 8,33. 40, 48, 95 Forty, Adrian 114n19
189
Forward-looking infrared radar (FLIR) 180-181,181 Frampton. Kenneth 171n12 Frankfurter Zeitung 125 Fresh air 7.8. 30.48, 63, 101, 110. 169.182 Fresh-air rure 64, 182 Freud, Sigmund 31,51-52,71 Fried man. Al ce 150n33 Frischer, Stefi 42 Fuller, Buckminster 36, 59n30, 59 n38 40Tower 137.141 Oymaxion car 141 Dymaxion Shelter prototype 141
Function (functionalism) 9-11,16,40,44,51.55,65, 69.116n66, 171n10 Functional 95 Futurist 128
Galison. Pater 150n28 Ganster, William 74, 75 Gardening 48 Garnier.Tony heliotherapy building in industrio(City112-113,t12 Gas 78
Gehry, Frank 176 George,Kmgof England 123 Geretsegger, Heinz 115n45 German Building Exhibition in Berlin (1931) 27,29 Germs (germ theory) 7, 31, 71 Gestoltungfe) 137. 138 Getty Research Institute 8-9 Ghost (ghostly) 121. 142,
   154,168
Giedion,Sigfried 61
   Befreites Woh nen 100-101.
   102
   Budding m Fran ce. Building in Iron, Building In Ferroconcrete 112-113,112, 116n65
   Mechanization Yokes Command 116n66 Spoce. Time ond Architecture: The Growth ofo New Tradition 114n2 Glaser, Oto 150n13 Glasgow Royal Infirmary 129 Glass 10.16. 22. 33.37.42, 59n29,78,120. 136, 142, 149, 151. 153. 157, 159, 167-166. 180
   glass architectu re 86,135,
   149.170
   glass houses 145, 150n29. 169-170.181
   glass pavilions 86, 168. See disc ^SANAA: Glass Pavilion glass skin176 glass »alb 104, 110. 136. 169
Good design 54-55 Goya. Francisco de 167 Graf,OttoAntonia 115n48 Grands Magasins Oufayel 132, 133 Gropius. Walter apartments for Werkbund exhibition in Paris (1930) 27,29
   Bauhaus Building in Dessau 61.136,136 137 Ger ma n Building Exh ibit ion inBerin (1931)27,29 Gunning.Tom 150n19. 150n24 Gym 27,30,100, 108, 116n60 Gymnastics 18, 26-27,100
Haefeli. Max 72.73. 89. 100.
   103
Hammer, Ivo 116n59 Hammer-Tugendhat, Daniela 116n59
Han, Byu ng-Chul 182-133. 184n6
Hands 121, 122,124, 126,
   130, 135
Hassenpf\ug. Gustav 27,74,78 Hawks, Herbert 134 Hay fever 86-87 Headaches52 Health 10. 13. 15. 19-20.
   22, 26-27,30, 42,44-45, 43-49,51 -52,59n49. 70,79. 104,108.112.113, 116n66, 117. 145 Health food 48 Health House 45, 48. 49.
   104,105
   Health machine 91 Healthy 73
   Healthy bodies 91,108 Hearing 36 Heait disease 52 Heating 65, 67,69,89 Heatsensors180 Hebebrand, Werner73, 75 Heckeshorn PutmonaryOinic8 Heliotherapy 72, 73.98, 112,
   113
Henderson. Linda 128. 150n19 Hennebique 78. 89 Hevesi, Ludwig 79, 114n16
Highlights ond Shodows 145, 145,150n31, 170 Hilversum 73. 73. 91-92 Hinckley, Robert C. 32 Hines. Thomas 59n46, 116n56 H itel«*k, Heni y-Russell9.42 Hledkl, tara108,116n60 Hoffmann. Joseph Purkersdorf sa natonum 72,73,78-81,82-83. 97. 114n15-18
Hofmannsthal, Hugo von 79 Homeopathy 26 Horizontal (horizontality) 65, 67, 69, 89, 113, 173 Horizontal view 67,113 Hospita l (hospita l room) 15-16, 58n22. 69,73.80. 94-95,97,100, 104,112, 114n19, 173
   childrens hospital 116n60 Hotel (hotel room) 80.94.97 Hounsfield, Godfrey 184n1 HposoBeoutiful 145,150n32 Howard, Ebenezer Garden City 112 Human body.SSe body Human species 49 Humors. theory ofthefour humors 13.15 Hunger 44
Hydrotherapy 35, 36-37, 48,90
Hyeres 101. 106-107 ^Hyg1ene (hygienic) 7.18,26, 31,44,73, 78.86. 94, 95.
   97,101
Hyperpublic 173. 179, 182 Hy^beria SO
Illness (ill) 7-B. 10-11, 11 n1, 15, 26, 18, 58n4 and 6, 69. 70, 87,90.93, 95, 104, 105, 117, 118, 145,150n1 of modernity 80,108 Illustrated London News 123 Impotence 52 Inclined bed 77 Indecency 131 Independent Group 143 Indigestion 44 Industry18,25 lnsamty87 Insects 86
Inside/outside 10. 119, 128.
   135-136,147,157,176.
   178-179
Institute of Contemporary Arts, London 143, 144
Interior 15,36, 43,54, 78. 94, 119.135-136,142, 147.151, 154.168, 170.173.175. 178,180
International ErExhibit'on in Paris (1937) 137,140 Intemauonal Style 42, 45 International Style ^hibitiOn at MoMA<1932) 31, 41 Intimate (intimacy) 11.25, 30, 84.95.96,117, 118, 119,121. 123, 147,170 Invisible 71, 73,119-121.
   128-129, 128, 150n21 Iron 10, 16, 78,112 IshigamiJunya 169 Italian Renaissance 135. 175
Jamnagar. ndia 77. 78 Jeanneret.Albwt 24 Jeanneret, Pierre 24, 5Bn16 Jennings. Michael 58n23, 115n47
Johnson, Philip 42, 59n38.
   151. 168-169, 171n3-4 Glass House 142.142. 152, 153. 168-169, 169, 171 n12
Kalkofen, lrene 110. 116n63 KAYAlens 181 Keck,George 137.141 Crystal house 137,141 Kepes, GyOrgy 151,171n1 Lo^poge of Vision 151. 171n1
Kerndle. Karl Maria 115n48 Kiesler. Frederick 36,38, 40-45,54, 59n36-38, 179 Contemporary Art Appl red to the Store and Its Display 37,37, 59n31
   End less House38,39. 41, 42, 59n38
   Endless Theater 41,4) Goioxies 38
   inside the Endiess House 42-44,43, 59n35, 59n39-45 Pseudo-Functionoiism in Mpoodern Architecture 37, 59n32-34 S^be Stage 41,41 Vision Machines 42 K19Sler. Stefi. Se Fns^r; Stefi Kipnis. Jeffrey 171n12 Kleinertz. Willi 73, 75 Koch. Adolf 47 Koch, Robert 16, 71 DieAetioiogie derTbber-cuiose 17
190
Kodak 170
Kodak Research Laboratories 145
Kolter, Karl 31
Kolliker,Albert von 121,122, 124
Korn, Arthur Glas im Sou und ols Gebiouch^genstond 135-136, Î36,150n25,
   153
Krafft- Ebing, Or. Richard von 79-80,79, 84, 96, 114n20 flsychopothio S exuatis 79 Ober gesunde und kranke Nerven 79, 79 Krafft Ebing, Marie Luise 79,79
Krauss, Karl 36, 58n29, 80,
   80
   Die Focket 80. 114n22 Krejcar, Jaromir ,
   Czech pavilion 137.140 M ach néi sanatorium 74,
   76
Laboratory 73, 76 Lake County Tubercu losis S anatorium 74 75 Lemour, Phillipe 25' Landscape 32, 63,67,84, 110.
   115n27, 169 Lasers 176
Lavin, Sylvia 59n52,116n56 Leadbeater, C. \N. 129,150n20 League of Nations 61 Leather 37.162 Lebendige Kraft sanatonum 33,35
Lebensreform 48, 110 Le Corbusier 7,19 27,24.
   30  31,42,44-45,53-54, 58n16-17,59n38, 73, 101,
   116n55, 169, 173 Glass Skyscraper project (1925) 137, 140 lmmeuble Villas 27,30 L'architecture d'aujourd'hui 20.20-2?, 58n21
       tdecoirotit d'ouijouidlKii 58n21, 146, 150n34 League of Nations 61 L'Esprit noruvealu 22,24-26, 24-25,30,32, 58n14 Garches Vi Ha 22 Plan Voisin 20 Precisions 114n14 Radiant City (La ville radieuse) 20, 23, 30,30.
    58n11-13, 58n20 112,182, 185 n7
    Urbanisme 20, 58n10, 5Bn19-20
                                                                                                                                           une architecture 19,
    58n8-9
Leibinger; Regn e 8, 8 LeMotin 12S Le nouveau siecle25 LeonardodaVinct, 14, 15 L'Esprit nouveau. See Le Corbusier Levi, Hilde 27,28 Libido 52 Liege kur 88
Life magazine 123, 143, 143-144, 150n30 Light 8, 16, 18, 44,79, 87,91, 97,100,173 Ught and shadow 153 Light therapy 97. Se also heliotherapy , L'lirustrootion 125 Liquid 168 Lods, Marcel 99,100 Long chairs 100. See otso chaise longue
Loos.Adolf 7, 34. 36,58n28-29, 84, H5n26-28, 166, 171n10
    Muller House 112 Ornam ent and Crime 33, 55
    The man with modern neives 34, 84,114n25 Los Angeles8,45, 48, 49.51, 52,104,108.109 Lovell, Or. Philip 45, 50,51, 59n48-49, 104, 105,108 Lovell, Leah 47. 59n49. 105 Lubarskij, G. 76 Lumière brothers, 132 Lungs 22, 23.58n12,71. 81,
    100.105 Lurcat, André Guggenbühl House 100, 103
Luxuiy 162
Lynn,6reg 174, 184n4
M2Acamera 178, 178 Machine aesthetic 10.
    58n22
Machine 31, 58n4 M^^ines 7,145,153 Magic (magical) 44,126,131 Mahler, Gustav 79 Maillart, Robert 72,73, 89, 115n35
Maison de Verre 140, 142 Mallet-Stevens, Robert Villa Noa'lles 101,104, 106, 116n55
Mallgrave, Harry Francis 115n46
Mann, Kâtiâ 88,89,115n36 Mann, Michael115n36 Mann, Thomas 90 Magic Mountain 9, 89,93, 114n3,118,114n3, 150n3 Tristan 6,81,93, 114n23-24, 115n42 Manuet,Jacques Biceps et bijoux 104 Marburg 74, 75 Marijuana 38
Maiy, Queen ofEngland 123 Masochi^ 79, 84 Moss Radiography 147 Mateo, Jose Lula 175,175, 184n2
M^py. Ester 108. 108,171n6 Mechonix Hiustroted 143 Media 7-8,17-18,119.150n19, 170, 1J1 n15,n17,n18 Medical 10, 20, 22, 44, 54, 56, 80". 95, 112. 114n19.1i:'121.
   126,143,147,170 Medical apparatus 117 Medical body 19, 45. 55,
   175. 182, 184 Medical books, teexts, journals, brochures 16,22, 142,173
   Medical diagnosis 55,176 Medical equipment 27,37, 53,94,146
   Medical images 11, 16, 58n12, 136
   Medical instruments, tools, devices 22,65, 67, 74, 79,93-94, 143,183 Medical procedure 175 Medical research 53,71 Medical technologies 10. 16,176, 182
   Medical theory, discourse. thought, arguments 20, 58n2, 86, 94,137 Medical treatment 89 Medicine 10,13,18, 22,26, 30,48,49, 52, 54, 58n5,
   65,    95,112,121,131,142, 150n22,n31, 175, 184n1 Medieval architecture 16 Medium 38,119,154 Melancholy 11, 90 Menard, Maxime 16
Mendelsohn, Erich 113,
   116n66
   Schocken department store 137,140 Mental health, 27,31, 51,
   81,105
Marano 115n37 Mers 137,139,150n27 Metal 37,53, 78,101,124,
   125, 163
Metal-and-concrete buildings 100
Metaphor 18, 73, 146,169 Metropolis 31. 33,79,96 Meyer, Adolf 137 Microbes73 Microscope 71,71 Miessen, Markus 11n1 Mies van der Rohe. Ludwig 112, 116n55.116n64, 137, 138,150n26 151,153, 157,159, 168-169. 171 n4, 171n14, 173.176 Barcelona chairs 160 Barcelona Pavilion (with Lilly Reich) 159-160.161, 162-163,164-165,166167,'167, 171 n9 Farnsworth House 142, 142,145-146, 146, 151,169, 169
   Fifty-by-Fifty House 151, 152'
   Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper 137.154, 154 Glass House on a Hillside 154, 155,171n5 Glass Skyscraper (1922) 137,138,153-154, 153
   Tugendhat House 108. 110-111, 112, 116n59 Velvet and Silk Café (with Lilly Reich) 163. 165 Migge, Leberecht 115n27 Military 18-19,53,87,180 Missile 178
Model 39,42,45, 152, 153154.159,171 n4,175,176 Modern architecture 8-11,16, 18, 22,26-27,30-31,33, 38, 40.44-45,48,71,73,93-94, 97,130-101, 108,117-118, 135, 137,146-147,149. 168, 170.182
Modern city 112 Modernity 11,55,58n7, 71,80, 94. 108, 153,166 Modern life 105
Index
191
Modern nerves 31,34, 84, 115n27
MoholyNagy. l.aszlb 112, 126, 127. 128
   Vision m Motor) 143,
   150n16
Mondrian, Piet 42 MonsieurTare 104 Morgan, Willard 59n47 Moser. Koloman 79, 80 Move projectors 134 MRI scan 176 Muscles26-27,43 Museum of Modem Art, New York 59n38, 169, 171 n14 Musil, Robert The Man without Qualities 94,95,115044 Mystery 136,168 Mysticism 128
Naked 27. 36, 44.48, 59n51.
   79, 110,181 Nanomachines 178 Narcotic33 NASA 178 Nausea 33 Nelson. Paul Suspended House 137 Nerve doctors 87 Nerves31,33,34, 36, 43, 51, 79,84, 86, 96 Nerve shock ocprong 36 Nervous 30, 116n66, 134 Nervous bodies 114n21 Nervous disorders (nervous sickness, cond itions, and ailments) 7,30. 80-81. 84,
   87.90,105
   Nervous health 105, 183 Neurasthenia 80 Neurological33 Neurological disorders 183 Neuropsychiatry 79 Neurosis 52 Neutra, Dione 105 Neutra. Richard 36-37,48,
   49, 51-52. 59n46, 59n50, 59n52, 105
   Chuey House 51-52,52 Lovell House (Health House) 45,48-49,49-51. 104-105. 116n56 Survival through Design 48, 49, 49,116n57, 183, 184n8 Newspapers 124-125,131,134 New vision 126 New YorkElectrical Exhibition of 1896 132
NewYork Institute for the Humanities 7
New ^York Medico Journo! 130 New YYork Times 125 Nishizawa, Ryue 151,171 n9, 171n13
Noailies. Charles dei04, 115n54,116n55 Noailles. Mane Laure de 104, 107. 115n54, 116n55 Normal(rarmahty) 40, 45,74. 90.150n28
Nuclear annihilation 54 Nude Livirg48. 48 Nudism 48, 59n46, 59n51 Nurses63 Nursing home 104
Obedieince-subject 184n9 Obscene45
Obsession 7.10,18. 42,86, 104, 17545 Ocean 86
Oceanic Sanatorium for Hay Fever. Scheerbart Oceanic view 168 Ocean liner 89. 91 Odessa 76
OMA (Officefor Metropo lit an Architecture)
   Bibliothque National competition 176, 176 Opacity 159 Opaque body 117 Open-airroom106 OpenAir School. Amsterdam 9798-99
Open-air school, Suresnes 100
Open-airsleeping 48.101 Opium32 Order25.73 Organic forms 53 Organs37,61.118,137,142, 173,176 Orgo ne 52
Orgone energy accumulator 51-52,52
Ornament 33. 40,49, 63,
   84.86
Orthopedic 108 Outer space 43 Ozenfant, Am6d4e 22
Paimiochairs 71
Poll Moll Gazette 131. 150n22
PaforlelofUfe andArt 143.
   144
Paris 100
Passive millimeter imaging (PMI) 181, 185 Pathology 7, 105 Patient 8-9.11.13. 18, 36. 55. 62,63,64, 65, 67,69-70, 78-61,84, 89-91,92. 93, 101, 103. 108,113, 114n4, 117-118, 147,173 Patient room 63, 68,82 Pavilion 8, 9, 16,86,137,141, 151. 153, 157, 157.159, 159, 160.160, 162, 163, 164, 166. 167, 168, 171n9 Peintner, Max 115n45 Pereira. William 74,75 Personality disorders 183 Perverts 45 Peutz.Frits
   Schunck Glass Palace 137, 141
Pevsner, Nikola'!Js9, 115n48, 115n52
Pfleghard, Otto 72. 73, 89. 103 Philips, Andrea 11 n1 Photography(photograph) 7, 110.124, 125,126,129,131, 132. 153. 154. 156, 173.See o(so X-ray photo graphy Photomontage 154 Physical health 81,105 Physiological space49 Physiology (physiological) 19.84
Physiotherapy 116n60 Picture window 142 Pilotis 20. 22,169 Piscator, Erwin 27 Plastic surgery 176 Plastic wrap 143 Pleasure 45
Plessen. Elisaocto 115n36 Plywood cabinets/chaifs 53 Poincar6, Henri 124 Police 131, 134,180 Polish Medical Society of Radiology 150n15 Political theoiy 18 Politics 18-19,25 Pollen 86 Pool 104
Postwar 54-55. 142, 182 Prague 112
Preventative medicine 30,49 Prevention 97,105 Pringsheim. Katherina Hedwig 115n36 Privacy (private) 36, 131. 134, 147,170,179.181-182 Private life 36, 170
Prosthesis 16 Prostrate 49 Pro^rë.Jean 101,104 Pseudo-ftmctionalism 37, 44,59
Psyche(psychical) 30, 37-38, 43,1l6n66,128.183 Psychiatry 30
Psychoanalysis (psychoanalyst) 30.36. 48,51, 59n52 Ps^ychoanalytic patient 113 Psycho-function 37 Psychological 31.37, 51, 55, 67,69, 70, 71,90.105, 1 47,
   182.183
Psychologist 183 Psychology 11.19,51-52, 69, 105,117
Psychosexual79 Psychotechnics19 Public 170
   and private 134, 179,182 Public life 134 Public space 179-180 Publicity 18 Pun'fication 78,81 Pyrex 143, 143
Quarantine 110 Queen Alexandra Sanatorium 72, 73,103
Rabinbach .Anson
   The Human Motor 18,58n7 Radiation exposure 134 Radiology 129
Ranjit Institute of FI ly-Redo-Therapy 77 Ray, Man 104,115n54 Les mystères du Cll6teou duDe 104,107 Ready-made 163 Realism 128 Recovery room 37 Reflection 151,153-154.354.
   159-160,162-163,168 Rehabilitate ncenter 110 ^Reich. Lilly 163,165,166-167.
   feeoiso Miesvan der Rohe Reich, Wilhelm 51-52, 52 Reinforced concrete 78,91 Religion 131 Renaissance 15 Repression 45 Retina 180
^^^ng sanatorium/ solarium 77. 78
Rheumatism 44 Richards,J. M. 115n48
192
Roentgen. Victor 147 Roof terrace (roof garden) 18, 20-22,22.27, 110.112.169 Röntgen. Bertha 120-121.
   122, 131,135
Röntgen Rays 132. 150n28 ^^^n,Wilhelm 90.119, 119-121,120.122.124-126, 128.128-129.131,135,147,
   150n4
Rosenblatt, Nina 58n21 Rowe. Colin 151,171n2 Ryan, Frank 114n4
Saarinen. Eero 59n54 Sacher-Masoch. Leopold von 79
Sade. Marquis de 104 Sadism 79 Saidman.Jean 77. 78 SANAA 151.157.159,168-170, 171n13,171015 21st Century Museum 157 Barcelona Pavilion installation 159-180,161.183,164, 166-167,171n9 Bunny chaif 16,2 Christian Dior Building 157 GlassPavilion Toledo Museum of Art 1SM52, 154,756, 157.157. 158, 168 Lumiere Park Café 159 Novartis Pharma Headquarters )S6 Rolex LearningCenter 171n8
Sanatorium 8. 19, 22.34-35, 36.38. 61. 65.67.69-71. 73-74,78,81,87,93, 97. 100-101.101. 105.110,113, 114n1,118. 146-147 Sanatorium movement 114n4 Santa Maria Nuova hospital 15
Saran Wrap 143 Scans 132, 173, 774, 175-176,
   179-181
Schatzalp sanatorium86, 87, 89.93. 115n35 Scheerbart, Paul 86. 86.87. 115n29-34
   G^Mrchitekt0r86,86, 115n29
   The ^OceaniC Sonotorium forHoy Fever 86 Scheu. Gustav 36 Scheu,Robert 36 Schildt,Goran 114n5,114n10 Schindler. Pauline 47
Schindler, RM.
    Lovell Beach House 45, 46,48
Schivelbusch,Wolfgang7 Schoenberg, Arnold 79 Scholl.Or. 143 Schools 18, 24.46, 47. 97. 97-99,100,110, 111,143 Schools of medicine 15 Schorske, Carl 7 Schrank, Sara 59n51 Schwarzmann, Dr. Norbert 36 Science (scientific) 18, 19,49, 63,112.114n4, n15.121, 125,129,129, 131.132,145, 147, 175, 184n1 Screens 119-120,124,128, 129.131.134-135.169 Sea 86, 100,169 Secret 8,15,16.45,129,157.
    163,167, 170 Secret tunnel 115n41 . Section cut 15,58n12,173, 175-176, 175 Sedentary 16, 19 SejimaKazuyo 161, 159.
    171n8-9.I71n13 Sekler, Eduard 80. 114n18 Self-improvement 51 Semper, Gottfried 166.
    171n10
Sennett, Richard 7 Sensuality 43, 45 Sert,Josep Uuis
    Dispensario Antituberculoso 74
Sexual dysfunction 52 Sexual liberation 48:
Sexual performance 52 Sexuality 1 1,20.43.45, 48,
                                                                                                                                                 51,79, 170 Shadow 149
    Shadow image 129, 135 Showers49
Shock 31-33.54, 132.134 Shock absorber 33. 52. 54 Shock proofing 36 Shoe fittings 143 Shopwindows42 Sick (sick person. sickness) 13, 30.31. 44.59n49. 63.
    66.  70,79, 79,110.112. 143,1S4n9
Sick building syndrome 183-184
Sipila, Laun 114n1 Sitte, Camillo 96 City Planning according to Artistic Principles 84,85
Skeleton 42, 71,153, 176 Skin 41-42,105,137,173,176. 178-179
Skin-and-bones architecture 33.40-41, 137 Sleep 25-26.48.80.84, 97,
   101
Sleeping cars 95 Slutzky, Robert 151,171n2 Smart bombs 178 Smile 33. 54,55 Smithson,Alison and Peter 173
Snow 81,88. 89. 110,168.169 Social hygiene 19 Social order 19 Society for Physical Research 128
Sociologist 26,58n16 Solan.VictoriaJane 59n49 Solarium 27,30,78 Sonnenblick Sanatorium 73-74,75
Sontag. Susan 6-7. 7.9, 117, 150n1
   Illness as Metaphor 7,18. 58n5-6. 117,150n1-2 La Sorbonne 34, 84 Soria y Matta, Arturo Ciudad Lineal 112 Southern California 108 Spa 80
Spaceship 178 Space-time 128 Spengler, Lucius 89 Spiral43
Spintualism 128, 131 Splint 53,53
Sports 18, 22.25.27.30.100. 112
Spyridaki, Georges 167,
   171 nil
Squash court 104 Standard, The (newspaper) 125, 150n14 Staging 44. 87 Steel33, 42,89 Stomach 34, 36, 40,44 Streptomycin 51,63 Stress 22.31.106 Stuttgart 78. 27. 101. 101. 137,140
Style 40,41,42.46,48,81 Subversive 162 Suicide91, 114n3 Sun (Sunlight) 8,9,13, 18, 27, 44, 48, 63, 69,74, 78, 91,
   93, 94,97. 98,101. 101. 104. 110. 182
Sunbathing 20, 22. 48. 99. 100.109
Suresnes99, 100 Surgeon 14, 26,53-54 Surgery 16. 20,26,31,32, 51, 54,129,176
Surrealism (Surrealist artl 43. 101.104
Surveillance 142-143, 145, 147,180
   video-surveillance cameras 181
Sydney Telegraph 125 Symptom 16, 52. 55, 117, 137, 145,147 Syphilis36 Swimming22
   Swimming ptpo. 104
Tactile 43, 169 Taut. Bruno 59n38 Taylorism 19. 25 Tegethoff, Wolf 116n59 Telephone 95 Temporary buildings 142.
   SSeoiso pavilions Tennis 86. 100. 702. 103 Terrace 8-9, 18. 31. 63,64,
   65, 67,74,86,88,89, 91,
   92.100-101.107, 103,
   106. 108,110.112. 114n3. 182 .
Terror 33. 145 Theosophy 128.128 Therapy (therapeutic) 20.35. 44, 48, 51,54, 63,73,77.
   76, 79, 80, 82.89, 90.93. 97.98.105.112,112. 113, 116n60
Thought Forms 128, 128, 150n20 Tobacco48
Tomography 173, I84n1 Topp, Lesle 114n 15 Toxic30. 183 Trains 94
Translucent 142, 149,154, 167-168, 176, 179 Transparency (transparent) 11n1,16.67,73,117, 119-120.128-129,135136.143,146-147,149, 151,154,157,159-160, 166-168,171n2, 179-180, 182
Trauma 37.54 55 Treniianske Teplioe 74,76 Truby, Stephan 11n1 Tschumi, Bernard 11n1
Index
193
Tuberculosis (TB) 7-8, 10, 13, 16, 18. 79. 20. 22. 23. 30. 36. 51, 61,63,69-70, 78,91,
   92. 97, 104-105,108.113. 114n4, 117, 142, 146-147, 182
Tuberculosis sanatorium, 8.
   61, 64, 65, 69, 74, 74, 76, 77,145
Tugendhatchildren 110 Tugendhat, Fritz 110,112, 116n59, 116n62 Tugendhat, Grete 110, 116n59
Unconscious 30, 71 UN Studio 174, 175, 184n3 Urbanism 25
US National Libraryof Medicine 175 Uterine 43
Vaccines48
Vacuum cleaner (vacuuming) 86,97
Vadim, Roger 51 Valenta, Eduard 126. 127, 150n17 VaUauris 78 Valois, Georges 25 van der Leeuw house (Brinkman & van der Vlugt)27,29 Vasari, Giorgio 15 Vegetarian 48
Veil (veiled) 84, 163,167,168 Ventilation 16, 18, 94 Vergo, Peter 114n16 Victoria Eugenia, Queen of Spain 160 Victorian 40
Video-surveillance cameras.
   See surveillance Vienna 36, 47, 73, 80,94,
   94, 125
VioUet-le-Duc, Eugene 58n4 Dictionnaire raisonné de rorchifecture 15, 15 Virile 19 Virus 8
VisibleHuman Project 175.
   175,
                                                                                                                                        Vision 126,143, 147, 150n8, 151.157,159,168, 171 n1,
   180-181
Visontai. Nicola 78, 78 Vitruvius 63
   Ten Books onArchitecture 13, 13, 18, 58n1-2 Vlugt, Leendert Cornelis van der 27,29, 137, 740
Vomit 44 Voyeuristic 149
Waiblingen 73 Wagner. Otto 94-97, 115n43, 115n45-46, 115n48-51, 115n53
   D/eGroszstaa't 94, 94, 112 Hotel Wien 97 Palmschoss heliotherapy center 72, 73 Steinhof73
Wald-Oberschule 97. 97 Waldsanatorium 86, 89 Wallpaper 153 Wannsee 8
War 19. 25, 31. 33.37.115n37.
   116n66, 125 Warburg, Emil124 WatsonJamesSibley 145, 150n31
Waukegan, Illinois 74, 75 Weather77, 168 Welch, William H. 58n5 Wendingen (magazine) 145 Werkbund exhibitionDie Wohnung (Weissenhof-siedlung, 1927) 18, 100-101 Werkbund exhibitionin Breslau (1929) 27, 29 Werkbund exhibition in Paris (1930) 27.29
Whiteness 8, 18, 31,40, 63, 73, 78,79-81,84,89-91,94, 146, 182
Whitney, David 171n12 Wieber, Sabine 114n21 Wiklund, Lars 114n1 Wildhagen. Harald 114n1 Wilhelm 11121 Winter. Dr. Pierre 22.25, 26, 30, 58n14-15 Womb 14, 15
Women's rights activism 128, 128. See oiso Besant.Annie; Dohm, Hedwig Wood 37, 70, 119,124-125 Worker 11,33, 91 World’s Columbian Exhibition, Chicago137
World Warl 18.31,40, 54, 87, 115n37, 130
World Warll 53-54, 53,91.
   116
Wright, Frank Lloyd 59n38 Würzburg 121,124 Würzburg Physical and Medical Society 121
X-ray 10. 16.63,71.90,117121,120, 122, 123-124,126, 128, 128 129,131-132. 134, 134-136, 138, 142,145-147, 149. 150n30, 167-168,170. 173, 179-181 Mass X-raying 142 X-ray equipment 134 X-ray effect 142,151 X-ray exposure 117 Fluoroscopic shoe X-ray 143
   X-ray images 137, 124 X-ray machines 143, 180181
   X-ray opera glasses 132 X-ray photography 122, 124-127,128,129,129, 131-132,136, 136 X-ray portrait 118, 123 X-ray proof 1"32 X-ray studios 134 X-ray surgery 129 X-ray vision '163
Zabalo, Pablo
   Sanatorio de Leza 74, 74 Zaera-Polo,Alejandro 176, 184n5
Zonnestraal sanatorium 73, 73, 91-92, 91, 97,100 Zuckerkandl,Bertha 80 Zuckerkandl,Emil114n20 Zuckerkandl, Victor 79,
   114020
Zurich 35, 89,100,102
194
Image Credits
INTRODUCTION
1  © 1975, Susan Sontag. Photo: Beatriz Colomina.
2  Photo: Jean-Regis Rouston/ Roger Viollet/Getty Images
3  CC BY-SA3.0
4  Photo: Stefan Müller and Simon M enges
CHAPTER 1
1  Cesare Cesariano, Di Lucio VitnjvioL..], (Como: Gotardus de Ponte, 1521), fol.49r.
2  Wellcome Collection
3  DennisHallinan/Alamy Stock Photo
6  Photo: Boyer/RogerViollet/ Getty Images
7   Eugène Viollet-Je-Duc, Dictionnoire raisonné de 'architecture froncoise du Xle au XV/e siec/e, tome 4ième, (Paris: B. Banoe, 1870),
p.93           .           '
8  Illustration byJean-Baptiste'Marc Bourgery in 7roité complet de fohatomie de Thomme comprenant la médecine opérotoire, Vol. 1, (Paris: Atlas, 1831)
9  From: WosmuthsMonots-hefte fur Boukunst, Jan. 1929, vol. 1, p.83.
10  Photo:Jacques Boyer/ RogerViollet/Getty Images
12  © 2018 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York /VG Bild-Kunst. Bonn
13  Photo:Marcel Breuer. From: Richard Docker, Terrossentyp, (Stuttgart: AkademischerVerlag Wedekind, 1929), p.99
14   From:LeCorbusier:The Art ofArchitecturre, (Weil am Rhein:Vitra Design Museum, 2007)
15-1 . 33 © F.L.C./ ADAGP, Paris I Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York 2018 18, 20, 21,34 LeCorbusier, The Radiant City: (New York: Orion Press. 1967)
19  From:LeCorbusier,Lo Ville Rodieuse, (Paris: Editions Vincent, 1933),p. 100
22 From: L'Esprit nouveau, vol. 2, (Paris: Editions de l'espritnouveau, 1920),p.185
24  Bibliothèque nationale de France, departement Réserve des livres rares, RES P-V-790
25  LEsprit nouveau. vol. 15, (Paris:Editionsde ('esprit nouveau, 1922),p. 1755
26  Photo: Lotte Jacobi. From: Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen, (Zurich: Orell Füssli, 1929;Reprint: Lars Mütter Publishers, 2019), plate 26
27  Photo:Wandavon Debschitz-Kunowski
28  Harvard Art Museums/ Busch-Reisinger Museum,
Gift of lse Gropius, BRGA.45.66. Imaging Depart-ment©President and Fellows of Harvard College
(29 ©^019 Artists Rights Society(ARS), New York i VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn
30    ©Collection Hel Nieuwe ■ lnstituut/LEPRd28-1
31  ©TheMuseum ofArchi-tecture in Wroctaw
32  From: Pierre Winter.
"Le point du vue du biologiste/ Architecture et Urbonisme, (Paris: Les Publications tech-niques/Galerie Charpentier. 1933)
36  OttoWilhelmThomê, Floro von Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz, (Gera: Eugen Köhler, 1885)
37  From: L'Esprit nouveau, vot. 21, (Paris: Editions
de ('esprit nouveau, 1924)
38  From: Burkhardt Rukschcio and Roland Schachel,AdoifLoos: Leben und Werk, (Vienna: Residenz. 1982),p.2 21,image 215
39   From: Burkhardt Rukschcio and Roland Schachei,Adoif Loos: Leben und Werk, (Vienna: Residenz, 1982)
40   Universität Zürich, Archiv für Medizingeschichte (AfM)
IN 47.08.10:03
41'44-46, 49, 50, 52 © 2018 Austrian Frederick andLillian Kiesler PrivateFoundation 42,43 © 2018 Austrian Frederlckand Lillian Kiesler
Private Foundation. Photo:
J. Alex Langley
47  © 20l8Austrian Frederick and Lillian Kiesler Private Foundation. Photo: Irving Penn
48  © 2018 Austrian Frederick and Lillian Kiesler Private Foundation. Photo: Hans Namuth
51 Photo: Renate Ponsold
53  R.M. Schindler papers, Architecture and Design Collection.Art, Design & Architecture Museum,UC, Santa Barbara
54  R.M.Schindlerpapers, Architecture and Design Collection. Art. Design & Architecture Museum,UC, Santa Barbara. Photo:JT Beals. From:David Gebhard, Schindler, (Santa Barbara: Peregrine Press, 1980), pp. 84-85
56  ©Gerhard Riebicke I Bodo .Niemann Berlin 57-59 CourtesyofThomas Hines
60  Richard Neuira Archives,
UCLA
61  RichardJ. Neutra.Survivoi of Design, (New York: Oxford University Press, 1954)
63  Anonymous, Security Pacific National Bank ILos Angeles Public Library
64  ©J. Paul Getty Trust.
Getty Research Institute. Los Angeles (2004.R.10,Job 2920). Photo:Julius Shulman
65   U.S.Department of Health and Human Services
66, 67, 71 @ 2018 Eames Office, LLCieamesofficc.com)
69  Photo: Dmitri Kessel.The LIFE Picture Collection/Getty Images
70  ©J.Paul Getty Trust.
Getty Research I nstitute,Los Angeles (2004.R.10,Job 2717). Photo:Julius Shulman
CHAPTER2
1  AlvarAalto Museum, no. 50-759
2  Alvar Aalto Museum,
no. 50-003-091. Photo:Aivar Aalto
3  Alvar Aalto Museum, no.50-003-361. Photo: Gustaf Welin
4  Alvar Aalto Museum,
no. 50-003-360. Photo: Gustaf Welin
5  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-395. Drawing:Alvar
Aalto
6  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-950. Drawing: Alvar Aalto
7  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-23b. Drawing: Alvar Aalto
8  Alvar Aatto Museum,
no. 50-003-266. Photo: Gustaf Welin
10  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-209
11  From:Alvar Aalto, "The Humanizing of Arch itecture; Technology Review, vol. 43, no. 1, (November 1940), p. 16
12  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. av2118. Photo: Maija Holnia
13  AlvarAalto Museum, no. digi 2078. Photo: Maija Holm a
14   Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-410. Drawing: Alvar Aalto
15  Alvar Aalto Museum, no. 50-405. Drawing: Alvar
Aalto
16  Alvar Aalto Museum,
no. 50-003-419. Photo: Gustaf Wetin
17  Alvar Aalto Museum,
no. AFmn 8-3. Photo: unknown 18,19 Granger Historical Picture Archive I Alamy Stock Photo
20  FromJosefHoffmonn. Sanatorium Purkersdor, ed Breckner, Meyer, et at., (Vienna: Galerie Metro pol, 1970). Cou rtesy Georg Kargl
21   From: Richard Docker, Terrrrossentyp, (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Wedekind, 1929), p. 70
22  From: Geretsegger.
Peint ner, Pichler, Otto Wagner 1841-1918. The Expanding City,(NewYork: Rizzoli, 1979) 24 From: Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen, (Zurich:
195
Orell Füssli, 1929; Reprint: Lars Muller Publishers, 2019), plate S
26  H8-05962-P2, Chicago History Museum. Hedrich-Blessing-Collection
27  C.Eberth
28  Revista NacionaldeArqui-tectura, vol. 126,June 1952, Official body of the Higher Council of the Spanish Arch i-tects' Assoc iations. Published by the Colegio Oficialde Arqu itectos de Madrid
29   From:Karel Teige and Jaromir Krejcar, Prdce JaromiroKrejcaro [The work ofJaromir Krejcar]. (Prague: V.Petr, 1932)
30   BrochureGallois,ca.1930, collection C. Raynal, T. Lefebvre. Thierry Lefebvre, Cécile Raynal, Les Soloriums taur-nantsdu DrJeon Soidman, Paris.Editions Glyphe. 2010.
31   From:Larissa Anisimova, Pavel Khoroshilov, Nudo per Stalin: II Corpo neIIo fotogrofio soviaöco neg(i onni vent if. {Rome: Gangemi editore, 2009), p. 203
32. 35 Collection Archives
d'Aix-les-Bains
34 Ullstein bild. Photo:Andrê
Kertesz
36   From: {-'architecture dbujourdhui. ed. André Bloc, September 1934.p. 78
37   From:LOrchitecture vr'vonte, ed.Jean Badovici, 1931, p.48
3d' Richard von Krafft-Ebing, Ober gesunde und kranke Nerven. 3rd edition, (Tubingen: H. Laupp'Schen, 1885)
41  ©ÖNB Wien 461.759B 42. 44,46 © MAK-Öster-reichisches Museum für angewandte Kunst/Gegen-wartskunst
43  FromJosef Hoffmonn. Sonotorium Purkersdorf, ed. Breckner, Meyer. et al., (Vienna:Galerie Metropol, 1970)
45 Photo: lmagno/Getty Images
47 From: C. Sitte, Lbrte di costruire (e cittd. Lurban istico
seconda isuoi fondomenti ortistici. (Milano:Jaca Book, 1980). p. 223
48 Camillo Sitte,Der Städtebau nach seinen künstlerischen Grundsätzen [City planni ngaccording to artistic principles],(Vienna: Graeser, 1889)
50 Collection Beatriz Colo-mina
55  Collection Jewish Historical Museum.Amsterdam. Collection J. van Velzen.
57  Photo: Arnold lten. From: EJJelles. C. A.Alberts,Duiker. 7890-7935, (Amsterdam: Architecture et amicitia, 1972)
58   Jan Verboom. Oudhilver-sum.nl. Photo:Jan vanZut-phen, International institute of Social History (Amsterdam). 60, 63 From: Geretsegger, Peintner, Pichler. Otto Wagner 7847- 7918. The Expanding City. (New York: Rizzoli. 1979), p. 40
61 © Rowohlt Verlag
64  Arkivi-Bitdagentur
65   From:E.J.Jelles.C.A. Alberts, Duiker. 1890-1935, (Amsterdam: Architecture etarnicitia. 1972)
66   From:Le Visogede Lenfance, (Paris: Horizon. 1937). p. 201
68-71 MUS-Mus6e d'Histoire Urbaine etSociale de Suresnes
72 From: Richard Docker, Terrosenntyp, (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Wedekind, 1929). p.57
74  Photo: Richard Poehl-mann. From: Richard Docker. Terrassent'p, (Stuttgart: AkademischerVerlag Wedekind, 1929). p. 24
75   From: Richard DOcker, Terrossentyp, (Stuttgart: AkademischerVerlag Wede-kind,1929), p.62
77  ©Richard-Docker-Archiv, Deutsches Ar chitektu r mj se-urn, Frankfurt am Main. From: Sigfried Giedion. Befreites Wohnen. (Zurich: Orell Füssli, 1929;Reprint: LarsMüller Publishers. 2019). plate 58
78   PhotoOUustriertes Slott no. 5,(Frankfurt a.M., 1929). From: Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen. (Zurich:Orell Füssli, 1929;Reprint: Lars Müller Pu blishers, 2019). plate83
79   From: Richard Docker, Terrossentyp, (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Wedekind. 1929), p. 70
80   © 2018Artists Rights Society (ARS), NewYork / ADAGR Paris. From: Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen, (Zurich:Orell Füssli, 1929; Reprint: Lars Müller Pu blishers. 2019). plate 82
81   From: Sigfried Giedion, Befrertes Wohnen, (Zurich: Orell Füssli, 19'Z9: Reprint: Lars Müller Publishers. 2019). plate 76
82   ©Man Ray20l5Trust f Artists Rights Society {ARS), NY/ADAGR Paris 201 B
83. 85 From: Richard Docker. Terrossentyp, (Stuttgart: Akademischer Verlag Wede-kind.1929), pp.116-117.
84 From:Andr6 Luryat. portfolio sheets 'Terrasses et jardins" L4rt internot/ono( d'ouyourcfhui (Paris: Charles Moreau, 1930).
86   Privat Collection,© villaNoailles
87   ©Man Ray2015Trust / Artists Rights Society (ARS). NY 1ADAGP. Paris 2018.
Photo: Telimage, Paris
88   © Man Ray 2015Trust/ Artists Rights Society {ARS). NY /ADAGP, Paris 2018
91 Alvar Aalto Museum. no. 50-003-257. Photo:Alvar Aalto
93  © Peter Blake. AU rights reserved, DDACS/ ArtistsRights Society (ARS). New York 2018. From: Franz Schulze, Mies von der Rohe. interior Spoces, (Chicago:ArtsClub,1982), p.21
94   From:Christian NorbertSchulz, Coso Tugendhot. Tugendhot House. Brno, (Rome: Officina Ediiioni, 1984), p. 44
95   Photo: Fritz Tugendhat. Courtesyof Daniela Hammer-
Tugendhat. From: Daniela Hammer-Tugendhat, lvo Hammer. WolfTegethoff. Tugendhat House. Lu dwig Mies von der Rohe, (Basel: Birkhauser, 2015), p, 101. fig. 132
96  Courtesy ofDaniela Hammer-Tugendhat. From: Daniela Hammer-Tugendhat, lvo Hammer.WolfTegethoff, Tugendhat House. Ludwig Mies von derRohe, (Basel: Birkhauser, 2015)
97  Tony Garnier, Une cité industrielle, (Paris:Vincent, 1917),plate 58
98  Private archive Arthur Ruegg
CHAPTER3
1  WilhelmRontgen. Ober eine neue Art von Strohlen [On a New Kind ofRays,
a PreliminaryCommu ica-tion], Sitzungsberichte dler Physikalisch-Medizinischen Gesellschaft in Würzburg 137, December 28,1895. CC BY-NC 3.0 DE15:34 Deutsches Textarchiv
2  Otto Glasser. W.C. Röntgen, {Springfield , Illinois: Cha rles Thomas Publisher. 1945). p.51
3  Photo:© CORBIS/Corbis via Gettylmage
5  Reproduction by permission of the Buffalo & Erie County Public Library, Buffalo, NewYork
6  From:Tom Gunning, Corey Keller, JenniferTucker,
Brought to Light: Photogrophy and theinvisible, 1840-1900, (San Francisco: San Francisco Museum of Modern Art.
2008}
7  Photo: Science and Society Picture Library/Getty Images 9 Purchase. Alfred Stieglitz SocietyGifts,Joyce F. Menschel Photography LibraryFund, and Maureen and Noel Testa Gift, 2011.The Metropolitan Museum, 2011.66.1-.15. http:/'www.metmuseum,org/ art/collection/search/
296322
196
10  L.Moholy-Nagy, Malerei, Fotografie, Film. Bauhaus-bucher 8, (Munich:Albert Langen Verlag, 1925), pp. 60-61
11  Photo: Hayman Selig Mendelssohn (1848-1908)
12  From:Annie Besant and C.W. Lead beater, Thought-Forms, (London: The Theo-sophical Publishing House, 1901, fig. 10
13-15 L.Au bert. La Photographie de /'invisible; Les rayonsXs uivi d'un g/ossaire, les livres d'or de io science, (Paris: Librairie C.Reinwald, Schleicher Frères, Éditeurs, 1898)
16 August Dittmar, Prof. Rontgen's X“ RAYS ond their oppkcotions in the, New Photography, (Glasgow: F. Bauermeister, 1896)
18  William J. Morton and EdwinW. Hammer, TheX-ray, or Photography of the invisible and its value in Surgery,
(N ew York: American Technical Book CO.. 1896), fg. 54
22  Published in La /(ustracrdo EsponoioyAmerica no ,July 16, 1897, p. 20;and in Scientific Amer icao, August 7,1897
23   National Cancer Institute, AV-4000-3979
24  Private collection.From: Llllustration,July3, 1897
25  Photo: Lucia Moholy. ©
2 018 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / VG BildKunst, Bonn. From:Arthur Korn, G/os im Bou und a/s Gebrauchsgegenstond,
(Berli n: Ernst Pollak, 1929)
26   ArthurKorn, G/asimBau und afs Gebrauchsgegenstand, (Berli n: Ernst Pollak, 1929)
27   From: Mies van der Rohe, "The Pure Form is the NaturaCG. Zeits chrift fur e/ementore Gestaltung. no. 5-6, April 1926
28  © 2018 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York /VS Bild-Kunst, Bonn
29   Kurt Schwitters, "Nascyr Merz, no. 8/9, Hannover, April-July 1924, pp. 31-82
30   Photo: Sigfried Giedion. From: Werner Oechslin.
Gregor Harbu sch, S ig fr ied Giedion unddie Fotografe, (Zurich: gta Verlag. 2010), p.47
31  © P.L.C./ADAGP, Paris / Artists Rights Society (ARS), NewYork 2018
32  From:BrunoZevi, Erich Mendelsohn, (New York: Rizzoli, 1985), pp.86-87
33  NAI Collection Database -Het Nieuwe lnstituut
34   Architectural Press Archive from the RIBA collection
35   HB-09789-A, Chicago History Museum, Hedrich-BlessingCollection
36   CourtesyThe Estate of Buckminster Fuller.From: Shelter; no. 5, November 1932
,37 PhOtoJ.Cohnen. Collection Rijckhey1 38 Courtesy of Edward Duckett'- 39 New York, Museum of Modern Art (MoMA). Gelatin silver print, 71/2x 93/4"
(19.1 x 24.8cm).Archite ct ure & Design Study Center. lnv. no.:AD1375. Digital image© 2019,TheMuseum of Modern Art, New Yor k/Scala, Florence 40 From: LIFE magazine, Decem ber 31,1945 42 Reproduced with kind permission from the Corning Museum of Glass/Rakow Research Library
45  From: LIFE magazin e, March 25, 1946.p. 34-35
46  © J.S. Watson. Used With Permission from the Eastman Kodak Co mpany.
48  From: Architectural Forum, October 1951, p 158
49   Lisa Cartwright, Screening the Body: Tracing Medicine's Visual Culture, (Minneapolis: University of Mi nnesota Press, 1995), p. 158
50   From:VictorX-Ray Company, -RaySupplies, (Chicago, 1920), p.25
51   Photo:Wallace Kirkland for LIFE Maga2ine/Getty Images
CHAPTER4
1, 12-19 SANAA
2  CCA, Fonds Myron Goldsmiths, Canadian Center for Architecture. 032 ARC 135.
© 2018 Artists Rights Society (ARS), NewYork/VG Biid-Kunst,Bonn
3  Photo:Arnold Newman/ Getty Images
4  © 2018Artists Rights Society (ARS), NewYork /
VG Bild-Kunst. Bonn.Photo: Oswald Herzog
5-7 © 2018Artists Rights Society (ARS). New York /VG Bild- Kunst, Bonn
8  © 2018 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York /VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn. From:Philip Johnson. Miesvon der Rohe, (New York: MoMA,1947, 1978), p. 109 (bottom)
9  From:Arts ^Architecture, March 1943.
10  © 20J8 Eames Office. LLC (eamesoffice.com). Photo: Julius Shulman
11  © 2018 Eam es Ofce. LLC (eamesoffioe.com). Photo: Charles Eames
20 Photo: MiquelAnglarilt 21.23 © Fundaciô Miesvan der Rohe, Barcelona. Photo: Ivan Blasi
22, 24,27 © Fundaciô Mies van der Rohe, Barcelona
25  Courtesy of Hendrich Blessing
26  Photo:© RamonPrat Homs
28  Photo: José Maria Segarra. Courtesy ofFamilia Sagarra.
From: OnOiseiio, no.73,1986, p.12
29  From: Diorio Oficiol cfe Io Exposic/do ioernociooa/ Sorce/ono, 1929
30  © Photographic Archive Museo Nacional delPrado
31  ©Michael Moran
32  HB-30037. ChicagoHistory Museum,Hedrich-Blessing Colle ction
CHAPTERS
2 F-om: Greg Lynn,Folds, Bodies,and S/ob, (Brussels:
La Lettre volèe, 1998)
3  UNStudio,MOVEVol. 2, (Netherlands: Goose Press, 1999), p. 171
4  UNStudio, MOVEVol. l. (Netherlands: Goose Press, 1999). p.154
6 USNationalLibrary of Medicine, Visible Human Project,http://erie.nlm.nih. gov/-dave/vh 7-9 © 2018Artists Rights Society (ARS), NewYork / c/o Pictoright Amste rdam 10-12 From:FOA, Phylogenesis, (Barcelona: Actar, 2004) 13,14 Given Imaging
15  Ph oto: John Springer Collection/Getty Images
16  Courtesy of the United States Customs and Border Protection
17  American Sci ence& Engineering /Science Photo Library
The ed ito rs have e nd eavored to identify all copyright holders and photographers. Should despite our intensive research any person entitled to rights have been overlooked, legitimate claims shall be compensated withintheusual provision.
Image Credits
197
Acknowledgments
With a project of such long duration, I feel indebted intellectually and emotionallyto many people and institutions. I am grateful to the New York Institute for the Humanities, my first host in New York an'd where this project was incubated—even if then abandoned for a longtime. I am grateful to Richard Sennett for his generosity as director, inviting me to the Institute as a research scholar, and to the fellows of 1980-81, particularly Susan Sontag, Wolfgang Schivelbusch, and Carl Schorske for their profound inspiration. I could neversee architecturethe same way again.
      In the long hiatus where I tried to suppress this project, several people and institutions invited me to speak and write about the question, unwittingly keeping the flame alive.They include Werne r Oechslin, Cynthia Davidson, BernardTschumi, Stephan Trüby, Andrea Phitlips, Detlef Mertins, Sylvia Lavin, Antoine Picon, Jennifer Sigler, Brett Steele, Andrea Simitch, Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev, and Nikolaus Hirsch.
      TheAmerican Academy in Berlin, where I was a fellow in the fall of 2014, provided the ideal setting to revive this project, which continued atthe Getty Center in Los Angeles in the spring of 2015. I am immensely grateful to the feedback of the fellows and their partners at both institutions, particularly Anthony McCall, Annabelle McCall, Myles Jackson, DanielEisenberg, Ellen Rothenberg, MonicaBlack,Adam Ross,Tacita Dean, Mathew Hale, Thordis Arrhenius,Thomas Hines, Katja Müller-Helle, and Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev. Back in theforests of Berlin and again atthe edge the water, as a 2018-19 fellow at the Wissenschaftskolleg zu Berlin, has been the perfect placeto complete this book.
198
Generous support for the research and publication was provided by the Graham Foundation for Advanced Studies in the Fine Arts and the Barr Ferree Foundation Publication Fund, Department of Art and Archeology, Princeton University. '         .   .
      l-am grateful to Bud Bynack for his subtle editing and to Bart-Jan Polman and.Esther Choi for their hglp with the index. and the image sourcing respectively. It. has been a pleasure to work again with Lars Müller, “the last bookmaker," and liis team. I am particularly thankful to Maya Rüegg for the careful coordination and to Martina Mullis and Lars forthedesign.
      Special thanks to my colleagues and friends for their support, particularly Giuliana Bruno, Jean-Louis Cohen, Elizabeth Diller, Hal Foster, Alice Friedman, Sarah Herda, Francesca Hughes, Sylvia Lavin, Dietrich Neumann, Felicity Scott, and Tony Vidler. I am especially grateful to Monica Ponce de Leon, my colleagues, and the students at the School of Architecture at Princeton, who continuously create such an energizing academic environment. In the end, this book comes out of my teaching and the pleasure of testing ideas.
      Above all, I am super grateful to the non-boring endless conversation with Mark Wigley aboutthese ideas.
Beatriz Colomina
199
     Beatrte Colomina X-RAY ARCHITECTURE
      Copyediting: Bud Bynack
      Proofreading: David Koralek
      Coordination: Maya Rüegg
      Image rights: Chris Reding, Maya Ruegg
      Design: Integral Lars Müller/Lars Mutter and Martina Mullis
      Production: Martina Mullis
      Lithography: prints professional, Berlin, Germany
      Printing and binding: DZA Druckerei zu Altenburg, Germany
      Paper: ProFibulk1.3,135gsm
      @ 2019 Lars Müller Publishers and Beatriz Colomina
     No partof this book may beused orreproducedinany form or manner whatsoever without prior written permission, exceptin the caseof brief quotations embodied incritical articles and reviews.
     Lars Mutter Publishers is supported bythe Swiss Federal Office of Culture with astr uctural contribution for the years
     2016-2020,
     Lars Muller Publishers
     Zürich, Switzerland
     www.lars-mueller-publishers.com
     ISBN 978-3-03778-443-3
     Distributed in NorthAmerica byARTBOOK I D.AP. www.artbook.com
     Pinted in Germany
     Publication is made possible in partbygrantsfrom the Barr Ferree Foundation Publication Fund. DepartmentofArt and Archaeology, Princeton University, and from the Graham Foundation for Advanced Studies in the Fine Arts.