PETER EISENMAN
PREFACE
THIS BOOK IS A critical work by an a RC H ite ct, not a historian or a critic. Its approach is little interested in the accepted narrative or recorded historical facts about Andrea Palladio. Nor is this book concerned with the current architectural fashions of big data, crowdsourcing, or parametrics. Rather, through what can be called a close reading of architectural traces, the book uncovers certain similarities between architecture in our time and the time of Palladio by focusing on a moment of architectural shifts, from 1520 to 1575, in northern Italy.
Walter Benjamin argued that in order to understand any form of paradigm shift, it is necessary, in a sense, to reawaken history. This is what this book attempts to do— to awaken a historical period that shares certain conditions with the present. Many philosophers define their work through a discursive relation to a historical figure: for example, Jacques Derrida in relation to Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Gilles Deleuze to Kant, Spinoza, Bergson, and others. Although not as a philosopher, it is in that tradition that I write about Palladio, in order to elaborate my own approach to architecture.
The shift that is the focus of this book has been discussed by many important voices. Among others, Rudolf Wittkower, Colin Rowe, Manfredo Tafuri, and, more recently, Pier Vittorio Aureli all have drawn from this period to propose theoretical matrices from which to view architecture, but none has taken the same approach as presented here. Of these, Rowe looms largest over this book. During my time at the University of Cambridge from i960 to 1963, he gave a series of lectures titled “From Bramante to Vignola.” He included in these lectures the work of Donato Bramante, Michelangelo, Palladio, Baldassare Peruzzi,
Raphael, Giulio Romano, Giuliano da Sangallo, Michele Sanmicheli, Sebastiano Serlio, and Giacomo Barozzi Vignola. Then, for a solid three months in each of two summers, Rowe was my guide to visiting this work, for which there were then no guidebooks, nor even road signs, to help us reach the buildings. For Rowe, Bramante was the pivotal figure for architecture (hence the title of his course), but for me it was Palladio who provided a unique theoretical matrix that seemed to transcend his own time, although both Bramante and Palladio owe much to the figure of Leon Battista Alberti.
The argument being made in this book begins with Alberti’s implication of homogeneous space in his De Re Aedificatoria (On the Art of Building, 1452), which originated the discourse about space and how to conceptualize it. And after Bramante, much of what is known as architectural mannerism—which historians date to Bramante’s successors, including Palladio—is in fact a questioning of Albertian spatial principles. However, it is only when Palladio’s work is examined that new strains of this questioning arise, an important aspect of which is the shift from the Albertian idea of homogeneous space to what might be called, in Palladio’s work, heterogeneous space, and thus from what would later be known as Cartesian geometry to topology. This phenomenon takes several distinct forms. For example, the articulated architectural elements—portico, transition space, and central space, which are given letter (A, B, or C) and color (white, gray, or black) notations in the following analysis—become dislocated from their supposed normative location as well as their meaning and become noniconic spatial inscriptions. These inscriptions often produce conditions where two or more notations become overlaid in a single space. The resultant space no longer has a simple or singular conceptual valence, as in homogeneous space, but rather takes on indeterminate characteristics. These characteristics are not necessarily “visible” in any one space, but their indeterminate qualities can be revealed through a close reading of the relationships among these notations. Nonetheless, the overlay of these notations causes the space to be “different” or “other” in its effect on both reading and experience. This difference—the evident conceptual transformation from homogeneous to heterogeneous space—is variously referred to in this book as the dissipation or disaggregation of supposed “ideal” toward “virtual” spatial conditions, as well as the movement from a geometric analysis to a topological one.
No longer either one condition or another—for example, dense or sparse space, but rather “both/and”—the proposed topological relationships between the ideal and the virtual are critical to the notations and analyses developed in this book. For example, the architectural ideal refers to an organization of form—nine-squares or biaxial symmetry. The virtual refers to architectural relationships that are implied by a condition of presence but that exist beyond the literal or the ideal. This could be considered a first definition of the virtual. By identifying moments of tension between ideal and virtual conditions in Palladio’s work, the analysis uncovers—or invents—the underlying architectural strategies, inscriptions, and notations in the works.
an architect sees differently than does an art historian or critic. Architects look less for dates, patrons, or pedigree than for how buildings teach them to see through their facture. Two conditions are particular to the ways that architects
see architecture, which makes the process of seeing both similar to and different from the ways musicians hear music, the ways writers read literature, or artists see sculpture or painting, for example; that is, to how those who work within a creative discipline see their own discipline. One of these conditions is that people who are not architects often think they know architecture in a way different than people who are not musicians or artists think they know music or painting. People are more familiar with architecture: they live in it, work in it, learn in it, play in it, and pray in it. This familiarity makes it more difficult for the architect to open architecture to investigations that promote change from the status quo, the expected, and what will be called here, the normal.
A second condition of difference derives out of the first. People assume that what is seen is in fact what is. Often, particularly in work that separates architecture from building, what is seen is only part of what is. One of my first lessons in architecture occurred in the summer of 1961 while traveling with Rowe in Italy. Coming upon our first Palladian villa, he said to me, “Look at that facade and tell me something about it that cannot be seen.”
1 did not know what to do. But over time, I have learned that architectural seeing involves this capacity to see the unseen, what could be described as a form of close reading.
A part of seeing in this way makes it necessary to separate—as did poststructuralism for language—the signifier from the signified. It has been assumed that in architecture there is little differentiation between the signifier and the signified: a column is simply a column. However, a column can be thought of as both a structural element— the object—and the sign of that structural element. This collapsing of sign, meaning, and object leads to conditions where the distinctions between form (signified) and space (signifier) are blurred. While architecture fills up space, at the same time it also creates space outside and inside of its walls. Seeing architecture, therefore, means to see, for example, the doubled columns in the portico of the Palazzo Chiericati as an imprint of a spatial syntax, of a topological or relational condition as opposed to a geometric one.
The idea of a spatial syntax goes beyond simple function. While there is no architecture without the external surfaces that shelter and enclose, the architectural membrane— that is, the vertical surface—is not just functional, it is also representational. While both horizontal and vertical membranes convey information in one way or another, Rowe has argued that the vertical surface manifests character while the plan is the source of composition. By contrast, this book argues that the vertical surface records something other than character, as the plan records something other than composition. That “other” is a defining characteristic of architecture: not the literal, material scale or proportion of building parts or spaces, but the latent, immaterial possibility of multiple readings of the same space through topological conditions such as adjacency, overlap, or superposition-all manifestations of architectural relationships as opposed to geometric coordinates.
Recognizing the “other” as an important part of the discipline, Le Corbusier suggested that when a window is too large or too small for a room—that is, when it is not as it is expected to be—it signifies the presence of architecture. In these terms, architecture is characterized by excess—too much or too little of something that may or may not be present. If Le Corbusier is correct, the idea of the normative is therefore a baseline definition, which helps organize certain elements of architecture—openings, rooms, and relationships between interior and exterior—in an attempt to typify and make generally accessible
what is, in fact, different from one moment in time to another. Most design acknowledges such norms, and thereby repeats the past, striving to make the subject feel “at home.”
If the normative describes those conditions that are external to the discipline of architecture—cultural or social norms that found their way into ideas of proportion, scale, symmetry, etc.—this book proposes a slightly different concept, called here the “ideal,” which describes those conditions that are internal to or that define the discipline. In any discussion about seeing in architecture, for example, there is a relationship of what can be seen to what cannot; there is a literal physicality of presence but also a condition of that which is not present but can be implied as other or excessive to that which is literally present. A niche, for example, has a literal presence in relation to the surface of a wall. But it could also be “seen” or read as the imprint or inscription of an absent positive element—a column, pier, or another wall perhaps. So a niche, or another element, could be simultaneously literally present and imply something other. As noted earlier, these implied conditions beyond the literal can be called the virtual, hence the title of this book, Palladio Virtue!. In one sense, the normative is itself a “virtual” condition in that it never really exists but is only a hypothetical “ideal” condition that erases difference (in other words, it homogenizes). In another sense, the virtual is an excessive condition in that it is “too large” or “too small” to conform to a normative standard. Thus, the virtual is both an excessive and a normative condition, because it too can be considered only a hypothetical version of something. This could be said to be a second condition of the virtual. This contradiction is important to the analyses presented in this book, seen in the movement of Palladio’s work both toward and away from an ideal type, in this case, the villa.
Another definition of the normative considers the idea that architecture’s function is usually thought of in relation to enclosure, comfort, and shelter—those conditions connected to presence. In fact, architecture has been called a sine qua non of the metaphysics of presence. No attempt is made here to completely disregard a metaphysics of presence, however, because it is a discourse that will always have currency in regard to architecture. However, shifts in thinking about the relationship between signifier and signified in language, among other things, signal a loosening of the dominant discourses connected to presence. This would explain the effect of Derrida on this book. Although it is sometimes assumed that the only function of architecture is to solve or accommodate social, political, and economic problems, in fact, architecture can also be engaged in the loosening of the supposed normative one-to-one relationship between sign and signified. And in this sense, architecture has the potential to open up these problems to their own internal constructions and contradictions.
The layering of the column bays of Santo Spirito (c. 1430) by Brunelleschi, the facade of Sant’Andrea (c. 1465) by Alberti, and the space of Bramante’s plans each in their own way constitutes a different aspect of architecture’s capacity to loosen— to dissipate—the relationship between sign and signified. Bramante was a key figure in this regard. He seized on the shift in cosmology that placed the human subject at the center of his world and produced a new kind of church exemplified in the centralized plan for St. Peter’s (c. 1506) and the Tempietto (c. 1510). While Brunelleschi had previously brought an idea of science into architecture, and Alberti collaged ideas and
references from the history of architecture, Bramante could be considered the first architect to have seen and conceptualized an idea that originated from within architecture itself—that is, to consider architecture as a self-contained organism.
Learning from Bramante, Palladio continues to place the Albertian notion of presence and homogeneous space in question, and, as this book contends, he is the first architect to work with the possibility of the inscription of a spatial syntax and the corresponding denial of overt symbols. In Palladio, for the first time, there exists what will later be called by Le Corbusier a promenade architecturale, for example, where space is understood not merely from a frontalized picture plane, as suggested by architectural historian James Ackerman, or through an understood set of proportional geometric relationships in space, but rather as unfolding in different ways through space, in en suite progressions without corridors, servant or served spaces. Instead there emerges a new typology: a villa plan in which the abstract geometry of the nine-square diagram gradually dissipates, replaced by a sense of topological relationships; it loses its volumetric discreteness, revealing spaces that are superposed over one another or transposed from some unstable base condition, which is no longer Platonic and ideal, but rather involves a series of potentially disarticulated and disaggregated relations of some presumed normative state.
It could be argued that Palladio’s consciousness of a spatial syntax is made evident in his I Quattro Libri dell’Architettura (The Four Books of Architecture), published in 1570, ten years before his death. In I Quattro Libri, Palladio redrew his buildings not as they had actually been built, but as he wanted them to be known. The reality of Palladio’s work therefore exists between the drawings and the buildings themselves, as a virtual Palladio; this is a third condition of the virtual. Bertotti Scamozzi, Heinrich Wofflin, Paul Frankl, Wittkower, Rowe, and Ackerman are some of the many architects and historians who, since the seventeenth century, have both drawn from and literally redrawn Palladio’s own redrawings. The substance of fact, one could say, is a very elusive one. Most of Palladio’s buildings have been changed or refurbished, and some have been destroyed. Many previous interpretations are based on Scamozzi’s drawings, which have little to do with Palladio’s intentions in the Four Books. Had Palladio not written and drawn the Four Books as a theoretical treatise following Vitruvius and Alberti, it is possible that very few architects would have studied so keenly or gone to see his buildings, as opposed to the many other country villas constructed at the time.
It is clear that this book is also engaged in an act of revision. Working from readings of English versions of the primary sources, this revision is therefore not a revision of the primary sources themselves as much as it is a revision of secondary material. Thus, the reading of Palladio that follows is not exactly a revision of Palladio, but a revision of nineteenth- and twentieth-century readings of his work through the lens of an Anglo/American theoretical context as it evolved out of a German art historical tradition in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Two questions must be asked about the work that follows: why Palladio today, and why this particular method of analysis?
To attempt to answer these questions, this work considers history as a template for the possible multiple interpretations and transformations of any project that are reflections of a dynamic culture. In the past, Palladio’s work has been seen as a master example
of critical introspection in the first wave of modernity, a moment in history that once had a poignancy and a clarity necessary to illuminate contemporary architecture. But in the rush to embrace new technologies beginning in the late twentieth century, ideas changed radically, and the potential in the transformation of historical precedent was almost forgotten.
The late nineteenth century “Kunstgeschichte” idea of Palladio as a model of Renaissance reason, proportion, and mathematics became part of the detritus of such rapid technological growth. Overlooked in most previous readings of Palladio were the nuances and inconsistencies that appear in Palladio’s own drawings, which have been passed over as unimportant to the prevailing interpretation. Beginning from the idea that what Palladio drew might be necessary to explore, not because of its inconsistencies but rather as evidence of an alternative model, might help resuscitate Palladio as well as the historical project. This new work exposes Palladio to a completely different interpretation than what has been previously available in an Anglo/American context. The interpretation in this book eschews and denies previous claims of an ideal and static geometry in Palladio’s villas. Instead, it develops a sequential tripartite typology, which traces the breakdown of unitary villa volumes into a series of partial villa elements and their important positioning in the landscape by comparing the possibility of two states: first, the relationship in space of potentially ideal organizations; and second, the possibility of virtual topological conditions that arise out of the subtleties of a close reading of each villa.
It is this close reading that in turn animates the discussion of each villa, producing a new theoretical trajectory from a previously thought static geometric volume to a dynamic topology of partial figures.
The analysis presented here does not go against or refute technology; on the contrary, it shows that technology itself is grounded in history, made more pliable and dynamic by close reading. This work attempts to redirect attention away from the formal components of an architecture typically conceived in static geometric terms toward a supple topology similar to the output of today’s digital algorithms. By casting Palladio in this light, this reading introduces a critical complexity of heterogeneous, as opposed to homogeneous, space-making, which breaks the bounds of the centuries-old humanist and enlightenment project. The results are a series of processes engendered by intrinsic, rather than extrinsic, movement, which reanimates the idea of close reading of history, now as a dynamic process. It is the critical reassessment of a formal logic, rather than the static formal project itself, that can become a necessary part of our culture of architecture today.
INTRODUCTION
THE WORK OF VENETIAN ARCHITECT ANDREA PALLADIO (1508-1580) has come down to us through many interpreters (Bertotti Scamozzi, Heinrich Wolfflin, Lord Burlington, James Ackerman, Rudolf Wittkower, Colin Rowe, and Manfredo Tafuri, among countless others) with a focus on its formal, ideal, and part-to-whole relationships, the organization of parts toward a synthetic or unified whole. But none of these interpreters, nor any known intellectual histories or theories of the work of Palladio, begin from a synoptic reading of Carlo Rainaldi’s Church of Santa Maria in Campitelli in Rome (0.1). This book changes that, with a different reading of the relationship between Rainaldi and Palladio serving as a key to the discussion and analysis presented here.
There are many brilliant and exhaustive studies of Campitelli, built almost a century after Palladio’s death, and many commentators have noted a dual influence on Rainaldi (1611-1691), suggesting that his work combines both the smooth figuration of the Baroque architect Francesco Borromini (1599-1667) and the gridded articulation of Palladio.
While Rainaldi may have been one of the first architects to synthesize Palladio’s work with Baroque form, that fact alone does not animate this analysis. There is something else, something different in Rainaldi’s church—as there is in Palladio’s work—that belies such easy categorizations. The carving of the architrave and pilasters at Campitelli is too precise to suggest the continuity of surface seen in Borromini, and while there is an echo of the double transepts seen in Palladio’s Venetian churches, San Giorgio Maggiore and II Redentore (0.2,0.3), there is also something unsettling in the space that is more difficult to articulate, a condition that leads the observer directly back to Palladio’s villa projects.
This unexpected condition in Santa Maria in Campitelli can be best described as a disarticulation, disjunction, or disaggregation—a breaking apart—of a conceptual (as opposed to an actual) whole, which produces a reading of two seeming fragments of a Latin cross. These fragments appear to be incongruent parts belonging to two entirely different wholes at different scales: one is a partial nave, the other, a partial apse (which seems to belong to a smaller original than the built nave). This immediately recalls Palladio’s breaking apart of traditional components—the classical portico, the transition space, the main central space, which over time have become aspects of the so-called “ideal villa”— from their traditional location and meaning. This disaggregation of parts, the uncoupling of objects from their location, meaning, or function, is one aspect of this analysis.
While Rainaldi’s work can be seen as a combination of precedents by both Borromini and Palladio, Palladio’s work can be seen as an explicit denial not only of the iconic value of Roman precedents but also of disciplinary precedents altogether, which had been formalized in the work of Filippo Brunelleschi, Leon Battista Alberti, and Donato Bramante. Various tropes of disaggregation can be traced in Palladio’s work, which were used perhaps unconsciously or naively and often for the first time.
O.l.
Carlo Rainaldi. Plan of Santa Maria in Campitelli, Rome, Italy,
1663-1667.
16
NTRODUCTION
These disaggregations can be understood when the relational and topological ideas of location and adjacency, as opposed to the more absolute geometric ideas of symmetry and proportion—that is, the simple shape and size of specific architectural elements— are closely considered. This act of close reading reveals a gradual but continual breakdown in Palladio’s work of an original whole volume, ultimately leaving parts with no whole. Thus, what is being argued here, perhaps for the first time, is the usefulness of seeing Palladio’s work as disaggregating, as refusing simple harmonic and unifying principles in favor of slippages, dissonances, and superpositions that have little to do with the figural and spatial exaggerations of his mannerist contemporaries (for example, Giulio Romano or Sebastiano Serlio) or even of much architecture today.
This book proposes a reading that differs from previous revisions of Palladio’s work. As opposed to the discourse of mannerism, which begins from a stable language and devolves from it, this reading proposes that the base condition of any architectural language is already unstable; it is difference waiting to be further disarticulated. While Robert Venturi’s Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (1966) and many of Colin Rowe’s essays identified mannerism and ambiguity as inflections from a given unity, the work that
0.2.
Andrea Palladio. Plan of San Giorgio Maggiore, Venice, Italy, c. 1566.
0.3.
Andrea
Palladio.
Plan ofll Redentore, Venice, Italy, c. 1577.
INTRODUCTION
17
follows suggests that Palladio’s project recognizes that a given architectural unity is always fictitious, fabricated by Western metaphysics to sustain ideas of truth, reality, and origin.
Like other practices, disciplines, and cultural fields, the development of architecture is neither progressive nor teleological. The temporal progression of architecture does not guarantee improvement. Le Corbusier was not a better architect than Palladio; he was a different architect facing different times and different possibilities for transformations of the norm. While it is important to understand a certain historical trajectory in architecture from Brunelleschi to Bramante to Palladio, in order to understand the Palladian project in a critical sense, it is necessary to cut that project off from its previous modes of legitimation. For example, Palladio is usually remembered for his so-called inventions. But invention implies the new, while Palladio’s contributions are more readily described by the term “transgression,” which suggests a displacement of something already existing—a repetition of difference, which, in Palladio’s work, is a transgression against classical ideals of proportion, symmetry, function, as well as narrative, iconic conventions, and is able to withstand being reabsorbed into yet another mode of legitimation.
After Wittkower’s typological research on Palladio and then Rowe’s linking of the Renaissance to modern architecture through a comparison of Palladio and Le Corbusier, a new arena of research and design was opened to architects in the 1960s and 1970s.
In his essay “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa” (1947), Rowe famously contrasts Palladio’s Villa Rotonda and Villa Foscari (known as Malcontenta) to Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye and Villa Stein at Garches—and the relationship of the villa type across centuries—against an analogy to paradise. For Rowe, Palladio’s Villa Rotonda represented the good life, while Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye stood for efficiency. Rowe writes that Palladio is concerned with a “logical disposition” of a type, which neither accounts for the architectural attributes of dense or sparse spaces in a conceptual sense, nor distinguishes between homogeneous and heterogeneous space, a discourse that animates this book. Present in Palladio’s work, and in particular in I Quattro Libri dell’Architettura (The Four Books of Architecture, 1570), is the notation of a different internal regulation, outside a purely abstract geometric or mathematical one. The complexities of the villas throw into question Wittkower’s and Rowe’s advocacy of a pure mathematical ideal. For example, the notation ABCBA, which Wittkower sees as a pure geometric reduction in Palladio’s work, is considered here an ideal in the most abstract sense: a possibility of relationships, not a norm; in other words, it has no stable value or moral condition attached to it.
Inspired by Wittkower’s and Rowe’s proposals, the close reading and analyses in this book were developed as a radically different way to understand architecture through the work of Palladio. Instead of focusing on typology, geometry, proportion, or history, the analytic drawings, models, and descriptive texts presented here place Palladio in a new light, marking a departure in a sense from contemporary concerns with aesthetic ideals of surface representation, parametric projection, or figure-ground reversals in favor of conceptual and topological arrangements of solid and void that are other than the literal solid and void described by geometry and function. In this sense, the book is not about Palladio, per se, but about a way of seeing architecture more generally. Working from drawings in Palladio’s I Quattro Libri that include the barchesse—literally, large estate barns—which were conveniently ignored by Wittkower and Rowe, the analysis proposes that the plans
themselves become autonomous entities that can be read and analyzed according to their own internal organizations and transformations rather than against a historical ideal.
In other words, rather than seeing Palladio as a mannerist, deviating from a Renaissance ideal, this book proposes a complex Palladio of indeterminate internal relationships, not founded on a known, classical language, but rather oscillating between possible interpretations of a hypothetical virtual as opposed to an ideal norm.
A number of theoretical questions underpin the concept of a “virtual” Palladio.
In the most basic terms, this work asks what else might be learned from an architect whose buildings and books have already been analyzed so exhaustively. The answer hinges on a phrase borrowed from the lexicon of French philosopher Jacques Derrida, “the possibility of undecidability,” or, in a slightly different sense, the notion of indeterminacy, which describes states of disarticulation, disjunction, or disaggregation. This book opens up Palladio to multiple readings, suggesting a latent instability in his projects that runs counter to a commonly held assumption that Palladio’s architecture can be thought of as ontologically or typologically whole, present, or complete. The distinction between a classical, synthetic project—one judged against conventions of reasonable scale, good proportion, or clear symmetry—and an unstable or disarticulated project is important. Rather than being pinned to an abstract idea of compositional, stylistic, or tectonic resolution that looks outside architecture for its norms and legitimation, Palladio’s legacy can be read as a confrontation with certain persistent internal architectural problems. For I Quattro Libri dell’Architettura, the Four Books, written near the end of his career, Palladio redrew his buildings as he wanted them to be known, as “virtual” projects. But he was also, in a sense, redrawing the very boundaries of the discipline at the time by proposing a series of radically different villa plans, each an exercise in double and triple readings. The layering of building, drawing, and text in the Four Books renders Palladio’s architectural projects conceptually open or incomplete, because no one mode of representation takes precedence over another, a condition that had deep resonances with the possibility of architecture in the 1960s and 1970s, just as it has today.
the idea of architecture as a representational discourse begins with Vitruvius in his Ten Books on Architecture. When Vitruvius used the term “firmitas,” he did not mean by this that buildings should stand up, because clearly all buildings must. Instead, what he meant was that buildings should look like they stand up, that is, they should signify their standing-up function. Similarly, all buildings must shelter or enclose space in order to function. To do this, all buildings will entail some form of material enclosure. No matter what this enclosure looks like, the physical structure inevitably will be compared to a visual referent—a tree, a nest, a cave, a beehive, or a ship. Many times these enclosures are designed, in addition to accommodating functions, to purposely look like or represent something. This type of semblance became a necessary
o
provision of architecture after Alberti, who reinforced, in his fifteenth-century treatise De Re Aedificatoria (On the Art of Building, 1452), which was modeled on Vitruvius’s books, that the Vitruvian triad of commodity, firmness, and delight was no longer a sufficient definition of what constitutes architecture, but rather that the structure of
architecture had to look like it held something up in addition to merely holding something up (that is, the column was also to be read as the sign of the column). Architects from Vitruvius to Alberti to Palladio inscribed into the discipline the concept that architecture, in addition to its being, must look and represent being.
All buildings in some way, therefore, fulfill the necessary functional requirements of enclosure, shelter, structure, comfort, and meaning, but not all buildings can be defined as architecture. Architecture, or something with architectural qualities, exists outside of— is in excess of and in spite of—and must in a sense overcome these given conditions. The disengagement of the signified from its sign—that is, the use of material as a sign rather than as real material—is one condition that distinguishes architecture from building and in particular, Palladio’s work from that of his contemporaries. For example, Serlio’s use of material, it could be argued, might challenge how material itself had previously been used, especially in his radical poche inventions, but it does not necessarily have a sign function. In Palladio’s work, material and structure take on the status of commentary on being and meaning in architecture, that is, they have a critical function.
At the time of Vitruvius’s Ten Books, architecture was seen as a representational art, as media. By the time of the Gothic churches, it had become strong media in the sense that it had the power to influence thought. In other words, for those who lacked the ability to comprehend liturgical Latin, the church presented the liturgy through drawings, paintings, frescoes, and the architecture of the church itself. Even Alberti, like Vitruvius, thought of architecture as representation; for example, a pediment signified a religious building. It is only when Bramante and then Palladio began to use architecture as a different form of media—no longer for its signifying and representational possibilities but internalized as a process of indexing these possibilities in the architecture itself—that the idea of the discipline began to change. Bramante first revived the Greek notion of centrality as representative of a new humanism and the relationship of the human body to the pure sphere, cube, and other geometric forms, ideas from which both the Tempietto and St. Peter’s evolved. Subsequently, in the Four Books, Palladio wrote about geometric forms, such as the purity of the circle and the square, and of his interest in Bramante. Although Palladio understood the approach of Vitruvius, Alberti, and Bramante, in his work, architecture is no longer merely a geometric representational artifact, but a linguistic and relational one in which many of the significant components—the column or the wall, for example—undercut or question the physical presence of the actual work. This questioning occurs in a specific way, not through external associations but from something internal to architecture. Palladio’s work in this sense both instantiates and questions ideas of architectural representation passed on to him through Alberti and Bramante, as well as the hegemony of the visible.
By transgressing the typical function of conventional architectural elements and the way in which they articulate spatial organizations (the doubled columns in the portico of the Palazzo Chiericati, for example, are unnecessary as structure or geometric order), Palladio altered the ways in which architecture signifies being.
Palladio does not begin from an a priori idea of type. Instead, it is as if he discovers by subtraction: by disarticulating, disaggregating, and dissipating conventional material, he “carves out” for the first time what could be called a villa typology, as a baseline condition. There was no villa type as a generic ideal in both a formal and functional sense
before Palladio, although Bramante produced the centralized forms with which Palladio then worked. The idea of the villa type as it evolved from a centralized form to a nine-square parti is one important element in understanding the reading of a virtual Palladio.
interestingly, despite its m i sc o N c E pti o n s, a sophisticated toy has also attempted an understanding of Palladian discourse. The game Gioco della Villa, or House Game, allows one to construct physically any number of generic villas from a set of three basic building blocks. As in an ideal villa, these blocks are labeled A, B, and C.
In an ideal villa, the condition ABA, as in the nine-square diagram, refers to a symmetrical condition about a center. To look at a model built of these blocks, which are homogeneous in relation to the set, gives little theoretical insight into the space of the villa or complex possibilities in the type of ABC notation in the analyses that follow, because they cannot account for the possibility of an A/B (or “A over B”) condition. The notations in the following analyses have to do with topological ideas such as adjacency, position, and superposition. For example, B does not refer to a specific size, shape, or proportion of a particular block (as it does in the game), but rather to an interstitial zone between a portico, or entry condition, A, and a main or central, figured space, C. When A is read over B or B is read over C, it means there is a superposition with respect to a virtual positioning and its corresponding adjacency as well as an implied heterogeneity. In such a case, the B space, because of a specific spatial arrangement, can be read as sharing aspects of the A or C positioning.
The possibility of reading multiple arrangements or overlaps in the projects through adjacencies and superpositions animates the theoretical aspect of Palladio’s work. In turn, these multiple readings produce a certain degree of undecidability in the work. In this sense, architecture—neither whole nor fully present—could be thought of as the impossibility of reducing a building to a synthetic reading of part-to-whole (whether in the two-dimensional space of a drawing or the three-dimensional space of a physical object). Until Bramante, the theoretical project of architecture was to reify or confirm the possibility of a synthetic relationship of part-to-whole, although there was little conception of what “part-to-whole” could even be at the beginning of the Renaissance. This is exemplified in his project for St. Peter’s, the final crystallization of such an idea, before Serlio and Palladio begin to break down the notion of synthesis.
As previously mentioned, Palladio introduced a new type—the villa—and with it, a new set of architectural relationships: en suite spaces, like beads on a string; no interstitial spaces or corridors; no hierarchy of servant and served spaces. Whereas the ideal villa diagram would be described by the nine-square ABA organization from side to side (a side A bay, a central B bay, and a side A bay) and front to back, Palladio’s villas presumed an ABA organization from side to side and an ABCBA relationship from front to back (first, a portico or entrance A bay; second, a transition or B bay; third, a central, figured C bay; then a rear B and A bay). Palladio goes even further by introducing overlaps and superpositions as a blurring of one space over another, thus making the relationship between spaces—rather than the geometry of individual spaces themselves— more important.
Whereas a plan might previously be read as comprising only discrete A, B, and C components, as in the House Game building blocks, Palladio makes possible the reading of A and B overlaid on one another, or A/B. In order to restore a normative typological condition of ABCBA (where each space is both literally and conceptually distinct), Palladio must be “pulled apart.” Two very different projects address this idea of disaggregation. First, while the Palazzo Thiene seems to be a square building because of its internal symmetries, the extra portico bay added to the front disrupts this ideality.
If the building (as it is—including the portico bay) is considered the base condition, then the square could be seen as subtracted from the overall composition; conversely, if the internal square is seen as the base condition, then the portico is seen as additive. This produces a double reading of the portico as either compressed into the volume of the building or added onto another volume. Second, in the Palazzo Chiericati in Vicenza, the spaces are so compressed that there are no neutral spaces. While there is an implied ABCBA condition from front to back, there are several superpositions as well, namely A/B, B/C, C/B, B/C, and B/A in the rear. The arrangement of so many overlays and superpositions produces both a dense space and a strong interstitiality, that is, a space within a space, or a space between a space, as well as a heterogeneous (as opposed to a homogeneous) spatial condition. In other words, the spaces of Chiericati are not merely a solid and a void, an A and a B, but a solid-void-void or a double void.
Many of the villas deny the singular and univocal reading of homogeneous space, and in fact begin the disaggregation of the space by using double and triple overlays.
In each of the Palladian works analyzed here, there exists a process of addition, subtraction, or compression, as well as a play of literal geometry against virtual geometry. In that sense, Palladio might be thought of as one of the first architects to deal with a spatial syntax, a structure that attempts to downplay the meaning of the relationship of its parts, in which the structure is more important than its meaning. Such a structure inscribes its own internal strategies with references that are no longer to the body, to Christ, or to God, but to the decomposition of what were then thought to be traditional typological structures. Palladio’s two Venetian churches, II Redentore and San Giorgio Maggiore, for example, are exaggerated decompositions of what were either Roman wall churches or Greek cross churches.
Palladio’s development of a spatial syntax—which brings architecture closer to the idea of written language than his mannerist contemporaries—represents the beginning of another discursive strategy in architecture, one that makes the idea of heterogeneity possible through disarticulation or decomposition, as opposed to compositional strategies, such as the articulation of traditional part-to-whole structures. In this way, Palladio’s plans move away from the representational characteristics of Alberti’s projects, where discrete components correspond to programmatic or narrative structures, and produce a nonrepresentational architecture. In Palladio, the traditional architectural elements (parts) represent neither a whole object nor the mere resolution of function. While an articulated architecture comprised of simple A, B, and C parts often presupposes a programmatic function, a disarticulated or disaggregated architecture attempts to reconstruct the idea of a complex work outside of, or beyond, the necessities of program, function, and structure. Palladio’s plans instead decompose. This is one definition of architectural heterogeneity, a decomposition or process of internal referencing.
This reading of Palladio differs from a strictly historicist account and can be seen in Palladio’s own drawings, which do not rely on the history of representation or iconography to become legible. Rather, it is the possibility to read specific conditions of decomposition or disarticulation that animates the Palladian project against historically reductive analyses, such as Wittkower’s diagrams, which leave out the internal architectural qualities of Palladio’s villas by reducing them to a series of organizational and geometric lines. But reducing these projects to lines defines architecture as pure proportional geometry, when in fact the Palladian project, it could be argued, has little to do with proportion or geometry, which are external to architecture, and more to do with topological strategies of relationship and difference. These strategies break down part-to-whole relationships to produce another condition of complexity requiring a different form of close reading. They emphasize concomitantly the breaking down of the normative relationship of signifier and signified and, in turn, become critical and political within the discipline of architecture.
For example, the Palladian strategy of relationship rather than pure geometry moves away from the idea of the centralized, static, part-to-whole plan, an idea-form that Bramante makes material in his Prevedari etching (c. 1480), for example, to a disaggregated, dynamic series of heterogeneous spatial overlaps. The centralized plan of Bramante starts from a cruciform in a square, an overlay that produces a nine-square plan, where the central bay is the traditional crossing of a Latin church. The suggestion of an ideal nine-square plan is the typical reading of the centralized symmetry of the Villa Rotonda, where it appears from the exterior that there is no dominant or main entry portico. However, this conventional reading misunderstands Rotonda’s internal complexities, and in the sequence of villas after Rotonda, Palladio opens up the possibility of a different reading, a different understanding of the object, by frontalizing the space of the nine-squares through several different strategies; for example, by creating layers of space that privilege a front-to-back organization over side-to-side. If the plan were literally symmetrical, there would be a similar condition from front to back— discounting functional necessity—and from side to side; in other words, an ABCBA notation (or what is known as a plaid grid). This diagram, which appears at Palladio’s Palazzo Thiene, reappears in various transformations throughout the history of architecture; for example, with a stair in the B bay in the plan of Giuseppe Terragni’s Casa del Fascio (1936) in Como, Italy, which has a nine-square plaid grid or ABCBA organization.
The “ideal” ABCBA condition—and the simplicity of thinking of it as somehow underpinning the Palladian project, as many commentators do—is shown in the ideal diagrams in the analyses to follow. Palladio uses an en suite organization in the progression of spaces from front to back in unusual ways. The A bay is often shifted into the main volume of the building, creating a series of dense spatial layers moving toward the center and the rear of the building. These manipulations of the object are recorded or inscribed internally. In the Palazzo Thiene, for example, this inscription or imprinting is manifest in the highly articulated poche of the internal walls.
When a plan, such as the Palazzo Thiene, has an ABCBA front-to-back organization and an ACA side-to-side, or lateral, organization, it can no longer be read as an ideal cross within a cube, because there is a directionality or preferred layering perpendicular to the

dominant axis of entry. In Palladio’s work, a square or rectangular space often will have a “grain” perpendicular to, rather than parallel to, the axis of movement. A grain in space is like a block of wood, as something with a side grain and an end grain. Palladian space is therefore very different than Bramantian space, where there is no graining, no preferred layering of the space. For the first time, Palladio takes void space, or space that is essentially homogeneous, and gives it a grain, inscribing it as essentially heterogeneous.
The addition of a grain and the possibilities of superposition and overlapping spatial layers introduce into architecture a virtual—as opposed to literal—condition in space.
MOST ANALYSES of architecture in general and of Palladio specifically begin from an assumption of an original synthesis, of a classical conception of parts related to a whole. But suppose that there is another way of analyzing his work— to reveal latent instabilities—that lie suppressed by this synthetic model. These latent instabilities make up what could be called the heterogeneous architectural potential in Palladio’s work, which could be defined then as the possible topological arrangements of solid and void that are other than the literal solid and void described by the physical presence of geometry and function.
The consideration of conditions beyond the literal begs the question, What is, so to speak, the being (or simply, the function) of architecture if not merely to enclose, shelter, or mean something? Buildings can be quite functional without any hint of architecture. But architecture, like some forms of art, literature, and music, it could be argued, questions the assumptions of the normative, the status quo, and the synthetic. It is through this internal questioning that architecture maintains a critical capacity and is inherently political and ideological. Rather than being considered for its abstract ideas of formal resolution (through the compositional, stylistic, or historical lens of Wittkower and Rowe, for example) or for its ideological and political aspects that look outside architecture for norms and legitimation (as in the work of Aureli), Palladio’s legacy might instead be read as a confrontation with certain persistent architectural conditions, which in Palladio’s work are intrinsically animated rhetorical devices.
In a linguistic sense; these rhetorical devices turn away, through repetition and recurrence, from their conventional meaning and begin to distinguish architecture from building; for example, Palladio’s articulation or marking of the corner as significant— the choice to use a square column to turn the corner of a loggia of otherwise round columns when a round column would do just as well, as in the barchesse of the Villa Pisani Bagnolo. The square corner column is not necessary to structure or enclose the building (Brunelleschi and Bramante use several alternatives to turn corners at the Ospedale degli Innocenti in Florence and Santa Maria della Pace in Rome, respectively), but it is one of the elements that architecture can engage with in a critical way by replacing the functional or structural purpose of an element with a conceptual one. The square column at the corner in Pisani allows for a set of undecidable or double readings; it can be read as a series of three differentiated planes or as a continuous arcaded enclosure.
There are also recurring conditions that disengage Palladio’s work from traditional interpretations of classical Roman architecture. For example, his use of the portico on a
small country house detaches it from its symbolic and iconic content. Although the portico finds different uses in different contexts, it is not dependent, in Palladio’s work, on its context. For example, the compression of the portico or entry space into the body of the building, as in Chiericati, is a Palladian condition repeated in many of the villa projects, which runs counter to accepted rules of Roman classicism. This compression also produces an “A over B” (A/B) superposition, a heterogeneous spatial condition.
Such heterogeneous spatial conditions begin to undermine absolute rules of proportion and scale, function, and meaning. The analyses that follow hold that certain rhetorical or conceptual devices (the articulation of the corner, the relationship of front to back, the ABCBA organization, poche, etc.), as used by Palladio do not necessarily refer to accepted normative conditions of building at the time or to conventional meanings, but instead refer to some other possibility of architecture. Architectural elements (physical objects— the portico or the column—or conceptual devices—compression, expansion, figure, ground) recur in Palladio’s work and make possible the turning away from their traditional functions. They begin, through superposition or overlay, to produce conditions of both undecidability and disaggregation of parts to the whole, conditions manifest and read in both the three-dimensional space of the building and the two-dimensional space of the drawing. The possibility of such a double (or sometimes triple) reading of traces, marks, or imprints are products of what could be called close reading. These recurring elements are not traditional shifts in proportion, scale, or materiality, for example, but rather can be seen as unstable signifiers disengaged from their symbolic and semantic meaning, and thus from their signifieds. This disengagement (detachment, disaggregation) articulates the difference between the “virtual”—consisting of implied conditions of presence beyond the literal—and the “ideal”—conditions of pure form.
At base, all Palladian work has a front-to-back ABCBA symmetry in addition to its visually apparent frontal facade symmetry. As mentioned earlier, the virtual elements of the villa are identified by location and adjacency—a set of conceptual relationships— as opposed to proportion, scale, or materiality, which are the traditional identifiers of formal analysis. These virtual elements are also usually identified in Palladio’s work by a change in the way poche is deployed; for example, in the way the poche articulates the main figural space differently than the spatially neutral side spaces. In contrast to the ideal, classical conditions of harmonic presence, these elements produce what is here being called architecture, which is considered different than building or design.
Traditional building or design can be said to involve the creation of symbols that resolve and clarify function and meaning through a one-to-one relationship between the sign and the signified, ultimately preserving the metaphysical project that began with Alberti. In architecture after Alberti, the potential exists for the questioning of that very project, and for the possibility of developing other relationships between the sign and the signified. This kind of questioning leads to what can be called disciplinary exceptions, of which it can be argued that Palladio’s work is an example. Within any discipline, there are normative conditions of synthesis and unity, and there are ruptures or breaks in that discipline’s history—exceptions to the rules.
In Palladio’s work, the most active exceptions are those that begin to disengage from the notion of a compositional whole, such as the portico and the poche. In the
Palazzo della Torre, for example, Palladio articulates the walls on the exterior of the building with niches and engaged columns, while leaving the walls on the inside of the building flat. This turning inside-out of the poche is not merely a version of a traditional technique. Rather, it is an inversion of a normalized classical technique that differentiates inside from outside through the use of niches, pilasters, etc. These exceptions belong to the critical matrix of differences that both separates architecture from building and distinguishes the Palladian project from others, not only of Palladio’s time, but also of today. It is the nature of these differences that will be seen in the following analyses. It could be argued that the digital promised the possibility of heterogeneous space but has instead succeeded in reproducing homogeneous space, in varying degrees of complexity. If the act of close reading has any resonance today, one valence surely must be a rethinking of Palladio.
THE NINE-SQUARE IS ONE OF THE s E MINAL, perhaps originary, diagrams in the history of architecture relating part to whole in terms of symmetry and proportion. Its dialectical opposite, the four-square diagram, is seen less often in architecture because its center is a point—the crossing of perpendicular axes—rather than a space, which occupies the center of the nine-square diagram (0.4). Since the age of humanism, it has been common practice that man occupies the center, thus the nine-square proliferated as a foundational diagram in architecture through modernism. Because all spaces of the nine-square are equal in size, their subtle complexity is only in the differences marked by the position of the exterior and interior sides. These squares can be given a simple notation denoting location (importantly, not shape or size): “A” for the four outer corners, “B” for the four exterior central squares, and “C” for the center square.
It is generally thought that Rotonda is the villa par excellence, exhibiting architectural unity and harmony, qualities potentially embodied in the nine-square diagram. However, when Palladio’s work is more closely examined, pure nine-square geometry begins to dissolve. To analyze the villas in terms of idealized, proportional geometric parts gives little theoretical insight into the work. In an ideal nine-square villa, for example, the notation ACA or BCB refers to symmetry about a center, C. In a typical analysis of architectural components, the notations A, B, C would refer to three sets of proportionally articulated volumes corresponding to rooms in a villa. In this work, symmetry and proportion do not provide a substantial theoretical underpinning, although they may be referred to as normative conditions against which Palladio works. In the analyses here, the notation B, for example, does not refer to a specific shape, size, or proportion of a particular space (as it does typically), but rather to an interstitial or transition zone between a portico or entry, indicated by the notation A, and a central or figured space, C.
This book presents three types of information—drawings, models, and texts— which together constitute a different theoretical critique of Palladio’s work. The first set of drawings are geometric diagrams that, in their serial nature, establish the basic premise of the following analyses, that there is no stable ground against which to read Palladio’s work. In these diagrams, the multiplicity or heterogeneity of space is implied by the varying scale and location of a series of ideal squares and their relationship to the
main villa body, the surrounding courtyards, loggias, and garden walls. The diagrams in this series for each villa project begin with a simple square, drawn to define as closely as possible the literal limits of the plan. The subsequent shifting front to back and side to side and scaling of the original square reveals the impossibility of reducing the plans to a single, synthetic geometric diagram. Here, Wittkower’s “average” or ideal geometric configurations are put into question.
Building on the instability of the strictly two-dimensional geometric diagrams, the second set of drawings begins to define more specific characteristics of each of the twenty villa projects. In these axonometric drawings, Palladio’s plans are analyzed to establish the difference between the “ideal” and the “virtual” in their constituent parts. Rendered volumetrically, these parts are coded A, B, or C and by color—white, gray, or black.
The notations are A for a portico or entry space, drawn as white volumes (the notation A, or A-prime, is used to identify the “virtual” location of a portico, or, in other words, one that is not literally there but conceptually present); B for a transition or circulation space, drawn as gray volumes; and C for a central or main space, drawn as black volumes.
There are two major characteristics of this notational system. First, annotated with explanatory texts, the drawings illustrate the relation of actual components to both an “ideal” base condition (relative to Palladio’s work, to the villa type) and one of many possible “virtual” readings of spatial adjacencies and overlaps. The ideal state is identified as the most straightforward version of an ABCBA front-to-back organization, drawn by layering A, B, and C volumes without any overlaps. Second, the drawings record the spatial density created by the superposition of two components of any virtual condition, for example, the portico space at Chiericati pressed into the loggia. When the parts are collapsed into a single axonometric (the virtual state), overlaps between A and B, A and C, B and C, or A, B, and C are shown in varying densities of lines. However, no reading produced by these notations is “better,” more stable conceptually, or preferred than the others; they merely contain different information. It is the fact that these readings fluctuate, and none is dominant, that creates conditions of spatial heterogeneity.
As the villas become more complex and disaggregated, the distinction between ideal and virtual also begins to blur. Because the ideal diagrams describe an unattainable
A	B	A
B	C	B
A	B	A
A	A
A	A
0.4.
Nine-square and foursquare diagrams.
base condition, they will be seen to transpose into “unseen” or virtual conditions; while the virtual diagrams describe distortions of an ideal state, they are also closest to the actual volumetric expression of Palladio’s original drawings, now coded to show latent overlaps or spatial densities.
The findings in these drawings are further illustrated in twenty diagrammatic volumetric models—one for each villa—which show in static objects the multiple spatial possibilities in adjacency and superposition. Like the drawings, the model parts are coded by color: porticos, A, are white; transition spaces, B, are gray; central volumes, C, are black. The models also differentiate between spaces that can be read as conceptually active and spaces that can be read as conceptually passive. For example, when an A space is thought to be compressed into a B space (see Chiericati), the resulting A/B space can be read as conceptually active—that is, readings of A and B are equally present. This is shown as a “void” in the model, indicated by a framed volume of corresponding color, to reinforce the idea that neither notation is primary. When an A space is thought to be overlaid onto a B space (and there is no implied compression; see the Villa Valmarana), the resulting overlapping A/B space can be thought of as conceptually passive. This is shown as a solid in the color of the primary notation, either A or B. An overlap of A/B/C produces both conceptually active and passive readings; the representation of this condition as either solid or void in the models is based on which notation is primary (see the Villa Foscari). The “void” notation—a framed volume—is also used to indicate an absence or trace of one part or another (a “virtual” element).
The models also differentiate between figural solid and figural void spaces in how they treat the C, or central, volumes. Figural solids (where the space defines the volume) are rendered as solid volumetric blocks, while figural voids (where the wall poche defines the volume) are rendered as open volumes, seen in the models as an extruded wall. Spaces thought to be conceptually inactive have no volumetric articulation and are notated only in flat relief. Finally, spaces considered neutral—that is, neither active nor passive but seen to be more significant than inactive spaces; those that may help define a certain internal organization but do not produce positive or negative valences themselves—are shown as simple extruded or framed volumes of corresponding color and type, A, B, or C.
This language, or “modeling grammar” (o.s), is used in the analysis of each project. By rendering spaces by color and as only solid or “void” (rather than by adding many different color or material codings), the models suggest the complexities inherent in Palladio’s work without resolving or reducing them to pure geometric relationships. While the component parts are the same in each villa, their deployments—that is, their syntactic rules—are different, making each villa a unique example of Palladio’s work, rather than one in a series of variations on an ideal. While the models focus on the analysis of a primary reading, they also inscribe and suggest secondary and tertiary readings of Palladio beyond what the drawings show. Expressing the idea of conceptual activity and passivity as literal solids and voids in the physical objects, the models, in one way, demonstrate the possibility of reading multiple spatial conditions in a single plan or architectural object. In another way, the models are not simply representations of many possible combinations of the A, B, and C notations; they are, in themselves, spatial propositions.
0.5. Diagram of modeling grammar.
The twenty projects are organized in three categories. It is important to note that, similar to their presentation in the Four Books, the villas are not arranged chronologically, by patron, or by location. Rather, they are arranged typologically to demonstrate a series of transformations from the most “ideal,” beginning with Rotonda, to the most “virtual,” the Villa Sarego at Santa Sophia, where the dissipation or disaggregation of parts is at its most extreme. These categories—first. The Classical Villas: The Impending Crisis of Synthesis; second, The Barchessa Projects: Extensions into the Landscape; and third, The Virtual Villa: The Dissipation of the Villa Type—identify in Palladio’s work a series of significant critical developments.
The first seven villas are composed mainly of a villa body without any garden or barchessa development. These range from the externally symmetrical, four-portico Rotonda to the Villa Cornaro, and suggest in very subtle ways the disaggregated potential of the later projects. The suggestion of a barchessa in the front colonnade of Valmarana, or the first tentative extensions out from the main body of Cornaro, for example, leads to the first of the “Barchessa Projects,” Malcontenta.
The second seven villas develop from Malcontenta, which is pinned between lateral garden walls with no actual barchesse. These garden walls transform into fully articulated barns and outbuildings in the Villa Emo, the Villa Poiana, and the Villa Zeno, while in the Villa Angarano the simple gesture of the closed forecourt, like a Roman bath, opens up new possibilities for the relationship between the main villa body, the barchesse, and the landscape. While the main body of the Villa Trissino recalls in a more elaborate way the striated and four-portico organization of Rotonda, the compound terracing and arcades of the porticos and barchesse push the idea of the extension into the landscape to an extreme condition.
In the third set of villas, beginning with the Villa Thiene and Villa Godi, the first of the “Virtual Villas,” the relationship between the main body of the villa and the barchesse almost entirely dissolves. These last six villas are not only villa/barchessa schemes, but they also witness the slow dissolution or disaggregation of the villa body into the vestiges of a villa. In the Villa Barbaro, for example, the barchesse dominate the villa, which itself recalls Malcontenta in its simple cruciform organization. Ultimately, in the Villa Repeta and Santa Sophia, the villa body disappears entirely, leaving only the “virtual” villa, and the cycle from seemingly ideal to virtual is complete.
The twenty building analyses that follow, framed by the historical and theoretical arguments of the previous pages, elaborate what is the most significant aspect of this project, that attempting to locate any single synthetic or homogeneous reading in Palladio’s work is not only a near impossible task, but one so fraught with misconception that doing so would almost render Palladio’s achievements historically insignificant.
On the contrary, Palladio is as important today as ever because of the nuance and complexity of his projects in relation to precedent, type, and analytic intensity. At the same time, the close reading comprising the following analyses is as much about Palladio as it is about the importance today of close reading itself.

PART I
THE
CLASSICAL
VILLAS
THE IMPENDING CRISIS OF SYNTHESIS
VILLA ROTONDA
VICENZA, 1566
the villa almerico c A pr A, known as Rotonda, is the first project in the series “The Classical Villas: The Impending Crisis of Synthesis,” which begins with the appropriation and deconstruction of the meaning and symbolism of the portico, a vernacular element transferred from the pagan temple of the Greeks to the public buildings of Rome (1.2). Relevant to this appropriation of symbols is Palladio’s own drawing of the Pantheon in Rome, of which he made extensive studies. In the portico of the Pantheon, the most important elements are the eight columns of the Corinthian order and the double pediment, which is a recurring element in Palladio’s work, from the villas to the Venetian churches, San Giorgio Maggiore and 11 Redentore. Palladio deploys the portico as a more generic formal component, in a way that reduces its iconic value as a frontispiece and emphasizes its notational properties, characterized by its component parts. By stripping the Pantheon portico of its iconicity, Palladio makes room for reinterpreting the architectural possibilities of columns and pediments and their location without being bound to their classical organization and placement.
The relationship of the portico of the Pantheon to the portico of Rotonda illustrates Palladio’s transposition of elements as notational signs and their use in creating heterogeneous spatial conditions. For example, the lower pediment of the Pantheon is similar in size to that of Rotonda (1.3). However, instead of eight Corinthian columns, at Rotonda there are six Doric columns comprising the portico. The shift is not, then, in the actual size or width of the column, but in the space between them. Another subtle transformation of the precedent is evident in the relationship of the portico to the main building volume.
1.1.
Analytic model of Villa Rotonda.
At the Pantheon, the lower string course on the body of the building is moved down to correspond with the bottom line of the capital, while at Rotonda, the string course aligns with the architrave and the bottom of the pediment. This is another important Palladian condition: to carry the string courses through the main body of the building and the porticos in order to deny the classical distinction and articulation between building mass and portico element. In this way Palladio manipulates a series of static, homogeneous historical relationships and proportions that produce dynamic, heterogeneous spaces. Within the scope of Palladio’s projects, Rotonda is the only building where the four porticos relate to the scale and size of the portico of the Pantheon; thus the precedent is clear. While referring to that precedent, Palladio recomposes a series of parts—the columns and pediments— that oscillate between alignment and misalignment, which ultimately emphasizes the villa’s organization as unstable.
1.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Rotonda in The Four Books of Architecture, 1570.
1.3.
Facades of the Pantheon and Rotonda overlaid.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE analytic MODEL FOR R ot 0 N DA reveals important differences between what is drawn by Palladio and what is typically thought to exist in the plan. Several modeling techniques help establish in this first project what has previously been called a “modeling grammar” (see Introduction), and these devices are legible in all subsequent models. For example, the four porticos of Rotonda, although identical in scale and all component parts (stairs, columns, pediment, etc.), are shown in two different ways.
The staircases of the front and back porticos are thought to be conceptually inactive; therefore they are represented literally and physically as solid objects. The covered portion of the porticos proper are shown as solid white A volumes, which sit adjacent to the gray B volumes defining the first interior transition bays on either side of the central drum. The solid A volumes produce the first layer of a five-part ABCBA front-to-back organization. The staircases of the two side porticos, on the other hand, are shown as framed white A volumes, indicating that they are conceptually neutral, that is, they do not register as part of an internal organization. The side porticos proper are shown without any volumetric articulation; they are conceptually inactive and are used to distinguish the side staircases from the main body of the villa. The internal organization of the plan is shown in the model as simultaneously a three- and five-part organization. The major volumes—gray B transition bays front and back and the black C central drum— make up the internal BCB layers of the overall plan. Two minor bays—shown as framed gray B volumes surrounding the C space—emphasize the level of internal complexity, in the layering of space, in what is a seemingly simple plan. Finally, the cruciform figure of the central space is shown in the extensions of the solid black volume from the center toward the four porticos.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THE FIRST GEOMETRIC abstraction of r o to N da is a single square overlaid on a symmetrical cruciform, which takes into account the main body of the villa (to the outboard edge of its exterior walls) and the four porticos (1.4). A second abstraction transposes the large cruciform defined by the porticos into the cruciform figure of the central drum and its adjacent passages (1.5). A third diagram establishes a two-square proportion from portico to portico. Because the overall plan is symmetrical, this diagram represents both side-to-side (lateral) and front-to-back dimensions (1.6). In the next several diagrams, the original square is shifted front and back to hold various edges internally. When one edge is held—for example, in a fourth diagram of Rotonda, where the squares shift front and back by one internal bay—there is a slight misalignment despite the villa’s apparent symmetry (1.7). In a fifth diagram, the center square shifts into two new positions so that its edges align with the narrow central lateral passageway and the overlap of the two resulting squares defines this space. In a sixth diagram, the two squares are pulled apart by the dimension of the lateral opening (1.8,1.9). In both cases,
even with an apparent geometric regularity, the outboard edges of the slipped squares do not align with the outboard edge of the portico steps. These misalignments suggest a reading of the narrow passageway as not simply cut away from the mass of the main villa (though that is its actual condition), but as a space acting as both a compressive and tensile force in relation to the porticos in their spatial dimension.
When the slipped squares are adjusted to align with the outboard edge of the portico steps, two other inconsistencies appear. The amount of slippage defines the centerline of the walls of the lateral passage, as opposed to an edge, as well as the inboard edge of the exterior villa walls as opposed to the outside dimension (1.10). When the same slipped square strategy is applied along the lateral axis, where the edges of the square align to the portico steps and the inboard edges of the walls, the distance between the two squares is the same as the clear width of the front-to-back passage, which indicates the asymmetry of both the side-to-side and front-to-back openings despite their apparent symmetry relative to the center and to the porticos (i.n). Squares with the same internal dimension, when aligned to the portico columns on either side, describe in their overlap the width of the front-to-back portico bay (1.12). When squares equal to the width of the portico bay are extended in both the side-to-side and front-to-back axes, again they describe the difference in width between the side-to-side and front-to-back openings, although there are few other alignments in these squares (1.13,1.14).
ROTONDA IS OFTEN CONSIDERED THE MOST “ I D EAL” of Palladio’s villas for its four porticos and biaxially symmetrical appearance. It is also the most well known in popular circles and thus is thought to be the “easiest” to understand. But these easily discernible exterior characteristics belie the fact that the interior is organized by two different strategies, which have little to do with the exterior. The first is a spatial layering across the major front-to-back axis. The second, the reciprocal of the first, creates a spatial grain parallel to the cross-axis. These axes even have different widths, creating different dimensions in the transition spaces. There are slightly wider connections from the front and back porticos to the central space than in the same connection made from the lateral porticos. Though Rotonda is normally thought to be the paradigm of bilateral
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
1.4. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Single
square overlaid on a symmetrical cruciform.
1.5. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Large
cruciform defined by the porticos transposed into the cruciform figure of the central drum and its adjacent passages.
1.6.	Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Two-square
proportion from portico to portico.
1.7. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Squares shift front and back, revealing slight plan misalignments.
1.8. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Two squares define the central passageway.
1.9. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Two squares pulled apart by the dimension of the lateral opening.
1.10. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Slipped
squares define the centerline of the walls of the lateral passage, as opposed to an edge.
1.11. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Distance between the two squares is the same as the clear width of the front-to-back passage.
1.12. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Two squares describe in their overlap the width of the front-to-back portico bay.
1.13. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Squares
extended side to side describe the width of the central front-to-back opening.
1.14. Geometric diagram of Rotonda. Squares extended front to back describe the width of the central side-to-side opening.
1.15.
Ideal and
virtual
diagrams
ofRotonda.
Spatial
layering from
front to back.
1.16.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Rotonda. Spatial layering from side to side.
symmetry, one possible articulation of an “ideal” diagram reinforces a layered reading from front to back. The related virtual diagram illustrates the subtlety of Rotonda, in which the dominant central figure, C, with its extensions toward the porticos, slightly overlaps the front and back transition spaces, B (1.15). In a second virtual diagram, which privileges the side-to-side reading, the transition spaces and central figure are more dominant (1.16). Together, these two diagrams demonstrate the problem of assuming Rotonda’s plan to be biaxially symmetrical.
The plan of Rotonda can be read initially as a cruciform in a square parti overlaid with a circle in a square organization. While the villa appears to have a conventional four-square organization, in fact it is not a conventional four-square villa type. The foursquare is implied in the presence of the four identical porticos, although they bear little relationship to the interior rooms and central drum in terms of width and proportion. There is a deviation from pure type, however, in the articulation of the transition bay between the front portico and the central drum. A secondary lateral axis or grain, a slice of space, is established by the relationship of the side niches to the doorways running perpendicular to the dominant front-to-back axis (1.17). In this sense, the building is not merely a series of interpenetrating volumes—cruciform, circular, domical, or square— but is a series of contiguous lateral layers.
The first and most important distinction between the porticos in the front and back and the porticos on the sides is their differentiated connection to the central drum, a relationship that can be read in two ways. First, while the front and back porticos appear to be outboard of the main square villa volume, the side porticos appear to be embedded in a lateral interior volume that is the width of the central drum (1.18). In other words, the front and back porticos can be read as additive elements in relation to the overall organization, despite their literal symmetry about the central drum, and the side porticos could be read as subtractive elements in relation to an implied internal continuity of the main lateral axis.
Second, the front-to-back connection is wider than the side-to-side connection, but because of a pilaster placed into the wall at the neck of the central drum, from inside the central drum the two connections appear to be the same width (1.19). This creates a disturbance between the implied continuity of space in the lateral axis (where the pilasters are absent) and the implied discontinuity in the progression from the front portico through the transition space to the central drum, a condition that can be seen clearly in the way the central drum and adjacent passageways are identified in the ideal diagrams. The articulation of this transition space differentiates the lateral axis from the front-to-back axis. This is one of the most important Palladian conditions: the possibility of a virtual asymmetry within an otherwise symmetrical organization. This condition creates an overall instability with respect to the relationship between the porticos and the interior spaces, and clearly delineates the difference between the conceptual and the functional in the Palladian project. There is little structural, programmatic, or symbolic function for the four sets of additional pilasters along the front-to-back axis, but the absence of such a detail in the lateral axis initiates the reading of the villa as layered and differentiated—in other words, disaggregated—within the framework of an exterior biaxial, four-square symmetry.
1.17. Diagram of Rotonda. Contiguous lateral layers.
1.18. Diagram of Rotonda. Front and back porticos appear to be outboard of the main villa volume, while the side porticos appear to be embedded in the interior volume.
1.19. Diagram of Rolonda. Wider front-to-back connection than side-to-side 1.20. Diagram of Rotonda. Nine-square plan, made equal by the addition of thin pilasters.
1.21. Diagram of Rotonda. Disjunction between interior and exterior in the placement of windows, niches, and doors.
1.22. Diagram of Rotonda. Excluded walls affect interior organization.
While Rotonda can also be classified as a nine-square plan (1.20), it is not symmetrical on the interior; rather, it is layered across the main axis. Moving through the portico door (the bottom entry on Palladio’s drawing), there is a compression of A, B, and C. It is the gasket of the B space that produces the layering. It is in one sense elongated across the main axis and in another compressed perpendicular to the lateral axis. This arrangement reveals two layers in the central C bay. The spaces on the sides of the central space are not equivalent and are not square spaces, as one would expect if the villa were bilaterally symmetrical. The rooms along the lateral axis appear compressed or flattened out. These secondary spaces are turned horizontally so that there is a series of layers that appear to be symmetrical on the outside, because of the four portico arrangement in a square plan, but are not actually symmetrical on the inside. The rooms in the central lateral axis approximate in proportion the first layer of rooms but are in fact thinner in their front-to-back dimension. This compression renders the cruciform organization unstable and asymmetrical when read internally from the plan, although on the outside it appears to be stable and symmetrical. This instability stems from the fact that the cruciform figure is simultaneously symmetrical in relation to the exterior and asymmetrical in relation to the interior. Thus, both its ideal and virtual conditions are active at the same time.
The layered plan diagram produces a secondary reading of an entirely different building. If Rotonda were entered through the side, the axis of entry would run parallel to the lateral layers or with the grain of the building as opposed to against the grain.
The subject enters across the grain and, as a result of this orientation, can register a progression through space as well as understand distance and dimension, which is made more difficult if movement is with the grain. Rotonda is thought to be very simple and straightforward, and yet it contains a clear double reading between an external neutrality of an articulated, classical order and an internal spatial compression, a disarticulation from an ideal type.
From the exterior of the villa, the side window in the first layer of rooms appears to be in the center of the side space surrounding the portico. From the interior, however, it is clear that that window is in fact to one side of a tripartite composition of niches and windows that is symmetrical about the center of the room. This internal composition has little reference to either the exterior or the next layer of rooms in the villa (1.21). There is a single lateral axis across the first series of inside rooms with no other poche articulation, which gives the lateral layer a dominant reading. Against this lateral reading is a series of blunted axes perpendicular to this dominant axis: one main axis that connects from front to back through the villa; and two others that are part of a tripartite poche organization that places a minor symmetrical axis in the room shifted off of the continuous front-to-back axis. It is important to note that in Palladian villas there are only implied axes with no literal corridors, but rather en suite adjacencies from room to room. It is the placement of the internal niches in the poche that defines the minor axes. The rooms comprising the four quadrants of the villa, which are not parts of a whole, only suggest the presence of a central space without literally defining it as an enclosed room. This condition will appear again at the Palazzo della Torre, where the enclosure, which ordinarily would be held together in some way by poche, is never in fact joined by any kind of poche.
It is also important to notice that the striation in the plan is taken up by the poche, which allows for the central drum to be perfectly symmetrical. Thus the center can no longer be read as part of a layer. Both the reading of symmetry and the loss of layering are restored in the center. The exterior condition—the ideal cruciform of Bramante— appears symmetrical, as does the interior condition—the ideal dome of Brunelleschi. Between these two conditions is what could be called the interstitial space of Palladio, which is overlaid onto a set of frontally oriented, lateral layers. In one sense, Rotonda relates to the ideal of the cruciform in the circle. Only in the layering does this condition differ from an ideal notation of the centralized villa type. While Rotonda can be seen as one of the most ideal of Palladio’s villas, there are subtle conditions that begin to shift the villa away from any ideal state (1.22).
This condition is especially clear in the facade and section. In addition to the ped-imented porticos, the side window appears to be in the center of the otherwise blank exterior wall rather than pushed to the edge, although in the interior, the window bay is aligned to the left of the niche in the center of the room. The centering of the window on the facade reinforces an idea that the villa is symmetrical but produces an awkward relationship between the portico and the alignments of niches and openings on the interior of the villa. Likewise, the dimensions of the small ground-floor windows and attic story windows reinforce the implied blankness of the space between them. This difference— between a supposedly ideal form or relationship of parts to a whole and a disarticulation of the building from such an ideal condition—is the critical significance of Palladio’s project. These conditions of stress, compression, tension, and extension are part of what defines the idea of the virtual in Palladio’s work and, in that virtuality, the heterogeneous potential of an active space appears.

PALAZZO DELLA TORRE
VERONA, 1555
THE SECOND VILLA IN THE “CLASSICAL VILLAS” SEQUENCE is the Palazzo della Torre, an unbuilt palazzo project for Verona. As with the Villa Rotonda, the Della Torre is one of Palladio’s most classical projects, distinguished by the use of a classical Greek element—the portico—which is, for Palladio, a received idea from the Pantheon in Rome. In his villas, Palladio transformed the idea of the portico from a mutable sign of a sacred public building to a component of a secular private dwelling.
In so doing, the iconic value of the portico is transgressed, and it becomes notational. Because of its many variations in size, location, and dimension, the portico becomes an important component of the Palladian lexicon. As an organizing principle, the portico after Palladio can be understood as a supplement in any part-to-whole totality because it has lost its traditional iconic value. In a similar way, undermining the stability of traditional measurement in the documentation of his buildings, Palladio did not draw to any specific scale in the Four Books; rather, dimensions are notations without value on the drawings. The plans and elevations were drawn to conform to the pages of the book. This facilitates the reading of a relational scale between, for example, the Pantheon and Palladio’s facades. The shared stable element is the proportion of the Corinthian column; that is, the proportion of the capital to the shaft, the base, and the width of the column remains constant even though the columns themselves change in size.
The centralized four-part parti of the Della Torre can be traced through a series of precedents known to Palladio, as well as a series of Palladian villas, but it is perhaps most similar to Rotonda, with its classical four porticos on the exterior and a differentiated
2.1.
Analytic model of Palazzo della Torre.
organization of striated space on the interior. The dissolution of the centralized domical space of the classical Renaissance extends from Bramante’s Tempietto and design for St. Peter’s in Rome in the 1520s to the centralized plan of Palladio’s Rotonda (which is different in its centralized organization than either of Bramante’s projects) to Della Torre and eventually to the Villa Sarego at Santa Sophia in the 1560s. Thus in the span of forty years, a radical change occurs in the conception of the centralized plan, from a stable organization of part-to-whole to one in which the parts barely comprise a legible whole. Compare this to forty years of modernism, from the 1910s to the 1950s, or the years between 1955 and 1995—very little change would be found in the relationships that make up certain modern typologies. What is interesting in this context is that the shift away from the centralized plan is one of the first radicalizations of architecture in that it undermines the traditional synthetic relationship between the actual structure and the iconic structure proposed by Vitruvius, between the sign and its signified. It is one of the first conscious conceptual erosions in the language of architecture. This erosion removes normalized iconic expectancies, leaving in their place a physical and typological presence devoid of the homogeneous spatial organization of the Albertian precedent, as well as the meaning of its classical antecedent. From this zero-state a new typology is
2.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Della Torre in the Four Books, 1570.
2.3.	Geometric diagram of Della Torre. Single square organizes the central
back portion of the palazzo but leaves the front and side portions unaccounted for.
2.5.	Geometric diagram of Della Torre. Two overlaid squares define the
central portion of the palazzo.
2.7.	Geometric diagram of Della Torre. Two overlaid squares encompass the
poche front and back, leaving out the poche on the sides.
2.4. Geometric diagram of Della Torre. Single square organizes the central front portion of the palazzo but leaves the rear and side portions unaccounted for.
2.6. Geometric diagram of Della Torre. Three squares define the breadth
of the building, leaving unaccounted-for portions of both the front and rear bays.
produced, with its potential for meaning. In the work of Palladio, the portico becomes a sign of the dissolution of the classical language of architecture.
Once eroded or dissolved, the relationship between sign and signified becomes less stable. The instability of the architectural element as a signifier animates the difference between the Della Torre and Rotonda. While there are nominally four porticos or entry spaces in the Della Torre (one actual portico in the front, one compressed portico in the rear, and two virtual porticos, one on either side), and a central courtyard, the space is not only striated but also split apart. The building as drawn by Palladio does not make a complete enclosure but is shown as two U-shaped halves of a single villa (2.2). These two separate halves on the ground floor plan are articulated in a very different way than any of the other courtyard projects. Because Palladio rarely drew side or rear facades, what the notation in the plan of the side elevation was meant to be—either as a connecting arch or a complete separation—is left ambiguous.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the model of della torre synthesizes several of these ambiguous conditions. The front portico and columns of the central courtyard are shown as framed white volumes or planes, as A spaces. Because the portico appears pressed into the main body of the building, the interior columns could be said to belong to the entry. The four corner volumes are shown in gray as B spaces, further reinforcing the interpretation of the building as split in half. The central courtyard, C, is shown not as a solid volume but as a “figural void”; that is, wrapped in an extruded surface that highlights the articulated poche, which moves from interior to exterior as if turning inside out.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THE PLAN LENDS ITSELF TO SEVERAL INTERPRETATIONS of implied geometric relationships. Clearly the perimeter of the Della Torre forms a rectangle.
Thus there can be no ideal geometric form that can encompass its entirety. The first reading of an ideal form shows an internal square that organizes the central back portion of the villa but leaves the front and side portions unaccounted for (2.3). The second diagram follows the same procedure as the first, but accounts for only the central front part of the villa, and not the rear and side bays (2.4). The third diagram combines the first two, producing two overlaid squares that comprise the entire central section of the villa (2.5). Using a square of the same dimension, a fourth diagram overlays three slipped squares to define the breadth of the building, leaving unaccounted portions of both the front and rear bays (2.6). The fifth diagram overlays two squares that encompass the thickness of the poche on the front and rear porticos, which leaves out the engaged columns on the sides when aligned to the first set of vertical interior walls (2.7). While the elaborate poche is clearly part of a continuous wrapper, the relationship between its front and side components is ambiguous relative to an imposed ideal square geometry. Even when a virtual
condition of symmetry is overlaid onto the plan, both implied porticos (front and back) are outside of the framework of the diagram. Thus, no ideal geometry can account for the actual conditions of the plan.
Because the double-height front portico at Della Torre, like that of the Palazzo Chiericati and the Villa Valmarana, is pressed into the main body of the building, the entry space can be read as connected through to the center by niches in the poche.
Then there is a transition layer with primary circulation and further poche articulation, followed by a central space, a rear transition space, and another A space (a notation read according to location, not function) with a second circulation element, a grand staircase. Della Torre is the only villa in which a large staircase is located perpendicular to the central axis and in the location of a possible rear portico.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
if it is assumed that the central void is the main C space, then it is easy to project a possible ideal diagram. The virtual diagram, while more complex, is merely a series of overlays (2.8,2.9). What is not reflected in either diagram is an important inversion concerning the positioning of the eight central columns. The two pairs of lateral columns are close together when compared to the columns at the front and back, which are more widely spaced. Since the front and back halves of the main body of the villa can each be seen as separate pieces joined in the middle, the composition of their individual massing would suggest that each pair of front and back columns should be closer together, but this is not the case. Equally, since the front and back halves appear pulled apart from one another, it could be expected that the lateral pairs of columns would be pulled apart, but this is not the case either. Thus the plan organization comprises two unexpected countermanding energies, which remain unresolved (2.10).
Four round columns (and two three-quarter round engaged columns) comprise the center bay of the front facade. These four columns are repeated in the rear of the entry portico, as are the engaged columns. Four of the six columns (two round, two engaged) simultaneously define the edge of the central space and sit within the central space itself. This is one of the only projects (along with the Villa Cornaro) where free-standing columns occupy the central space. If in one reading the villa can be said to be split or sheared in half along the lateral axis, these columns serve in a sense to bring the two halves together. Another reading produces a split or a shear in the front-to-back axis. In this reading, the portico and entry space “hold together” the halves in the front, while the two pieces in the rear are held together by the grand staircase.
The column notations simultaneously add to and confound any reading of a split.
Ultimately, it is the poche of the Della Torre that is its most unique element and is perhaps the most conceptually active of all the Palladian villas. For example, on the rear facade, the poche for the first time denotes a virtual portico. It is as if something has been pressed into the building, an inversion; the poche in one sense has been turned inside out (2.11). What remains on the exterior is, in a sense, the void impression of the six columns that would normally constitute the portico. The convention of Palladian poche
2.8.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Della Torre. Spatial layering around central cruciform figure.
A
2.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Della Torre. Central figure extends to exterior poche.
is flat on the exterior surface and modeled on the interior surface. However, the poche on the central exterior rear facade here, which one expects would be flat, has been turned outboard and articulated. The same thing occurs on the two side elements. There is a condition of flat poche with minor niches on the inboard side of the facade set against an articulated outboard poche (2.12). The particular play of articulated poche on the outside is not total, however, since the outboard poche stops short of the four corners of the villa, allowing the corners to be read clearly as corners. It is as if the poche were a thin membrane surrounding the voided space in the center of the building, leaving only the outer corners of the building intact. Two different poche striations can be seen: one that runs from side to side and one that runs from front to back (2.13). This reading produces an overlaid poched cruciform, the difference between the two striations being that the lateral one has an opening in the center, which creates a central C space, whereas the front-to-back striation has more continuity with the column line to the rear.
This reading, in moving from the real to the virtual, activates the latent asymmetry that confounds the apparent symmetry of the villa. While the Della Torre has a cruciform biaxial symmetry similar in some respect to Rotonda, the split between front and back and the compression of the outer volumes inward produce a spatial tension between edge and center at Della Torre, with its eight columns surrounding the courtyard, in a much different way than in Rotonda, with its central drum. While there is literal asymmetry in the four quadrants defined by the absence of an interior wall (2.14), a more subtle misalignment of a secondary front-to-back axis with the symmetrical three-part niche organization of the front rooms further distances Della Torre from Rotonda, where there is no such misalignment (2.15).


2.10. Diagram of Della Torre. Plan organization of eight central columns comprises two unexpected countermanding energies, which remain unresolved.
Diagram of Della Torre. Poche turned inside out.
2.12. Diagram of Della Torre. Flat poche with minor niches on the inboard side of the facade set against an articulated outboard poche.
2.13. Diagram of Della Torre. Two different poche striations can be seen: one that runs from side to side and one that runs from front to back.
«
58 CLASSICAL VILLAS
2.14. Diagram of Della Torre. Asymmetry in the four quadrants defined by the 2.15. Diagram of Della Torre. Internal misalignment of axes and niches, absence of an interior wall.

PALAZZO THIENE
VICENZA, 1544
PALLADIO BEGAN WORK ON THE PALAZZO THIENE in 1544, eight years after his first trip to Rome, in 1536. By 1544, Palladio would have seen Sebastiano Serlio’s Five Books on Architecture, which had been published in 1537, the same year Palladio’s first major project, the Villa Godi, was realized. The relationship of the plan to the portico and the articulation of figure within a seemingly idealized internal organization at Thiene command attention and allow for the comparison to Serlio’s architectural inventions (3.2). In particular, Palladio’s use of poche not only as pure figure but also as a notational device differentiates his work from that of Bramante and other predecessors, and from that of Serlio, the exemplar of Palladio’s mannerist contemporaries.
At Thiene, the poche does not distinguish room type, as it typically does in Serlio’s pala-zzi, but rather signifies a set of unconventional architectural conditions: asymmetries, shifts, and overlays. For example, the poche that appears in the two central side rooms at Thiene is of a different nature—it is a notation of a different diagram—than that of the layered front-to-back diagram.
Located in Vicenza, Thiene could be described as a square within a square, although it exhibits several anomalous elements in what is otherwise a rather modest, biaxially symmetrical, four-corner-tower palazzo design. The first anomalous element is the extra frontal bay, which acts as a frontispiece to the entire composition. The idea of the doubled entry bay, a particularly unique motif, reappears in the doubled columns of the portico in the Palazzo Chiericati (1550) and is evident in several of the later barchessa projects. The second anomalous element (vis-a-vis any normative portico
3.1.
Analytic model of Palazzo Thiene.
condition) is the portico itself, which penetrates from beyond the frontal bay to the internal courtyard space. The third anomalous element is a cross-axial main stair in the B or transition space. While this is a palazzo and not a villa, it may have had, in its urban setting, different functional circulation requirements. Finally, at the back of the palazzo, beyond the central courtyard, is a highly articulated, figural space, a second C notation, which occupies what could otherwise be read as an A bay.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE model FOR thiene identifies several of these anomalies while presenting other possible internal component ABCBA relationships. For example, the four corner towers are shown as solid white extruded poche, not as spatial volumes. This notation recognizes the dual reading of the corners as both part of an entry bay
3.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Thiene in the Four Books, 1570.
62
CLASSICAL VILLAS
(here only in the front but potentially in the back of the palazzo type as well) and as figured spaces similar to many of Palladio’s central spaces. The doubled entry bay is shown in white as an extruded plane, similar to the front portico, which appears to carve into the solid white volume of the three central rooms comprising the vestibule. (The entry is shown on the right side of the model, replicating Palladio’s orientation of the drawing of Thiene in the Four Books.) Describing the reading of ABCBA from front to back, the white A volumes are followed by a solid gray B volume of the front circulation bay. The central space, C, is shown in several ways. First, the rectangular columns comprising the courtyard are shown as extruded black C-shaped surfaces turned outboard, while the corner columns are shown as solid black extrusions. The figured rooms to the left and right of the courtyard are shown as extruded black planes, which identify them as part of the complex C notation. These two rooms, as well as the entire depth of the central courtyard space, are framed in black to establish their position in the virtual ABCBA reading (virtual because Thiene has a dominant square organization that does not privilege a front-to-back reading). This is followed in the back of the model with a second solid gray B volume and a series of extruded white poched elements similar to the front A bay. Finally, the entire square plan of the palazzo beyond the doubled entry bay is framed in black, which identifies the palazzo as centrally planned, a reading that is counter to the front-to-back ABCBA notation of the internal organization.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
the lack OF re lati 0 ns HI p between the virtual project ofThiene (what is implied by its complex and sometimes redundant notations) and the ideal comes into focus in a series of plan organizations that locate an idealized square in various positions in relation to the main body of the palazzo. By trying to idealize the villas through a one-square or a two-square geometry, parts are left out of the whole. These left-out parts often make up what will be seen as the virtual. A close reading of the project reveals these inconsistencies in relation to an ideal and at the same time produces the disaggregating quality of what appear to be normative building types. There are multiple possible base conditions, none of which account for all of the many internal discrepancies between part and whole. For example, if the palazzo is read as a square drawn from the four corner towers, the added frontal bay drops out of the overall ideal organization (3.3). Alternatively, when the palazzo is read from front to back, aligning a square to the front of the extra bay, the rear bay of the palazzo is left out (3.4). It is also possible to see in this variation that the added frontal bay affects the internal layering in the reading from front to back (3.5). When the square is moved to the front of the portico, it aligns in the back with the outboard edge of the rectangular courtyard columns and further disrupts the normative ordering and proportions of spaces from front to back (3.6).
A second square encompassing the space of the interior courtyard can also be drawn (3.7). When this square is shifted horizontally to include the adjacent rooms on either side, the space defined by the overlap of the two new squares has the same width as the poched central lozenge-shaped hall in the rear of the palazzo, a dimension further
described by the narrow set of rooms in the front (3.8). However, when the same square shifts vertically to include the adjacent rooms front and back, the space defined by the overlap between these squares does not align to similarly poched central rooms on either side of the courtyard (3.9). These produce different front-to-back and side-to-side readings, despite the dominant square, corner-tower organization of the plan.
Finally, a third square can be drawn, which describes the courtyard space inside the arcade (3.10). Several geometric diagrams can be extrapolated from this third square. The first two possibilities (3.11,3.12) shift the square from front to back and side to side by increments of half its length, which define a 5:4 relationship between the depth and width of the palazzo on account of the front portico. A third diagram using the dimensions of the smaller square aligns the squares with the implied internal corners of the four towers, which describe, where they overlap, the central openings in the front, back, and on the sides of the courtyard (3.13).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
THIENE IS ONE OF several palladian projects with four articulated corner towers (the Villa Valmarana, Villa Pisani, Villa Thiene at Cicogna, and Villa Sarego at Santa Sophia all have corner towers of varying degrees of articulation). These corner towers define the main body of the palazzo, which is square in plan. While this is a reference to a medieval fortification or a castle, the towers also read as corners of a proto-nine-square organization. While the articulation of the corners gives a simple potential reading of an A or portico in the front, followed by a circulation or transition space, B, and the central C space, this is belied by the actual articulation of elements. This organization establishes a sequence of A, B, and C followed by a second transition space, B, without stairs, and an implied portico space, A, in the rear; in other words, a potentially typical ABCBA notation. The implied portico is itself a unique condition of a figural, lozenge-shaped, flattened poche, which recalls the central space of Chiericati; here, it occupies simultaneously an A location—when read as part of the typical ABCBA sequence— and a C location, as figural poche is typical of central rooms, not porticos (3.14). The use of such unconventional spatial organizations in various locations in the ABCBA notational
3-3. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Single square defines the main body of the building but leaves the frontal bay unaccounted for.
3.6. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Further
disruption of the normative ordering and proportions of spaces from front to back.
3.9.	Geometric diagram of Thiene. The space
defined by the overlap of two squares shifted front and back does not align to spaces on either side of the courtyard.
3.12. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Shifting the
square from side to side in addition to front to back by increments of half its length defines a 5:4 relationship between the depth and width of the palazzo.
3-4.	Geometric diagram of Thiene. Single square
shifted to the front defines the main body of the building but leaves the rear bay unaccounted for.
3-7-	Geometric diagram of Thiene. A second
square encompassing the space of the interior courtyard.
3.10.	Geometric diagram of Thiene. A third square encompassing the space of the courtyard inside the arcade.
3.13. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Squares
align with the implied internal corners of the four towers.
3-5. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Added frontal bay affects the internal layering in the reading from front to back.
3-8.	Geometric diagram of Thiene. The space
defined by the overlap of the two squares shifted side to side has the same width as the poched central lozenge-shaped hall in the rear of the palazzo.
3.11.	Geometric diagram of Thiene. Shifting the square from front to back by increments of half its length describes a five-part organization in the depth of the palazzo on account of the front portico.
3-14.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofThiene.
The implied rear portico simultaneously occupies an A location and has C characteristics.
66 CLASSICAL VILLAS

3.15.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Thiene. The doubled front A bay runs across the entire width of the facade and extends forward of the main building
system is a common Palladian motif. Because the central space of the palazzo type is usually an interior courtyard (a void), what would typically be the poched or figural space of the villa type appears at the Palazzo Thiene as compressed into the rear bay: a C volume in an A location.
The most unusual feature in Thiene, however, is the doubled front A bay, a series of rooms that runs as a frontispiece across the entire width of the facade and extends forward from the main building volume in the middle as an entry portico (3.15). Giuseppe Terragni will use this same strategy of the elongated frontal bay in the Casa del Fascio in Como (1936), though in that case it is internal to the structure. In a sense, Thiene and the Casa del Fascio share the same diagram; four corner towers (although the symmetrical side bay is absent in Como), a cross-axial stair arrangement, the location of the internal stair or circulation bay, and columns framing the central space. The extra front facade bay at Thiene is one of the most sophisticated plays on the idea of frontality in Palladio’s work. It is not merely a portico, which extends out and in, but is the first example of an extended frontispiece, an extra bay that when read against the four corner towers seems to belong to the main interior body of the building, and, when read together with the actual portico that extends through the front facade, seems to belong to some other additive spatial organization.
Finally, there are several articulated but minor receiving rooms in an enfilade organization around the perimeter of the palazzo. The corner towers are slightly larger than these perimeter rooms, so that they read as separate volumes from the dominant striated organization of the building (3.16,3-17). The doubled front bay then produces an asymmetry in relation to the four-tower plan. The front circulation bay and the protrusion of the front portico are notations of this shift in the axis of symmetry. The symmetrical reading of the palazzo defined by the actual, internal square of the building is never physically articulated or experienced; it can only be understood conceptually.
K
3-16. Diagram of Thiene. Towers read as corners of a nine-square Organization-
Diagram of Thiene. Corner towers read as separate volumes from the dominant striated organization of the building.

VILLA SAREGO
MIEGA DI VERONELLA, 1562
the villa sarego at MIE G A has a rather unremarkable plan dominated by two unique conditions. One is the transformation of a normative nine-square diagram into a diagram that is striated from side to side and echeloned from front to back, similar to the Villa Valmarana (4.2). Both villas share a similar proto-modernist spatial order of servant-to-served—major and minor—spaces. Sarego also plays on the idea of the front and back porticos of the Villa Cornaro and others, leaving only a trace of the rear portico as an outward extension of the central space against the back wall. Its second unusual attribute is the two-story loggia punctuated with a heavy string course at the piano nobile, which extends across the facade. The spacing of the eight-column portico, however, is unlike Palladio’s other six-column porticos. Here it appears as if a regular six-column portico with a wider central bay is placed into a second portico, which, because of the location of the pediment and architrave, creates a compressed bay on either side of the central portico.
ANALYTIC MODEL
ONE of THE seemingly more simple v i ll AS, Sarego produces one of the more complex analytic models (4.1). The front and back facades, including the portico columns and square spaces to the left and right of the main entry, are shown as solid white A volumes, indicating that they can be read as conceptually neutral; that is, they
4.1.
Analytic model of Villa Sarego.
help define an internal organization but do not in themselves have a positive or negative spatial valence. The entry volume that presses into the main body of the villa is conceptually active and is therefore shown as a framed white volume, allowing for a reading of the central bay of the portico overlaying the first internal gray B volume, which is shown as partly solid and partly framed, that is, simultaneously passive and active. The central C space—in which the space (as opposed to the wall poche) defines the volume, shown as a solid black volume—presses against the rear facade. Adjacent to the C volume in the rear are the extensions of the gray B spaces toward the rear facade, rendered conceptually neutral as framed volumes. The model articulates the implied echeloned geometry from front to back, showing in its overall effect the spatial density produced by the complex overlay of conceptually active and passive spaces in an otherwise minor villa.
4.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Sarego in the Four Books, 1570.

GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
BECAUSE OF the density of the internal compressions at Sarego, it is difficult to establish a singular geometric diagram to describe the plan. If, for example, two squares are drawn the width of the central bay and offset by half a square, the rear square encompasses the depth of the central room while the front square aligns with the edge of the portico steps but with nothing in the rear (4.3). Two squares of the same dimension shifted laterally to align with the outboard edges of the main villa body describe in their overlap the space between the two center columns, which is also articulated in the central room by inboard pilasters. These squares do not take into account the depth of the villa, however (4.4). Two alternative squares, aligned to the edges of the villa body on their sides and to the first compressed facade plane in the front, show in their overlap the width of the central room (4.5). Two more squares can be drawn that align with the outboard edges of the villa, which in their overlap define the width of the central bay (4.6). Finally, to reinforce the transformation of the villa from an ideal square to its rectangular plan, two larger squares are drawn, which define by their width the actual side-to-side dimensions of the villa and show the virtual or implied front-to-back dimension in their extension beyond the front and rear facades (4.7).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
SAREGO IS ONE OF the few villas striated from side to side rather than layered from front to back with a cross-axial grain derived from the nine-square diagram. A precursor to the Villa Foscari, Sarego has, in the virtual reading, a slight projection beyond the rear facade of an absent portico. The asymmetrical front-to-back relationship is dominant. Since Palladian villas are typically made up of en suite relationships of interior spaces, the cross-axial layering at Sarego is difficult to see, particularly because the front pair of corner rooms have elaborately coffered ceilings, further accentuating the progression of side rooms from front to back. Thus, one variation of the virtual villa has a complex notational system that shows the compression of a portico, A, into an implied transition or circulation space, B, at the front and an A/B/C overlay in the rear (4.8). The corresponding ideal plan is difficult to read and has very little to do with this first reading of the virtual villa, which presents a complex density of spatial overlays and anomalies from an otherwise rather unremarkable plan. In the alternate notation, where the portico in the rear occupies only the facade, the central space, C, has nearly no presence. In this reading, because of the four-bay organization (as opposed to five-bay), the transition spaces front and back are adjacent to one another (4.9). While the ideal shows a simple front-to-back layering of ABCBA, the virtual describes a recurring condition in the villas: nominally nine-square organizations, there is often an even number of side-to-side or front-to-back bays that confound the classical ABCBA plan.
While the internal plan organization clearly articulates an ABCBA reading from side to side, where the circulation bays are seen as slots between the major perimeter
and central rooms, the facade has a tripartite, ABA, organization. The front facade is seen as compressed into the body of the villa by the T-shaped space of the portico, which in turn sets up a series of echeloned spaces from front to back (4.10,4.11). There is then a slight extension of the column-line of the portico beyond the facade, similar to the extension of the center bay on the rear of the villa (4.12). The various compressions and extensions of the side rooms especially produce a condition internally of the overlay of different symmetrical organizations. The dominant implied axis of symmetry through the middle of the central space shifts forward to the actual midpoint of the villa’s exterior volume, which aligns with the back edge of the two staircases (4.13).
Finally, in the portico itself, there are several unique conditions. Typically, the porticos comprise either four or six columns, but at Sarego, there are eight. The outboard columns of the portico engage the side walls and are paired with the columns next to them. The remaining four columns seem to have a spacing independent of the outboard pairs, which produces an uneven spacing of column bays. In the facade, a heavy string course separates the two-story portico in a way very unlike Palladio or any classical notion of a two-story portico. Here again Palladio transforms what could be considered a classical motif normalized by Bramante—the two-story portico—calling attention to its relationship to some presumed ideal or prior condition of existence while displacing it from a normative or classical vocabulary.
4.3.	Geometric diagram of Sarego. A rear square encompasses the depth of	4-4.	Geometric diagram of Sarego. Two squares aligned to the outboard edges
the central room while the front square aligns with the edge of the portico	of the main villa body describe in their overlap the space between the two
steps but with nothing in the rear.	center columns.
4.5.	Geometric diagram of Sarego. Two squares aligned to the edges of the villa	4.6.	Geometric diagram of Sarego. Two squares aligned with the outboard
body on their sides and to the first compressed facade plane in the front	edges of the villa define in their overlap the width of the central bay.
• show in their overlap the width of the central room.
4.7.	Geometric diagram of Sarego. Two squares define by their width the actual
side-to-side dimensions of the villa and show the virtual or implied front-to-back dimension in their extension beyond the front and rear facades.
4.8.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Sarego. One variation of the virtual villa has a complex notational system that shows the compression of a portico, A, into an implied transition or circulation space, B, at the front and an A/B/C overlay in the rear.

4.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Sarego. When the portico in the rear is seen to occupy only the facade, the central space, C, has nearly no presence.
4.10. Diagram of Sarego. The front facade is compressed into the body of the villa.
Diagram of Sarego. The T-shaped space of the portico sets up a series of echeloned spaces from front to back.

4-12. Diagram of Sarego. The slight extension of the column-line of the portico beyond the facade is similar to the extension of the center bay on the rear of the villa.
4.13. Diagram of Sarego. The implied axis of symmetry through the middle of the central space shifts forward to the actual midpoint of the villa's exterior volume, which aligns with the back edge of the two staircases.
K
PALAZZO
CHIERICATI
VICENZA, 1550
the palazzo chiericati is located on an urban site in central Vicenza. Even though it is not, strictly speaking, a villa, it can be classified as a compressed villa type that descends from the Casa dei Vettii in Pompeii (c. 62 AD; 5.2). The palazzo has an actual frontispiece, a two-story arcade that acts as a loggia on the ground floor. The regular rhythm of columns across the facade is interrupted when the portico and loggia intersect, which creates a doubled column: one column literally pressed into another. This junction is set slightly forward of the loggia column line, creating a linear sense of compression that is echoed throughout the interior. The inward compression of both the front portico and the internalized rear portico produces an elongated, central figured space that in turn is narrower than the volumes surrounding it. This condition of the doubled column keys a reading of the portico as compressed into the body of the building.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE IDEAL AND THE VIRTUALis addressed in the analytic model for Chiericati, demonstrating generally several important aspects of the models in relation to the axonometric drawings. First, the white framed volume in the front of the model shows the extent of a virtual (unseen but conceptually present) portico, A, which has the same dimension as the actual portico, A, but is located as if separated or pulled away from actual portico’s position, which
5.1.
Analytic model of Palazzo Chiericati.
overlays the adjacent loggia. The loggia, which can be read as conceptually neutral, is represented as a solid gray B volume. A solid white volume—framed in gray by the marking of the implied dimension of the adjacent B space—shows the dimension of the front staircase outboard of the front column line. Where the portico. A, compresses into the space of the loggia, B, there is a void, that is, the resulting A/B space is thought to be conceptually active, with neither the A nor the B being dominant. The same condition occurs in the rear courtyard of Chiericati, but with narrower lateral dimensions. Between these two void A/B spaces is a lozenge-shaped central C space, one of the only such central spaces in Palladio’s work, shown in the model as a “figural void” in which the wall poche is the active condition that defines the central volume.
S-2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Chiericati in the Four Books, 1570.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
there IS NO one ideal regular geometric figure that can explain the organization of Chiericati, a building that is marked by a compressed ideality. Yet within the palazzo, there are many examples of partial ideal organizations. These start from the most obvious geometric overlay, a single square that describes the depth of the palazzo and the width of its central bay defined by a pair of lateral rear staircases (5.3). From this single square, three overlapping squares can be extrapolated. The three squares define the width of the entire villa while framing the void of the central section (5.4). A second single square diagram partially encompasses the figured central area of the plan, leaving the outer rooms on both sides unaccounted for. This square maintains the edge of the rear portico stairs but sits inside the edge of the front portico stairs (5.5). Two overlapping squares of the same dimension—one that maintains the edge of the front stairs, the other that holds the back wall of the villa—encompass the entire front-to-back dimension and describe, in their overlap, the two dominant interior bays: the central lozenge-shaped C space and the rear staircases (5.6). However, there is no correlation to a centerline or internal symmetry, as there is in the previous diagram.
Three other overlapping squares of a similar dimension define the main interior body of the palazzo, with the space between the two center columns defined by the dimension between the two outboard squares. The same three squares can be shifted to align with the outside edge of the front portico stairs and the back edge of the pair of symmetrical staircases in the rear and similarly describe the space between the two central columns front and back (5.7,5.8). The dimension between the outside edges of the central columns can also be described by two larger squares, which together encompass the entire width of the palazzo, aligning to the interior edge of the rear wall and the front columns. Here the portico columns and stairs fall out of alignment (5.9). Two squares overlapped in the central bay encompass another unique aspect of the palazzo plan: the two rear circular staircases (s.10). The two squares in the last diagram define the central volume of the palazzo, with the amount of overlap describing the width of the rear portico (5.11). One of the main characteristics of Palladian irresolution or undecidability arises when, for example, one diagram seems to be an organizing principle, but some minor aspect of it is out of alignment. Often, when this minor aspect is made to align, the rest of the diagram is thrown out of alignment.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
of all the p roj e cts , Chiericati is the most compressed both actually and conceptually, which produces a high degree of cross-axial density. The clear articulation of the poched central space and the columnar notation of an actual compression of the portico into the arcaded transition or B space make it easy to determine the coordinates of an ideal version of Chiericati (5.12). The ideal is a striated front-to-back ABCBA organization where all the parts are more or less equal in depth. It is the virtual villa, however, that commands attention with its multiple overlays. While the porticos, A, and
interstitial spaces, B, are fairly conventional on their own, it is the compression of A into B at both the front and rear of Chiericati that suggests the lozenge-shaped C space. A second virtual diagram further obscures the layered ABCBA ideal by recognizing in effect a four-bay ABBA organization, the result of the unusual adjacency of the portico and the central space with no transition in between. The central C space and the first interior B bay are overlaid in this reading, producing the sequence A, B/C, B/A, A (5.13).
There are two characteristics that distinguish Chiericati from the other Palladian projects. First, there is the loggia, which runs across the full two-story facade, simultaneously acting as a frontispiece and containing a portico. Second, like few other Palladian projects, Chiericati consists of a series of lateral layers in plan, parallel to the facade.
The key to understanding the mutations that take place in this layered diagram is the pair of doubled columns in the center of the loggia (5.14). This is an extraordinary detail: single columns flank the doubled column on either side, and the upper story of the two-story loggia is filled in. There is a slight articulation in the first- and second-story cornice lines, which protrude outward in the middle bay of the facade.
Such a virtual condition assumes a notational symmetrical sequence of ABCBA from front to back denoting both positional and functional but not ideal geometric relationships. There is a particular sequence in which the portico is read as virtual, in this case as a missing portico that has been compressed into the B space, a transverse circulation space between the portico, A, and the dominant major space, C. If Chiericati is compared to an ideal villa comprising a portico, circulation space, main central space, circulation, and rear portico (ABCBA), what can be noted is the absence of an actual portico in the front, a loggia as circulation space, and an implied portico in the rear. But another reading is possible with two other virtual portico conditions. In this reading there is first a compression from front to back, and then from back to front. In the front-to-back compression, the portico is pressed into the loggia. In the back-to-front reading, the B circulation bay has the portico pressed into it from the rear, leaving a void in the rear courtyard. This creates an A/B condition in the front, producing a conceptual spatial density in the superposition of the A over B. This density is acknowledged in the front by the condition of the doubled columns in the center front portico. This compression of A into B is an internal mutation of the classical relationship, which produces a conceptual density in the space.
The C or main space is compressed from an ideal centralized form, as if these spaces had been placed in a vise with pressure applied to them. While, the palazzo plan has an ABCBA articulation from front to back, the compression of the portico into the transition space in a way produces the C space, if the C space is seen to be defined by the articulation of poche (5.15). The unusual figure of the C space is produced from an initial reading of A as ambiguous—is the space a portico, or is it a line of columns? The second space, or the B space, therefore, appears doubled up. The A and B spaces are superposed over each other. These spaces also could be read as B and C when there is a further compression of the B space into the central C space. Similarly, the rear B space is compressed by the rear portico. Thus, there are two compressions of two spaces into the C space. What is read is a void that contains a double compression. This void is read as an articulated figural volume that allows for the reading of an A/B space, a C/B space, and a B/A space. This leftover void space is not active in the conceptual reading of the palazzo.
5.3.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. A single
square describes the depth of the palazzo and the width of its central bay defined by a pair of lateral rear staircases.
5.6.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. Two
overlapping squares define, in their overlap, the two dominant interior bays.
5-9-	Geometric diagram of Chiericati.
The dimension between the outside edges of the central columns described by two larger squares, which together encompass the entire width of the palazzo.
5.4.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. Three squares define the width of the entire villa while framing the void of the central section.
5.7.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. Three
overlapping squares define the main interior body of the palazzo, with the space between the two center columns defined by the dimension between the two outboard squares.
5.10. Geometric diagram of Chiericati. Two squares overlapped in the central bay encompass the two rear circular staircases.
5.5.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. A second single square partially encompasses the figured central area of the plan, leaving the outer rooms on both sides unaccounted for.
5.8.	Geometric diagram of Chiericati. The same squares shifted to align with the outside edge of the front portico stairs and the back edge of the pair of symmetrical staircases in the rear describe the space between the two central columns front and back.
S.11. Geometric diagram of Chiericati. Two squares define the central volume of the palazzo, with the amount of overlap describing the width of the rear portico.
5.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Chiericati. While the porticos. A, and interstitial spaces, B, are fairly conventional on their own, it is the compression ofA into B at both the front and rear of Chiericati that suggests the lozengeshaped C space.
5-13-Ideal and virtual diagrams of Chiericati.
A second virtual diagram further obscures the layered ABCBA ideal by recognizing in effect a four-bay ABBA organization, the result of the unusual adjacency of the portico and the central space with no transition in between.
Two mutations of a virtual condition occur in Chiericati. One is an actual physical deformation of an idealized villa, which creates a layering from front to back. In turn this deformation—that is, the relationship of the ideal to the real—creates a conceptual density. If only the proportions of length to width as a formal condition are read, the condition would be seen merely as layered, without being understood as a deformation of an ideal or, in turn, conceptually dense. This compression then creates the second mutation, a series of superpositions. In Karl Friedrich Schinkel’s Altes Museum (1830), as in Chiericati, a similar fluctuating reading is caused by the unstable relationship of the dominant spaces to one another.
On the other hand, unlike at the Altes Museum, at Chiericati the space of the front portico and loggia produces a doubling of two spaces, A and B. This overlay of physically void spaces produces a conceptually active or dense space, a doubly active void. The portico at Chiericati is not pressed into an interior space, as it is at the Villa Sarego at Miega, for example; rather, it is as if it has been moved into a space that is neither interior nor exterior, the loggia. The traditional C or figural space, the only space with articulated poche, is also figured as what appears to be a compressed symmetrical space. The central volume seems to be symmetrical on the ends and through the centers; however, there are two niches on either side of the door on the front wall (which is also the exterior facade of the portico) and only one niche on either side of the door in the rear (5.16). This is another example of the Palladian facade as a membrane that reflects the differences between inside and outside on its interior and exterior surfaces. In the front, there is a portico the width of the palazzo, which allows for four niches to be expressed on the interior facade. In the rear, the portico is half as wide, and instead of having four columns, it has only two. The two niches on the rear wall reflect the two-column portico in the rear. In a sense, the space that appears to be symmetrical is split in half: the front half relates to the front portico, and the rear half relates to the rear portico. The difference between front and back is noted in the plan by a missing rear niche. Several other minor disturbances in the alignment of niches and doorways in the side rooms and the addition of a small room in the rear of the palazzo further destabilize any reading of an ideal (5.17,5.18).
These absent parts, which are conceptually present, are destabilizing elements at the detail level. In the overall organization of the parts in relation to the whole, this instability can be seen in the relationship of the palazzo’s seemingly normative spatial layers: a double void (the front portico, A, overlaid onto an exterior transition space,
B); a positive figure (the central space, C); a single void in the wrong location (the rear portico, A); and an absent void (the implied location of the rear portico in the courtyard). These layers do not add up to a consistent or ideal whole. On the contrary, what emerges is a virtual diagram, a series of unstable fragments. While maintaining the integrity of the building volume, Chiericati is the strongest attack on the idea that centrality is a necessary characteristic of the ideal villa.

5.14.	Diagram of Chiericati. The palazzo consists of a series of lateral layers in plan, parallel to the facade. The key to understanding the mutations that take place in this layered diagram is the pair of doubled columns in the center of the loggia.
5.15.	Diagram of Chiericati. While the palazzo plan has an ABCBA articulation from front to back, the compression of the portico into the transition space in a way produces the C space.
5.16.	Diagram of Chiericati. While the central volume seems to be symmetrical on the ends and through the centers, there are two niches on either side of the door on the front wall and only one niche on either side of the door in the rear.
5.17.	Diagram of Chiericati. Several minor disturbances in the alignment of
niches and doorways in the side rooms further destabilize any reading of an ideal.
5.18.	Diagram of Chiericati. The addition of a small room in the rear of the palazzo fiirther destabilizes any reading of an ideal.
VILLA VALMARANA
LISIERA, 1563
THE VILLA VALMARANA at Li s IE ra is one of the more complex and subtle of Palladio’s stand-alone villas. It includes the suggestion of an arcaded barchessa, and in many respects, like the Palazzo Chiericati, presents an idea of compression from front to back, which creates a series of implied parallel layers in plan. Its differences from Chiericati help define Valmarana. Like Chiericati, Valmarana has a two-story portico with a heavy architrave and a balustrade that extends beyond the porticoed pediment (6.2). But unlike those of Chiericati, the plan and elevation of Valmarana are dominated— as in the Palazzo Thiene—by four articulated corner towers. Perhaps the most important difference between the two projects is the articulation in plan, which in Valmarana consists of a series of striated layers from side to side, and the elevations, which suggest corner towers. Finally, the columns that sit slightly outboard of the loggia columns at Chiericati are here projected outward perpendicular to the main body of the villa, producing a proto-forecourt, a hint or precursor of the barchessa projects to follow.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE SUBTLETY OF valmarana is expressed in the analytic model, which renders only three spaces—the front and back porticos and the central C space—as solid volumes, or conceptually passive elements. The four corner towers and the portico columns front and back are shown as extruded white elements defining the entry or portico
6.1.
Analytic model of Villa Valmarana.
sequences, A. Internally, aside from the solid white A elements and solid black central C volume, there are framed gray B volumes and an extruded interior wall, meaning these transition spaces are read as conceptually neutral, that is, they help define the interior organization of the villa but have little effect on the dominant ACA symmetry of the plan. The white framed volumes front and back show the implied or virtual position of the porticos that would allow for an ABCBA symmetry front to back. Finally, the columns comprising the proto-forecourt are shown in gray as part of the transition space from inside to outside and not as part of the front portico.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
MANY variations of geometric overlays could be used to describe Valmarana. The most basic diagram shows a square equal in width to the villa body aligning with the edges of the back corner towers and encompassing the six freestanding columns of the villa’s forecourt (6.3). This square, while inclusive of the body of the villa and the proto-barchessa in front, does not take into account the steps of the rear
6.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Valmarana in the Four Books, 1570.
portico. A second diagram shows an internal axis of symmetry and a shifted square, defining the space of the absent or implied rear courtyard (6.4). A third diagram shows two squares equal in depth to the main villa body, which define in their overlap the width of the portico or central bay. In this diagram, the central C space appears compressed in on its sides (6.5). Another square equal in width to the portico bay (including the minor staircase bays) can be overlaid to align with the front steps of either portico and the inboard wall of the opposite portico. This square can be shifted front to back and side to side: if front to back, the corner towers and parts of the interior side rooms are left unaccounted for; if side to side, the front portico and corner towers are left out (6.6,6.7). When the square is reduced further to the width of the portico itself and shifted from front to back, the diagram exposes the fact that the interior wall that appears to divide the villa front and back is actually slightly offset from the centerline of the villa (6.8). Two smaller squares set between the interior walls in the rear side rooms show in their overlap an alignment of the niches in the central room with the space between the portico columns (6.9). Finally, a square set symmetrically between the four corner towers leaves the thickness of the front and back facades unaccounted for in its diagram (6.10).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
COMPARED TO MANY OF THE other VILL AS, Valmarana has a simple analytic structure. Except for two internal walls, the plan has a front-to-back ACA symmetry. However, in order to approximate an ideal villa, it is necessary to move the two portico spaces outward from their actual location to produce a pure ABCBA as opposed to an A/B, C, A/B notation (6.11). Assuming their actual location as a base condition, however, the porticos can be seen as stable elements, while the internal organization, one of transition and central spaces, can be seen as unstable. In this alternative virtual diagram, there is no longer a clearly defined central space, C, as the four-bay plan organization renders an ABBA sequence on the interior (6.12). In fact, the only asymmetry in the plan occurs around the central space, C, which is rectangular and flanked by two sets of side rooms equal in width; but one of each pair is undivided, the other divided, setting up a minor asymmetry (6.13).
Two other conflicting notations exist. The first is the four stairs placed across the side-to-side grain of the building, which set up a secondary reading of a plaid grid overlaid onto what is a conventional Palladian set of en suite rooms. The second is the articulation of four corner towers in what is otherwise a striated plan. These towers are read with the front and back porticos as A components overlaid onto the two front and back transitional layers, B. While at first the corner towers read as part of a symmetrical organization, there is a difference in the relationship of the front corner towers to the columns comprising the forecourt, and the rear towers to the interior. This difference alternatively puts a focus on the front or the rear of the villa (6.14). The columns of the barchessa and those making up the front facade appear to form a U-shape forecourt.
The compression of the facade between the two front corner towers and the misalignment of column-line to wall produce a double reading of the dominant entry plane (6.1s).
Several minor shifts and compressions further dislodge a stable notion of symmetry in the villa, expressed through subtle means in the misalignments of niches and walls (6.16).
Because Valmarana is one of the first villas to articulate a barchessa organization, it is interesting to see the discrepancies between the notation of column and wall in the plan and elevation. The facade comprises a double-story portico and pediment rather than a single-story portico, a motif that places Valmarana in a lineage from the Palazzo della Torre to the Villa Sarego at Miega and finally to Chiericati. However, there are two anomalous conditions on the facade. First, while the two-story facade is made clear in the heavy string course and loggia, there is a series of smaller windows between the ground floor and the piano nobile, which suggests a tripartite reading of the facade. These mostly square windows occupy an unusual location. In the Palladian villas there are sometimes smaller ground-floor windows below, or attic windows above the piano nobile, as at the Villa Rotonda, and sometimes there are smaller upper-story windows above the piano nobile, as at Chiericati. This is the first time that square windows appear between the piano nobile and the ground floor. Thus, there seems to be no normative convention for window location in Palladio’s work.
The second anomalous condition occurs at the connection between the colonnade of the forecourt and the main body of the villa. The two-story portico and pediment are clearly differentiated in relation to the massing of the villa on the sides, but there is a slot of space between the side and center bays. This produces an ABCBA organization on the facade. In plan, the center portico bay and the interstitial circulation bays— connected by a three-quarter-round column—together are seen as pressed into the body of the villa. At the connection between the circulation bay and the side bays—the corner towers—there is a half-round column engaged in the wall. In Palladio’s elevation drawing, this column is not articulated with any notation but is shown as a post supporting the opening in the corner tower. These slight slippages between column-line and wall and the discrepancies between plan and elevation are a further source of animation to Palladio’s villas, creating a dialogue between the arbitrary and the rationally planned.
It is this dialogue that often produces the presence of heterogeneity in Palladian space.
6.3.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. A square equal in width to the villa body aligning with the edges of the back corner towers encompasses the six freestanding columns of the villa's forecourt.
6.6.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. Another square equal in width to the portico bay can be overlaid to align with the front steps of either portico and the inboard wall of the opposite portico. If shifted front to back, the corner towers and parts of the interior side rooms are left unaccounted for.
6.9. Geometric diagram of Valmarana. Two
smaller squares set between the interior walls in the rear side rooms show in their overlap an alignment of the niches in the central room with the space between the portico columns.
6.4.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. A second diagram shows an internal axis of symmetry and a shifted square, defining the space of the absent or implied rear courtyard.
6.7.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. If the same
square is shifted from side to side, the front portico and corner towers are left out.
6.10. Geometric diagram of Valmarana. A square set symmetrically between the four corner towers leaves the thickness of the front and back facades unaccounted for.
6.5.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. A third diagram shows two squares equal in depth to the main villa body, which define in their overlap the width of the portico or central bay.
6.8.	Geometric diagram of Valmarana. When the square is reduced further to the width of the portico itself and shifted from front to back, the diagram exposes the fact that the interior wall that appears to divide the villa front and back is actually slightly offset from the centerline of the villa.
6.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Valmarana.
In order to approximate an ideal villa, it is necessary to move the two portico spaces outward from their actual location to produce a pure ABCBA as opposed to an A/B, C, A/B notation.

6.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Valmarana. In an alternative virtual
diagram, there is no longer a clearly defined central space, C, as the four-bay plan organization renders an ABBA sequence on the interior.
6.13.	Diagram of Valmarana. The only asymmetry in the plan occurs around the central space, C, which is rectangular and flanked by two sets of side rooms equal in width.
6.14.	Diagram of Valmarana. While at first the corner towers read as part of a symmetrical organization, there is a difference in the relationship of the front corner towers to the columns making up the forecourt, and the rear towers to the interior.
6.15.
Diagram of Valmarana. The compression of the facade between the two front corner towers and the misalignment of column-line to wall produce a double reading of the dominant entry plane.
6.t6. Diagram of Valmarana. Several minor shifts and compressions further
dislodge a stable notion of symmetry in the villa, expressed through subtle means in the misalignments of niches and walls.

VILLA CORNARO
PIOMBINO DESE, 1553
THE VILLA CORNARO at piombino D es E is a rather simple villa with traces of the classical cruciform plan that appears in the Villa Rotonda, save for two lateral extensions, which can be seen as proto-barchesse (7.2). Like several other villas, it is basically symmetrical from front to back. But when the lateral extensions across the front are taken into consideration, Cornaro can be seen to introduce the problem of differentiating the front and back porticos. Here the front portico is outboard of the villa body, and the rear portico is compressed into the main body of the villa. The extensions create a five-part reading from side to side in the front, while the portico in the rear, surrounded by highly articulated elliptical staircases, creates a tripartite organization. The central space has four freestanding columns with an articulated series of corner niches, which, when related to the columns, create a set of cross-diagonals in the main space.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE MODEL OF cornaro A rti c u late s the various internal readings at play. For example, the outboard portico in the front and the inboard portico in the rear both can be read as conceptually passive elements, therefore shown as solid white volumes, while the virtual location of the rear portico, outboard of the villa body, is a conceptually active element, shown as a framed white volume. The extensions along the front are shown as framed gray volumes, indicating that they can be read as having a double
7-1.
Analytic model of Villa Cornaro.
valence occupying the virtual position (in addition to their actual location) of the two internal rooms, which are shown as solid gray volumes. Both the small entry vestibule in the front and the square central space, C, are shown as extruded black walls, that is, as figural voids, where the poche defines the volume. In the rear of the villa, the two corner rooms, part of the transition from the inboard portico to the central space, are shown as extruded gray walls, B, borrowing the modeling language of the central space to show the figural quality of the elliptical staircases.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
SEVERAL VARIATIONS OF AN IDEAL SQUARE GEOMETRY are active at Cornaro. First, a square can be drawn from the outside of the rear stairs to the exterior wall onto which the front portico is seen to be attached (7.3). This square highlights the massing of the main villa body. A second square can be added, which aligns with the edge of the front steps and the rear wall of the central room (7.4). Together these two squares give the initial impression that there is something unusual about the plan of Cornaro,
7.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Cornaro in the Four Books, 1570.

whose geometry at first glance appears to be simple. A third and fourth diagram register variations of squares in relation to the extensions of the villa. In one, the overlap between two squares aligned to the inboard edge of the side rooms defines the width of the front entry vestibule (7.5). In the other, the overlapping space is equal in width to the space between the columns of the central space but not to the entry vestibule or the central space itself (7.6).
A fifth diagram describes the tripartite ABA relationship of the side rooms to the central bay of the villa, leaving the rear staircases and side extensions unaccounted for (7.7). The sixth and seventh diagrams show a progression of squares based on the dimension of the central C space front to back and side to side. In the front-to-back variation, the alignment of squares to principal edges—the portico steps and interior walls in particular—produces a syncopated relationship; in other words, a simple proportional system does not account for the organization of interior spaces if it is defined originally by the central C space (7.8). In the side-to-side variation, there is a clearer geometric or proportional relationship of the side rooms, the central C space, and the entry vestibule (7.9).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
cornaro is the first v IL L A where the villa body itself extends outward in wings that in other villas become barchessa extensions. Here the extensions are still functionally and formally part of the main villa body. The ideal villa need only detach these extensions and pull the rear portico outward to produce a symmetrical ABCBA volumetric and functional arrangement (7.10). Similarly a simple set of operations produces the virtual villa. The rear portico, A, is pushed into the rear transition space, B, producing an A/B overlay. Depending on the position of the rear B bay, however, there is also a reading of a B/C overlay in the rear with no apparent A/B overlay present (7.11). The central space, C, is figured by a series of flat pilasters and half-round niches except in its connection to the front corridor. Without any articulation of this connection (with a corner column, doorway, or pilasters as at Rotonda, for example), the C space could be read as pressing out into the front transition space, creating a second reading of B/C in addition to the previous one in the rear of the villa (7.12). These front transition spaces, in turn, extend to the sides of the main villa body (7.13).
To further understand the nuances in the plan of Cornaro, it is also necessary to look at the differing location of the porticos. Both porticos are the same size and shape, but one is embedded in the building and the other is outside of or attached to the main building, similar to the porticos at Rotonda (7.14). Based on their relative locations, the porticos are read as either outside of or overlaid onto corresponding B and C spaces in the villa. Several readings are possible depending on which portico is considered a base condition and where the central C space (as either the figured space with four columns or the space including the extension toward the front of the building) is accounted for. The A space, or portico, can be seen as a virtual condition relative to one overlay of an ideal square. There is an oscillation back and forth between an articulated condition of center—articulated as a continuity of poched spaces—and a reading of the portico
pushed into the B space, creating an A/B condition in the rear of the C, where otherwise the C, the B, and the A spaces are intact. Palladio proposes the virtual as a base, but also an unstable base condition, that is, the movement from a virtual base condition to the actual building itself. This instability produces various ambiguous readings of A, A/B, B/C, and C. There are several internal shifts of symmetry and alignments of doorways to niches that further destabilize the interior organization. Likewise, the centerline of the villa shifts depending on whether the overall building volume or the central C space is read as the base condition (7.15,7.16). When the villas are closely read, various conventional notations, such as center and edge, scale, or the reading of front to back, begin to change. In that sense, these readings refer not to an actual idealized whole but rather to a series of virtual notations or parts that are rarely fixed or stable.
7-3.	Geometric diagram of Comaro. A square can be drawn from the outside
of the rear stairs to the exterior wall onto which the front portico is seen to be attached.
7-5-	Geometric diagram of Comaro. The overlap between two squares aligned
to the inboard edge of the side rooms defines the width of the front entry vestibule.
7.7. Geometric diagram of Cornaro. Two squares describe the tripartite ABA relationship of the side rooms to the central bay of the villa, leaving the rear staircases and side extensions unaccounted for.
7-9. Geometric diagram of Comaro. In the side-to-side variation, there is a clearer geometric or proportional relationship among the side rooms, the central C space, and the entry vestibule.
7.4.	Geometric diagram of Cornaro. A second square aligns with the edge of
the front steps and the rear wall of the central room.
7.6.	Geometric diagram of Cornaro. The overlap between two squares is equal
in width neither to the entry vestibule nor to the central space itself but to the space between the columns of the central space.
7.8. Geometric diagram of Cornaro. The alignment of squares to principal edges front to back—the portico steps and interior walls in particular-produces a syncopated relationship.
7.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Cornaro. The rear portico, A, is pushed into the rear transition space, B, producing an A/B overlay.
7.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Cornaro. Depending on the position of the rearB bay, however, there is also a reading of a B/C overlay in the rear with no apparent A/B overlay present.

7.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Cornaro. Without any articulation of the connection between the front corridor and the central space, the C space could be read as pressing out into the front transition space, creating a second reading of B/C in addition to the previous one in the rear of the villa.
7-13- Diagram of Comaro. The front transition spaces extend to the sides of the main villa body.
7.14. Diagram of Cornaro. Both porticos are the same size and shape, but one is embedded in the building and the other is outside of or attached to the main building, similar to the porticos at Rotonda.

7.15. Diagram of Cornaro. Several internal shifts of symmetry and alignments	7.16. Diagram of Cornaro. The centerline of the villa shifts depending on
of doorways to niches further destabilize the interior organization.	whether the overall building volume or the central C space is read as the
base condition.
PART II
THE
BARCHESSA
PROJECTS
EXTENSIONS INTO THE LANDSCAPE
VILLA FOSCARI
GAMBARARE,1558
AS the first proj ECT in the second category ofvillas defined by this analysis, “The Barchessa Projects: Extensions into the Landscape,” the Villa Foscari (known as Malcontenta) at Gambarare, outside of Venice, is key to the argument presented in this book that there is little of the “ideal” about this or any of Palladio’s villas, and that any notion of ideality with regard to them masks a more complex interpretation. There are two unique conditions at Malcontenta. First, because Malcontenta is sited on the Brenta River, on which guests from Venice would arrive, the major of its two entries is away from the land (garden) side, facing the river with an elaborate entry portico that dominates the facade. On the land side, the entry is on the ground level below the piano nobile, through a flattened plane marked by the slight articulation of an outlined portico forward of the facade plane. This reads as a virtual portico. Because of the dual entries, the central reception space is extended as a dominant cruciform reaching from the actual portico in the front to the virtual “portico” in the rear and overlaid on a telescoping series of side rooms, which produces an unusual ABC sequence from front to back, different from the typical ACA organization of a nine-square plan.
The second unique condition at Malcontenta is the relationship of the body of the villa itself to two parallel garden walls that were never built (8.2). These walls are the first indications of the more fully developed barchessa projects that will gradually overtake and dominate the Palladian villa body. In the case of Malcontenta, the location of these garden walls keys several important complexities: the river-side portico and stairs fall outboard of the parallel walls, while on the garden side, only the thin frontispiece
8.1.
Analytic model of Villa Foscari.
projection falls outside the parallel walls, making it clear that any ideality ascribed to this villa is somewhat illusory. Yet the notion of an ideal villa proposed by Colin Rowe, as mentioned in the Introduction, began with the Villa Rotonda and extended to Malcontenta in his famous essay “The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa” (1947), although his notion of the ideal was far from any accepted definition of the term. In Rowe’s view, it was the synthesis of villa and landscape, as well as the relationship between plan and elevation that made Malcontenta ideal, compared in the essay to Le Corbusier’s Villa Stein at Garches. By contrast, in the terms established here, the ideal is an implied and ultimately unattained state, an internal reference never actualized in the Palladian project; it is the breaking apart of the villa into the landscape, not their synthetic relationship, that is seen to animate Palladio’s work.
8.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Foscari in the Four Books, 1570.

ANALYTIC MODEL
WHILE OSTENSIBLY articulating the different elements of the villa—porticos, transition spaces, and central rooms—the model of Malcontenta exposes one problem with Rowe’s claim to the villa’s ideality. The traditional monoaxial ABCBA organization of the ideal villa is disrupted in Malcontenta by the compression of the garden-side portico into a flattened plane. Because of the resulting overlay of the implied portico, A, the circulation bay, B, and the rear arm of the cruciform central space, C, the three spaces in the center bay on the garden side of the villa are shown as framed, or conceptually active, volumes, not as neutral solid white, gray, or black volumes: A, B, and C are not dominant over one another. The implied or virtual portico on the garden side is likewise shown as a framed, active volume, since it does not actually exist as a portico. The representation of the garden-side portico as a solid white element has been reduced to just the thickness of the wall as opposed to a volume. While the central cruciform figure is clearly legible in the plan, only the side and front arms are shown as solid black volumes in the model, where the space defines the central volume; the rear arm partially comprises the ABC overlay in the rear. While the front portico (and its supporting columns)—which sits outboard of the garden wall—is shown as a solid white or conceptually passive volume, a secondary reading suggests that the front stairs, because they turn at a landing and run parallel to the garden wall, could be seen as a B or transition space as opposed to simply part of the front portico, A; thus the gray B framed volume in the front of the villa. The center rooms on either side of the villa and the garden walls themselves, though active in one sense as locating various internal notations, can be read as conceptually inactive, shown in the model in shallow relief. It should be noted that it is only in these physical models that the important distinctions between active, passive, and neutral can be made.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
ACTIVE and passive, real and virtual constantly oscillate within the framework of a given—although arbitrary—base condition: the ideal square. The most basic geometric diagram describing Malcontenta is comprised of a single square, but even this square resists reduction to an ideal state, as it sits to the inboard face of the villa’s exterior side walls and to the outboard face of the villa’s front, water-side portico and the slight protrusion of the rear, garden-side facade (8.3). If this square is shifted side to side to the inner edges of the garden walls, the resulting overlay of the three squares produces the dimension of the villa’s center bay, C (8.4). Shifted front to back, the overlay of the three squares encompasses the second and third lateral layers of the villa when it is seen as having a four-part front-to-back organization, ABBA (8.s). Two other sets of squares—one set located within the rectangular volume of the villa proper, the other including the exterior front portico and stairs—describe the internal geometry of the villa (8.6,8.7). These squares articulate the basic tripartite or ACA organization of the villa, though clearly neither set of squares can take the entire villa into account.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
THE BASIC TOPOLOGICAL OR RELATIONAL D I AG R AM of Malcontenta gives the most ideal reading possible of a front-to-back layered ABCBA symmetry (8.8). Here the central C space is not a lateral layer, as it is in Chiericati, but a cruciform with its own ABA internal organization. The actual, or virtual, villa is a superposition of B and C at the front, or water side, and a collapse of A, B, and C at the rear, garden side. This reading is further reinforced by the slight forward placement from the facade plane of a virtual portico, A, at the rear. Because of the location of the stairs perpendicular to the garden facade, which frame the central cruciform figure, what is seen is the possibility of a triple overlay, where the A and B spaces occupy the same space as the C or main space. Clearly demonstrated here is the transition from a real condition (the location of particular elements) toward a virtual condition.
Two other diagrams demonstrate the irreducibility of Malcontenta to a single ideal reading. The first locates the front transition, B, bay in the dimension of the portico, on the exterior of the villa, which acknowledges the difference between the staircases facing outward and those running parallel to the villa facade (8.9). The rear A space is read as a flattened plane that is not overlaid internally; the virtual diagram comprises an A/B space in the front and a B/C space in the rear. The ideal diagram articulates the layering of A and B on the exterior of the villa in the front, the cruciform C space, and an internal B and exterior A space in the rear. An alternative diagram combines the exterior and interior B spaces and reads the central cruciform figure as bilaterally symmetrical (8.10).
As mentioned earlier, there was to have been a series of garden walls at Malcontenta— proto-barchesse—on which the main body of the villa sat. As it does at the Villa Cornaro, the front portico, which acts as a frontispiece to the villa, is located outboard of the horizontal garden wall, although the garden walls (both front and back) can also be seen as continuous with the building facades (8.11,8.12). The front portico, rendered as a series of walls in Palladio’s drawing, comprises eight equally-spaced columns, which sit inboard of the edge of the portico, and two half-round columns that engage with the exterior wall and frame the entrance.
The C space is not merely a barrel-vaulted longitudinal space connecting front and back, but is a cruciform shape that reads as either compressed on the sides or elongated front and back from a bilaterally symmetrical form (8.13). The cruciform C space appears in several of the barchessa projects, although in this case is most similar to the C space at the Villa Pisani. In both cases, the main body of the villa has nominally a nine-square parti comprising a series of side rooms around the cruciform central room. The compression of the “virtual” rear portico into the rear facade of Malcontenta is registered in the compression of the cruciform and the decreasing dimensions of the side rooms from front to back (8.14). The compression can also be understood as acting on a square the width of the villa, which is centered on the cruciform. This reading reinforces the unusual nature of the front portico and makes conspicuous the absence of a rear portico by expressing its virtual or implied depth (8.15).
8.3.	Geometric diagram of Foscari. A single square sits to the inboard
face of the villa's exterior side walls and to the outboard face of the villa’s front, water-side portico and the slight protrusion of the rear, garden-side facade.
8.5. Geometric diagram of Foscari. Shifted front to back, the overlay of the
three squares encompasses the second and third lateral layers of the villa when it is seen as having a four-part front-to-back organization, ABBA.
8.7.	Geometric diagram of Foscari. Another set of squares including the
exterior front portico and stairs describes the internal geometry of the villa.
Geometric diagram of Foscari. When the square is shifted side to side to the inner edges of the garden walls, the resulting overlay of the three squares produces the dimension of the villa's center bay, C.
Geometric diagram of Foscari. A set of squares located within the rectangular volume of the villa proper describes the internal geometry of the villa.
The oscillation between symmetrical and asymmetrical conditions is further expressed in the misalignment of niches and openings between the interior and exterior of the villa. Of importance here is the Venetian character of the frontal plane, that is, the play between the composition of the facade as a whole and the articulation of the fenestration. Within the dimension of the pedimented portion of the portico are the front door and two side windows, equally spaced, relative to one another. Because the side windows appear to be primarily of the symmetrical composition of the portico, they appear detached from the outboard windows. On the interior, however, the side windows and outboard windows belong to the same room, which produces a reading of another symmetrical organization (the side window and outboard window pairs) sliding, in a sense, under the pediment.
The doubling of the side window, belonging equally to the main entry and the outboard window, is a condition similar to the play of doorways and windows on the facades of many palazzi in Venice, for example the fifteenth-century Ca’ d’Oro on the Grand Canal, which Palladio would have known. Because of the spacing of the five openings on the piano nobile across the facade at Malcontenta, the outboard windows seem to have been pushed to the edge of the villa. On the interior, however, these outer windows align symmetrically with internal openings and niches, and the windows framing the entry, which on the exterior appear to align with one another, seem to be pressed against the inboard wall of the side rooms (8.16). There is a disjunction, then, between the niches placed symmetrically on the interior and asymmetrically under the portico.
Also present at Malcontenta is the Palladian motif, first seen at Rotonda, of square windows placed above and below rectangular windows that mark a series of compressions and elongations on the facade. Palladio takes otherwise normalized conditions of organization—whether in plan or on the facade—and dislocates them, opening up in their dislocation the possibility for architecture to be something other than the historically expected or accepted normative geometric conditions. Equally, the recurrence of these dislocations in Palladio’s work can be considered part of the conceptual shift of Palladian space away from the homogeneous idea of Albertian space to one that is more heterogeneous.
8.8.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Foscari. The virtual villa is a superposition of Band Cat the front, or water side, and a collapse of A, B, and C at the rear, garden side.
8.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Foscari.
The front transition,
B, bay is located in the dimension of the portico, on the exterior of the villa, which acknowledges the difference between the staircases facing outward and those running parallel to the villa facade.
*
8.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Foscari. An alternative diagram combines the exterior and interior B spaces and reads the central cruciform figure as bilaterally symmetrical.

8.11.
Diagram of Foscari. There was to have been a series of garden walls at the villa—proto-barchesse—on which the main body of the villa sat.
8.12. Diagram of Foscari. The front portico, which acts as a frontispiece to
the villa, is located outboard of the horizontal garden wall, although the garden walls (both front and back) can also be seen as continuous with the building facades.
*
8.13.
Diagram of Foscari. The C space is not merely a barrel-vaulted longitudinal space connecting front and back, but also a cruciform shape that reads as either compressed on the sides or elongated front and back from a bilaterally symmetrical form.
8.14. Diagram of Foscari. The compression of the “virtual” rear portico into the rear facade of the villa is registered in the compression of the cruciform and the decreasing dimensions of the side rooms from front to back.
8.15. Diagram of Foscari. The compression can also be understood as acting on a square the width of the villa, which is centered on the cruciform.
«
8.16. Diagram of Foscari. On the interior, the outer windows align
symmetrically with internal openings and niches; and the windows framing the entry, which on the exterior appear to align with one another, seem to be pressed against the inboard wall of the side rooms.
K
VILLA EMO
FANZOLO, 1564
THE VILLA EMO IS THE SECOND IN THE SERIES OF VIL L A S that trace the evolution of the barchesse as perhaps one of the most important Palladian inventions. Unlike its immediate predecessor in terms of this book’s three-part taxonomy, the Villa Foscari, in which the villa body is suspended between two garden walls, Emo straddles a single linear garden wall and the arcade of the barchessa. Unlike most of the barchessa developments to follow, the barns at Emo are turned in a line toward the rear garden as opposed to forming a courtyard to the front (9.2). What makes any analysis of the relationship between the main body of the villa and the barchesse problematic is the misalignment between the space of the interior rooms and both the exterior arcade columns and the garden wall. The villa body itself—nominally a nine-square configuration in plan—is rather simple, although there is a clear difference between the front portico, which is pressed into the villa body, and the rear portico space, which comprises only a stair leading directly into the largest interior volume. This distinction between front and back, which runs counter to an ideal symmetry, is a recurring condition in the villa projects and will become more active in relation to the development of the barchessa plans.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the model of emo reveals both the latent complexity of the seemingly modest internal organization as well as the disjunctive relationship between the villa body and
9.1.
Analytic model of Villa Emo.
the barchesse. This is the first analytic model where there is a necessary articulation of the outbuildings; in this case, the arcaded space of the barchessa extensions are read as both active and passive elements and are therefore shown as partly framed and partly solid gray B volumes. The framed barchessa volumes locate the virtual or unseen position of the side buildings in line with the B spaces within the main villa body, which are shown as solid gray volumes. This virtual positioning could also be described as an ideal location, as it would align the spaces inside with the spaces outside. The solid barchessa volumes in the model show the actual position of the loggia on either side of the villa body, clearly misaligned with the internal transition bay, B. This actual position could be described as a virtual condition in the sense that the misalignment of inside and outside is a distortion of classical, ideal geometry. Here the designation of virtual, actual, and ideal begins to blur.
The space occupied by the front portico steps is shown as a framed white A volume. Inside the four large columns on the front facade, the portico proper is also shown as a framed volume, indicating that it could be considered an active element in relation to the
9.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing ofEmo in the Four Books, 1570.
other component parts. In addition, this space has around it a black frame, describing the extension of the central C space as a dumbbell-shaped figure through the narrow corridor in the center of the villa toward the front. The overlay of A, B, and C spaces here renders all three spatial types conceptually active; in other words, neither A nor B nor C is dominant, despite the fact that they are all virtually located within the actual space of the portico, A. Across the center bay of the villa, two framed gray B volumes surround a narrow solid black C element, which is identified by its location in the center of the villa, not for any spatial characteristic as a main space. The main C space in the rear bay of the villa is an extruded black wall, which acknowledges both its virtual position in the rear—as opposed to the center of the villa—and its reading as a figural void, where the volume is defined by the wall poche. The dimension of the rear facade is shown here as a B or transition element, an extrusion of the rear wall. Like the front steps, the space occupied by the narrow staircase leading into the back of the villa is shown as a framed white entry volume; there is no solid volume here because there is no actual portico, only an implied one.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THERE ARE many geometric overlays that describe the organization of Emo, although most are only partial diagrams. The main body of the villa is a square (9.3), and while the porticos, which appear to be added onto the villa body, can be taken into account by shifting the first square front to back, there are no interior alignments of these two new squares (9-4). It is an unusual characteristic of Emo that there is little relationship between inside and outside. Several partial diagrams of the interior organization can be drawn, all of which describe but do not entirely define the dominant though asymmetrical nine-square plan (9.S-9.8). These diagrams reinforce the various internal compressions and extensions from an ideal nine-square plan of the center and side rooms in the villa. When a square is drawn to the width of the space between the villa body and the outbuildings, there is some suggestion of coordination between exterior and interior; namely, when the squares are extended through the villa itself, the overlap between two squares in the middle is equal to the width of the minor staircase in the rear of the villa (9.9). Finally, the outboard dimension of the villa from portico to staircase is equal to two squares that are equal in width to two bays of the villa (9.10). When these squares are shifted side to side, they take into account in their overlap the wider center bay.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
AS IS THE CASE WITH MOST THREE-BAY VILLAS (as opposed to four-or five-bay), there is little apparent conceptual superposition and thus little virtual density at Emo. While it has a literal straightforward quality, Emo may be the most virtual villa of all, since it is the most difficult to translate into an ideal villa. In an initial, quite literal reading, the front portico, A, could be seen to be pushed into the front transition bay, B,
which is followed by an actual B circulation bay that separates the portico from the C or main space. The B space seems to push the main C, or central space, completely to the rear. Thus, from the rear, the main space quite literally sits in the position of either an A or B space, which produces a C/B/A condition (9.11). The asymmetry of the two entry stairs suggests other problematic conditions within. For example, when read by location, what would typically be a large C volume at the literal, physical center of the main body of the villa is actually occupied by two small internal stairs and a very narrow vestibule or transition space.
In a second virtual diagram, the front portico, A, includes both the steps and the portico itself in the first internal bay of the main villa volume. The middle internal bay, which includes the narrow vestibule and staircases, can be read as a B space. The C space is again the large square room in the rear or third bay of the villa. Reading from back to front then, the rear steps can be seen as the rear portico, A, which lead to a transition space, B, comprising the third internal bay of the villa (9.12). As in the first virtual diagram, there is no clear C space, since the overlay B/C occurs in this third bay. Unlike the first virtual diagram, in this reading there is no A/B overlay in the front of the villa, because the internal circulation instead indicates a B space in a different position, that is, in the set of rooms beyond the front portico.
A third virtual diagram disregards the conventional spatial characteristics of the C space, instead reading the sequence ABCBA in terms of position only (9.13). Here the porticos front and back are the same as in the previous diagram, while the transition spaces are the same as in the first virtual diagram. If the plan is read in terms of the conventional position of its elements, the C space should be in the center of a typical nine-square plan. Instead, here at Emo there is only the combination of a vestibule and internal staircases, which in the previous diagram were part of a B space (when identified by spatial type, not position). A final virtual diagram further articulates the problem of assigning notations either by position or type (9.14). Here the porticos front and back are read the same as in the first virtual diagram, that is, as occupying both an external and internal position in relation to the main villa body. In this diagram, the first two internal bays of the villa (reading front to back) are identified by position and type as B or transition spaces, while the only identifiable C space (following the typological and positional characteristics of a central space) is the narrow vestibule between the interior staircases.
9.3. Geometric diagram of Emo. The main body of the villa is a square.
9.5. Geometric diagram of Emo. A partial diagram of the interior organization describes but does not entirely define the dominant though asymmetrical nine-square plan.
9.7- Geometric diagram of Emo. A third partial diagram of the interior
organization, which describes but does not entirely define the dominant though asymmetrical nine-square plan.
9-9- Geometric diagram of Emo. When two squares are extended through the villa itself, the overlap between them in the middle is equal to the width of the minor staircase in the rear of the villa.
9.4. Geometric diagram of Emo. While the porticos can be taken into account by shifting the square front to back, there are no interior alignments of the resulting two new squares.
9.6. Geometric diagram of Emo. A second partial diagram of the interior
organization, which describes but does not entirely define the dominant though asymmetrical nine-square plan.
9.8. Geometric diagram of Emo. A fourth partial diagram of the interior
organization, which describes but does not entirely define the dominant though asymmetrical nine-square plan.
9.10. Geometric diagram of Emo. The outboard dimension of the villa from portico to staircase is equal to two squares that are equal in width to two bays of the villa.
9.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Emo. The B space seems to push the main C, or central space, completely to the rear. Thus, from the rear, the main space quite literally sits in the position of either an A or B space, which produces aC/B/A condition.
9.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Emo. The C space is the large square room in the rear or third bay of the villa. Reading from back to front, the rear steps can be seen as the rear portico,
A, which lead to a transition space, B, comprising the third internal bay of the villa.
9.13.
[deal and virtual diagrams of Emo. A third virtual diagram disregards the conventional spatial
characteristics oftheCspace, instead reading the sequence ABCBA in terms of position only.

%
9.14.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Emo. The first two internal bays of the villa (reading front to back) are identified by position and type as B or transition spaces, while the only identifiable C space (following the typological and positional characteristics of a central space)is the narrow vestibule between the interior staircases.
It is unusual to have the rear entry directly into the main or C space; in this reading, there is no discernible B or transition space in the rear.
As mentioned earlier, at Emo the barchesse seem inverted in relation to their typical orientation: the arcade of the barchesse is on the front side and the interior spaces of the barchesse are in the back. The arcaded outbuildings of the villa provide a form of frontispiece. Their inversion is made even more apparent by the misalignment between the barchessa walls and columns and the facade and interior walls of the villa (9.15).
At Malcontenta, for example, the garden walls align exactly with the facades front and back. At Emo this is not the case.
The entry at Emo occurs through an enclosed space within the villa body. Here there is, in a sense, only a portico and a main space. The B circulation space is displaced into the C space. This leads to an uneven distribution of circulation in the C bay, which articulates the play between B and C. The internal stairs, appearing on either side of a compressed transition space, have little relationship to the size and dimension of the room in which they sit. Typically the cross-axial relationship in the C bay or main space is on the central cross-axis of the space. At Emo the poche of the outside walls, with its many niches, seems disconnected from the interior rooms, which have very little wall articulation. Again, this is an inversion of a recurring Palladian condition, where the articulations of the center space usually extend to the side rooms or even to the barchesse.
There is also a minor entry in the rear of the villa without an actual portico or even the implication of a compressed portico, which creates a strange condition from front to back. The organization is similar to Malcontenta, that is, a tripartite set of rooms, which at Malcontenta are compressed into a portico-like element in the rear facade; at Emo, the rooms expand toward the rear facade and an unusually narrow staircase is then attached directly to the main body of the villa. The differences between Malcontenta and Emo are further articulated in the circulation through the side rooms, which is moved to the outside of the rooms at Malcontenta—a typical Palladian condition—while at Emo, the circulation occurs on the central axis of the rooms. There is also an unusual progression from front to back of a double-niche to a single-niche to a triple-niche arrangement on the outboard walls of the side rooms. This arrangement of niches along the side walls is juxtaposed to the central C-space, where the niches occur in the front and rear walls instead of the sides. The absence of niches in the flat side walls of the C space gives a reading of the outboard walls of the villa as extensions out from the center, or, alternatively, that the organization of the villa could be seen as not only nine-square but possibly linear in nature; that is, as an elongated U-shaped figure extending from the front portico to the interior of the rear facade (9.16,9.17). Thus, multiple readings exist simultaneously, their differences articulated by slight deviations away from convention of certain architectural elements, such as the niche.

9.15. Diagram of Emo. The inversion of the barchesse is made even more
apparent by the misalignment between the barchessa walls and columns and the facade and interior walls of the villa.
9-16. Diagram of Emo. The absence of niches in the flat side walls of the C space	9-17. Diagram of Emo. Various internal compressions and extensions from an
gives a reading of the outboard walls of the villa as extensions out from	ideal nine-square plan of the center and side rooms in the villa,
the center.


VILLA POIANA
POJANA MAGGIORE, 1550
THE VILLA POIANA can be c o n s ID E R E d one of the most modern expressions of the Palladian villas. This is because the articulation of the plane of the facade as opposed to the articulation of the volumetric space of the portico is the dominant element. With only a pair of columns supporting an arched opening set into the face of the building, the entry seems more like the residual imprint of a triumphal arch than it does a portico. This interpretation is sustained by the pyramidal buildup of the facade from the periphery to the center, which is echoed in plan where the main volume of the villa body projects forward from a rear garden-wall datum. Even the two barchessa volumes immediately flanking the interior spaces of the villa, which have no connection in plan to the interior, are treated as part of the mass of the villa. In this sense the villa is only marginally a barchessa project; save for the rear garden wall and an incomplete garden arcade and its extensions, there is little that is barchessa-like (10.2). Palladio’s plan and elevation drawings of Poiana, it should be pointed out, are the only representations in the Four Books in which the building is not centered on the page (part of the original drawing is cropped by the limits of Palladio’s page layout).
Because of the integration with its barchesse, Poiana presents an anomaly with at least four possible notational scenarios. While the villa is literally a two-bay-deep, central organization, it can also be seen as a three-deep or a one-deep condition, depending on the point of origin of the reading. From a traditional standpoint—that is, in relation to an ideal state—there is an inserted portico, A, and a long narrow main central C space flanked on both sides by transition or B-like bays. What is unique here is that two other
10.1.
Analytic model of Villa Poiana.
entries can be read from the barchessa arcade into each side of the rear-most wings extending from the main volume of the villa. These now could be read as two A or portico spaces that pass through two layers of transitional B spaces and culminate in the C space; the anomaly is that this occurs from the sides rather than from the front or back.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE AMBIGUITY AND COMPLEXITY of the internal organization of Poiana in relation to the barchesse is expressed in the model, which articulates several possible interpretations of plan and volume. First, the steps and portico proper both front and back are rendered as conceptually active and thus framed white volumes. Where the front portico is seen to be compressed into the transition space, B, between the portico and the central C space in the main body of the villa, the resulting A/B space is conceptually active and thus rendered as void. Neither the A nor the B notation—that is, neither the portico nor the transition space—is primary or dominant. The only part of the front
10.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Poiana in the Four Books, 1570.
portico shown as a passive or solid white element, A, is the portion of the facade itself that projects slightly forward from the villa’s exterior wall, which is, in turn, shown as passive B space in solid gray. The transition bays flanking the portico (oriented from front to back) as well as the side rooms in the rear bay (oriented side to side) are considered neutral, and thus shown as solid gray volumes. The central C space is shown as a solid black volume; however, because its width corresponds with the width of the front portico steps, a virtual or implied extension of the C space is shown in the model as a conceptually active and thus framed black volume projecting to the front facade. Finally, the rear exterior wall and its lateral extensions into the gardens are considered conceptually neutral and rendered as solid white extrusions.
A second interpretation of Poiana registers an ABCBA organization from side to side rather than from front to back. To articulate this interpretation, the model depicts the columns of the side courtyards as solid white extrusions and the spaces inside the front-to-back garden walls (which are, in fact, exterior courtyards, although in the plan they appear to be interior) as framed gray volumes. In this interpretation, the C notation accounts for the entire central bay of the villa’s main body, which is framed in black. Because the model superposes two possible interpretations, the central bay is conceptually active—neither A nor B nor C is spatially dominant—and thus rendered as predominantly void (save for the actual central space). This explains why the internal staircases flanking the main space in the central bay, which would typically be considered passive elements, are shown as active or void and not as solid gray B circulation volumes, because they fall within the active space of the superposed A, B, and C notations.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
the irreducibility of p o I an A to a single stable diagram is further expressed in a series of geometric overlays, which, from the beginning, deny the possibility of any ideal. First, a square equal in width to the central bay of the villa body is overlaid to align with the projection of the rear facade (10.3). Although the five rooms (central space, flanking halls, and staircases) within this ideal square are each oriented from front to back, giving the impression of an extension in the front-to-back dimension, the diagram reveals what seems to be a compression of these rooms toward the back from the front of the villa. A second diagram comprises two overlaid squares shifted front and back. Although the porticos themselves clearly differentiate front from back, the space of overlap between the two squares describes the geometric center of the villa: the two symmetrical internal staircases (10.4). A third diagram defines two squares equal in depth to the central bay of the main body of the villa aligned with the flanking side rooms. Their overlap defines the width of the central bay but individually would leave the opposite side bay unaccounted for (io.s). A similar overlay, this one setting four squares inboard of the villa’s exterior walls, accounts for the width of the villa set within the barchesse, though no clear proportional organization emerges (10.6). A fifth diagram shows two adjacent side-by-side squares that extend from the outboard line of the front and back stairs to the inboard edge of the outer garden walls (10.7). The same two squares, when aligned with
the side walls of the main body of the villa and the front and back steps, describe again an indeterminate relationship between the villa’s depth and width with the barchessa extensions omitted (10.8).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
THERE are TWO equally STRONG SYSTEMS of notation possible in Poiana: one along the main central axis; the other along the rear wall. Within each of these notations there are also countermanding notations. To begin with, from the front, there appears to be no B space as the A portico space is pushed into the villa body up against the C space, producing a T-shaped interior figure, similar in some respects to the interior figures of Villa Sarego at Miega and the Villa Valmarana, as well as to those of several projects to follow (the Villa Zeno and the Villa Angarano, in particular). It is only when the slight projection of the main body forward of both the rear wall and front facade is seen that a compression of the portico, A, into a B space, which produces an overlaid A/B space, can be understood. Here the outboard front stair can be read as the missing or virtual A space (10.9). There is another notational system across the back, with its own complications. This reading demands, on account of the slight protrusion of the rear facade in the portico bay, that a portico also be identified as overlaid on the adjacent B space. While the central space remains the same as in the first reading, the front B space can now be seen as the actual circulation bay, itself overlaid on the C space (10.10). This reading leaves the compressed front portico as a singular volume, A.
While at first the villa body at Poiana itself might appear to have a symmetrical ABCBA structure, this is not the case. In plan, the projection of the front and rear porticos distinguishes the central entry bay from the barchessa and side bays. Within this central bay, four narrow spaces surround a T-shaped figure. Despite the more obvious compression of the facade at the front of the villa, there is also a reading of compression toward the secondary entry in the rear caused by the T-shaped organization, which produces an asymmetry front to back (unlike the symmetrical plan of Emo). Coupled with the extension of the side walls into the barchesse and surrounding arcades, this central T-shaped figure, as opposed to a cruciform or square C space, produces several different possible conditions of internal symmetry and alignment (10.11,10.12).
The addition of the side rooms that extend the main body of the villa toward the barchesse produces two oscillating organizations: one that relates the side-to-side oriented spaces to one another (the side rooms and the front portico space); one that relates the front-to-back oriented side and central rooms (10.13,10.14). This is a unique condition: typically all niches align—even if on asymmetrical axes—from the front of the villa to the back. Here, while the three niches in the outer rooms on the rear villa plane align with three niches across the dimension of the room, only one opening occurs in the outer room on the front villa plane. These front rooms are, in a sense, garden rooms or stables, although as rendered in the plan they are seen as part of the main body of the villa; in the elevation, the distance between the three bays of the main villa and the rear wings is ambiguous. The portico slips into and out of the front facade (10.15).
10-3- Geometric diagram of Poiana. A square equal in width to the central bay of the villa body is overlaid to align with the projection of the rear facade.
10.5. Geometric diagram of Poiana. The overlap of two squares equal in depth to the central bay of the main body of the villa aligned with the flanking side rooms defines the width of the central bay but individually would leave the opposite side bay unaccounted for.
10.7. Geometric diagram of Poiana. Two adjacent side-by-side squares extend from the outboard line of the front and back stairs to the inboard edge of the outer garden walls.
10.4. Geometric diagram of Poiana. Although the porticos themselves clearly differentiate front from back, the space of overlap between the two squares describes the geometric center of the villa, the two symmetrical internal staircases.
10.6. Geometric diagram of Poiana. A similar overlay, which sets four squares inboard of the villa's exterior walls, accounts for the width of the villa set within the barchesse, though no clear proportional organization emerges.
10.8. Geometric diagram of Poiana. Two squares, when aligned with the side walls of the main body of the villa and the front and back steps, describe an indeterminate relationship between the villa's depth and width with the barchessa extensions omitted.
10.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Poiana. A compression of the portico, A,into a B space, which produces an overlaid A/B space, can be understood when the outboard front stair is read as the missing or virtual A space.


10.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofPoiana. Another reading demands, on account of the slight protrusion of the rear facade in the portico bay, that a portico also be identified as overlaid on the adjacent B space.
The pediment of the central bay of the facade is broken by a void and by the upward thrust of an arch, a unique condition among the Palladian projects, similar only to the Villa Godi. Not only is the pediment broken, but also the second- or attic-story windows above the piano nobile windows surrounding the arched entry appear to be missing. Instead of a row of compressed attic-story or basement windows as at the Villa Rotonda, the Villa Foscari, and the Villa Emo, for example, the inboard piano nobile windows at Poiana appear compressed outward relative to the blank wall above them.
As a result of the broken pediment, the corbelling of the pediment appears to connect directly to the cornice line of the main volume of the villa. The pediment comes out of what seems to be a continuous plane, a unique facade strategy seen only at Poiana. Here the side bays and the pediment read as one and the same surface. No longer does the facade comprise columns with capitals, although the residue of the column/capital assembly remains in the small half-round columns supporting arches compressed into the facade and in the compression of the center column pair into the plane of the facade. The relatively flat surface of the facade at Poiana now takes up all the energies of what were formerly classical elements: columns, roundels, arches, etc. These elements are now reduced to indentations and traces, a flattened relief with little iconic symbolism in the surface and only a figural residue of iconic elements. The symbolism of the elements is used here to transgress the tripartite relationship of the iconic portico, which is flattened into and becomes part of the composition of the entire facade.
10.11.	Diagram of Poiana. Despite the more obvious compression of the facade at the front of the villa, there is a reading of compression toward the secondary entry in the rear caused by a T-shaped organization, which produces an asymmetry front to back.
10.12.	Diagram of Poiana. Coupled with the extension of the side walls into the barchesse and surrounding arcades, this central T-shaped figure produces several different possible conditions of internal symmetry and alignment.
10.13.	Diagram of Poiana. The addition of the side rooms that extend the
main body of the villa toward the barchesse produces an organization that relates the side-to-side oriented spaces to one another.
10.14.	Diagram of Poiana. The addition of the side rooms that extend the main body of the villa toward the barchesse produces an organization that relates the front-to-back oriented side and central rooms.
10.15- Diagram of Poiana. The portico slips into and out of the front facade.

VILLA ZENO
CESSALTO, 1560
the villa zeno IS the fourth in the typological evolution of the barchessa projects. It is a more typical barchessa project than the Villa Emo in that it has an arcaded forecourt that fronts an enclosing garden wall and two wings of relatively unarticulated outbuildings. As with the Villa Malcontenta, the Villa Poiana, and Emo there exists at Zeno a dynamic relationship between the main building mass and a series of parallel or planar elements—a garden wall that passes through the villa body and creates an inverted U-shaped front courtyard, and a line of columns, which acts as a loggia that fronts the garden wall and produces a transition between the courtyard and the main building elements. The garden wall penetrates the body of the villa, while the loggia engages the frontal plane of the facade, leaving three-quarter-round engaged columns at the corners of the villa body (11.2).
As will be seen in the more developed Villa Pisani, which follows in the category of barchessa projects, Zeno introduces in the forecourt a small-scale tripartite stair motif, one in the center and one to each side. In the development of the barchessa projects Zeno is also unusual, because the typical entry sequence at the front of the villas, which is framed by the barchesse forecourt, is here inverted. Palladio’s presentation of the plan in the Four Books seems turned 180 degrees, with the major portico entry at the top of the plan, where traditionally it is at the bottom of the page facing up. In Zeno the main entry portico is at the rear of the villa body, and the front has little exterior facade articulation other than the trace of an arch flattened into the frontal plane denoted by an arched tripartite “Palladian” window. The windows of the outboard rooms on the
11.1.
Analytic model of Villa Zeno.
front facade, otherwise typical of the Veneto, have been moved outward to the edge of the facade, creating an active blank space or void on either side of the entry ensemble windows. Zeno’s relationship to Pisani is threefold: first, in the tripartite semicircular so-called “Palladian” window in the center of the upper story of the facade; second, in the relationship of the main body of the villa to the barchessa; and third, in the deployment of the rooms on the interior.
Zeno is one of the only villas without a true front portico. Rather, what exists is merely a trace of such a portico in the semicircular tripartite oculus that, coupled with the placement of windows in what could be the central bay and small roof pediment crowning this ensemble, gives the sense of a missing columnar portico, its trace etched flat into the facade. The same semicircular window arrangement pressed into the facade occurs at Malcontenta, the important difference being that at Malcontenta the “virtual” rear portico protrudes slightly from the main building mass. At Zeno, the seemingly minor staircase attaches directly to a flat facade, and the windows are voids punched
11.2. Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Zeno in the Four Books, 1570.
into the exterior surface. There is an unusual connection of the ground floor to the barchesse through a similar tripartite stair arrangement as at Pisani. But unlike the stair arrangement there, the two side stairs at Zeno connect the barchesse not to a portico but directly into the main body of the villa.
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE REFERENCES TO MALCONTENTA, EMO, POIANA, AND PISANI are expressed to varying degrees in the analytic model of Zeno. Similar to the model of Poiana, for example, the Zeno model incorporates the barchesse—particularly the garden wall and arcade—into the overall diagram. Because the courtyard colonnade is continuous with the front facade, both are shown as solid, conceptually neutral white, or A-space, extrusions. The volume implied by the minor front entry staircase is shown as a framed white or virtual A space. Beyond the facade, the spaces into which the side staircases lead are shown as solid gray or neutral B volumes, which flank the vaulted solid black main C space, while the spaces of the barchessa arcade are shown as framed or active B volumes. The garden wall, which penetrates the main body of the villa and acts as a virtual plane through which the C space extends, is also articulated as a gray B element. The implied (not actual) continuation of the interior segment of this wall is registered as a reveal in the C volume.
Flanking the rear portion of the C volume are two additional solid, neutral gray B volumes indicating the placement of an interior stair (left) and another small room (right). To the left and right of these solid B volumes are framed or void gray B volumes. Because Palladio draws these side rooms with some indication of what today would be called a reflected ceiling plan, which is rare in the Four Books, they are shown neither as simply inactive nor neutral, as is typical of many side rooms in the analytic models. Instead, they are considered to have some conceptual quality, in this case passive, in their relationship to the plan organization. Finally, the rear portico, including the steps, is shown as a framed white volume—that is, it is seen to be conceptually active—where the portico, A, and transition bay, B (shown to the left and right as solid gray volumes), are equally present in the space. Unlike the front facade, which is shown in white, the rear facade is shown in gray as a B element as opposed to an A element. This is because the rear facade appears in the original drawing as a solid plane with arched openings punched into it—related more in a sense to the interior transition bay than to the portico—rather than articulated as a column and beam construction, which would be more typical of a facade that marks entry.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THE GEOMETRIC complexities at zeno caused by the unusual deployment of the exterior stairs and the relationship of the villa body to the barchessa are apparent in a series of overlays that begins from a single square. This square takes into account
the main body of the villa and the front and back stairs but excludes the side stairs (11.3). When this square shifts to align with the exterior walls front and back, it describes the implied or virtual outer dimensions of what would be ideally positioned porticos front and back (11.4). A larger square, centered on the side garden wall and aligned with the outer edge of the main, rear portico and side stairs, leaves the minor front stair unaccounted for (ii.s). Yet it implies, in its symmetrical relationship to both the central C space and the garden wall, the extent of the ideal villa; that is, if Zeno were symmetrical from front to back according to an ideal ABCBA organization, the front portico would align with the front edge of this larger square.
A series of double-square diagrams address the geometric relationships of interior and exterior elements. The overlay of two symmetrical squares aligned with the outer edge of the side stairs, for instance, is equal in width to the rectangular central C space, which is oriented front to back as opposed to side to side (11.6). The same two squares aligned with the inboard edges of the villa’s end walls overlap in the center bay, which is defined not by the central C space but by the width of the rear portico (11.7). While the three lateral bays of the villa appear to be equal in depth, they are slightly different, as evidenced by two additional diagrams (and corroborated by Palladio’s own plan notation). The first diagram sets two adjacent squares symmetrically about the center of the villa, which are equal in depth to the front and middle lateral bays (and also to the length of the central C space) (11.8). The second locates two squares equal in depth to the middle and rear lateral bays (and equal in width to the central portico bay in the rear), which do not overlap. Instead, the space left between these two squares is equal to the width of the minor front staircase (11.9).
There are also several geometric overlays that describe the proportional relationships of the barchesse to the main villa body. The first begins with a square defined by the outer edge of the barchessa buildings and the end wall of the villa volume, which is equal in depth to the forecourt. When shifted toward the villa body, this square aligns with the inboard edge of the barchessa building and the interior wall of the villa volume that defines the central C space. The same square aligned with the center of the villa reveals that the villa body itself does not have a corresponding dimension to the space of the barchesse (11.10). However, when two squares are located inside the loggia of the forecourt, they not only align with the central C space, but their width also corresponds to the distance between the outer edges of the side staircases (11.11). On the one hand, the main body of Zeno seems to be integrally related to the barchesse because of the garden wall that continues through the body of the villa itself. However, this close reading of the geometric relationships of the villa to the barchesse reveals that they are not so easily part of a single idea: the beginnings of a project of disaggregation.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
ZENO HAS A SEEMINGLY TYPICAL NINE-SQUARE PART I. However, it is the central bay to which attention must be paid. There is only one articulated portico, which is compressed into the rear B transition space. There is no portico on the courtyard side,
11.3. Geometric diagram of Zeno. A single square takes into account the main body of the villa and the front and back stairs but excludes the side stairs.
n.6. Geometric diagram of Zeno. The overlay of two symmetrical squares aligned with the outer edge of the side stairs is equal in width to the rectangular central C space, which is oriented front to back as opposed to side to side.
11.9.	Geometric diagram of Zeno. Two squares equal in depth to the middle and rear lateral bays do not overlap. Instead, the space left between these two squares is equal to the width of the minor front staircase.
11.4. Geometric diagram of Zeno. When the square shifts to align with the exterior walls front and back, it describes the implied or virtual outer dimensions of what would be ideally positioned porticos front and back.
11.7. Geometric diagram of Zeno. Two squares aligned with the inboard edges of the villa's end walls overlap in the center bay, which is defined not by the central C space but by the width of the rear portico,
li.io.	Geometric diagram of Zeno. A square
aligned with the center of the villa reveals that the villa body itself does not have a corresponding dimension to the space of the barchesse.
u.5. Geometric diagram of Zeno. A larger square, centered on the side garden wall and aligned with the outer edge of the main, rear portico and side stairs, leaves the minor front stair unaccounted for.
11.8. Geometric diagram of Zeno. Two adjacent squares set symmetrically about the center of the villa are equal in depth to the front and middle lateral bays (and also to the length of the central C space).
ll.ll.	Geometric diagram of Zeno. Two squares located inside the loggia of the forecourt not only align with the central C space, but they also correspond in width to the distance between the outer edges of the side staircases.
but rather a pair of side entries into what would normally be the transition bay and only a minor entry on the main axis, directly into the main C space. These minor entries at Zeno are the only such entries in Palladio’s work to connect a U-shaped barchessa to the villa body without a portico. This condition produces multiple virtual possibilities and makes it difficult even to project the possibility of an ideal villa.
Three interpretations of a virtual villa illustrate this problem. All three begin with what is clearly the dimension of the main space, C, a rectangular space perpendicular to the facades. A first reading identifies the front and rear side-to-side bays as B spaces (11.12). Some idea of a B space is given in the front by the side staircases, which are more a part of the circulation of the villa than the entry; hence their B notation. The front B bay overlays the C space, producing a front B/C space. The front facade itself and the dimension of the small staircase leading from the forecourt into the villa are identified as the front entry or A space. Toward the rear, the B space is both a portico and a space of transition between the central space and the rear portico stairs, A; hence the A/B notation where the rear portico, A, overlays the transition bay, B.
A second interpretation of Zeno’s organization is based on the possibility of reading the two side staircases entering the villa from the barchesse as entry spaces, A— as opposed to circulation, or B, spaces—which overlay the central C space, producing an A/C notation (11.13). The central side-to-side bay, which contains the interior staircases, is then seen as a B bay both in terms of its location in sequence with the front A bay and in terms of its function or type, that is, as internal circulation. This B bay is also superposed on the C space, producing an internal B/C space. Again, the rear side-to-side bay can be seen as a B space as in the previous intepretation, while the rear portico and staircase combine as an A space, creating an A/B space in the rear of the villa. The virtual villa in this interpretation comprises, then, the unusual sequence A/C, B/C, and A/B. A third virtual reading takes into account the three-bay internal organization as well as the lack of an articulated outboard front portico and an overlaid inboard rear portico. Here the front and rear side-to-side bays are each seen as A spaces, while the central side-to-side bay is seen as the only B space (11.14). When overlaid on the central C volume, this creates a sequence from front to back of A/C, B/C, and A. The ideal diagram illustrates the problematic nature of a single B space; the front B space is rendered as merely implied in the ideal diagram.
The multiple interpretations of spatial order and density in the villa are made legible not only by the overall plan organization but also in the details; in the relationship, for example, of column to wall. It is important to notice in Zeno three different conditions of the column in the exterior loggia (11.15). First, there is a round column at the corner of the courtyard (as opposed to a square column, as at Pisani, Angarano, and Trissino). Second, on the open front side of the courtyard, the end of the loggia is marked by the intersection of a square column with the end wall of the stables. In plan, this could be read as a pilaster engaged with the inboard side of the wall. However, in Palladio’s elevation drawing, the column (which appears round) is seen outboard of the wall (see 11.2). The discrepancy between plan and elevation reveals a strange ambivalence toward defining the limits of the project. In one sense, the plan reads as a volume turned in on itself, the space of the courtyard pressing into the building mass; in another sense,
11.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Zeno. Some idea of a B space is given in the front by the side staircases. The front B bay overlays the C space, producing a front B/C space, while the front facade itself and the dimension of the small staircase leading from the forecourt into the villa are identified as the front entry or A space.
11.13.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Zeno. A second interpretation of Zeno’s organization is based on the possibility of reading the two side staircases entering the villa from the barchesse as entry spaces,
A—as opposed to circulation, or B, spaces— which overlay the central C space, producing an A/C notation.
*
11.14.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Zeno. A third virtual reading takes into account the three-bay internal organization as well as the lack of an articulated outboard front portico and an overlaid inboard rear portico.
the line of columns reads as a surface that wraps the inside of the barchesse. This reading is put into question by the third column condition at Zeno, the three-quarter-round engaged columns on the front corners of the facade of the main building. These three-quarter-round columns appear again at Angarano (and in an unusual inverted way at the Villa Thiene at Cicogna), though there they are autonomous elements disengaged from the barchesse.
Another important condition to notice is the flattening of the rear portico columns into the main body of Zeno. Reminiscent of the rectangular courtyard columns of the Palazzo Thiene, the columns here read as fragments of the rear wall of the villa and become flat, engaged pilasters where they meet the wall at the corners of the portico. These flattened columns—what Alberti refers to as columni quadranguli, or rectangular piers—will subsequently reappear in the porticos of Pisani and Godi. In referencing Alberti’s suggestion that the wall is primary and the column merely ornamental, Palladio begins to question the traditional relationship between column and wall, as he breaks down the distinction between villa and barchesse.
In that sense, a singular, stable conception of the villa as a whole cannot easily be found in Zeno. The main body of the villa falls partly within the barchessa and partly outside the garden wall. While the garden wall could be seen as a line of symmetry extending through the middle of the central space, the openings into that space from the side rooms are asymmetrically loaded (11.16). This produces an oscillation between the central space and the flanking rooms, which otherwise align in the rear, whereby the central space appears to shift toward the rear, while the smaller flanking rooms shift toward the front facade. Two further diagrams articulate the internal asymmetries of the villa relative to the implied symmetry of the garden wall. The first renders the villa as a three-by-five bay organization, suggesting that two front-to-back walls are absent from the rear portico (11.17). The second describes the minor misalignment of niches and openings through the side rooms of the villa, an evolving condition in the sequence of villa projects (11.18). These internal discrepancies, combined with the unresolved relationship of the villa proper to the barchesse, suggest a complexity in Zeno otherwise disguised by its relatively undistinguished exterior.
11.15* Diagram of Zeno. Three different conditions of the column in the exterior loggia.
11.16. Diagram of Zeno. While the garden wall could be seen as a line of symmetry extending through the middle of the central space, the openings into that space from the side rooms are asymmetrically loaded.
11.17. Diagram of Zeno. The villa as a three-by-five bay organization, suggesting 11.18. Diagram of Zeno. Minor misalignment of niches and openings through the that two front-to-back walls are absent from the rear portico.	side rooms of the villa.


A
K
VILLA ANGARANO
VICENZA, 1548
SITTING BETWEEN TWO PARALLEL GARDEN WALLS, the volume of the Villa Angarano combines certain evolving motifs of the barchessa projects: the arcaded forecourt, the side-to-side and front-to-back outbuildings, and the specific location of the main body of the villa attached to the garden walls (12.2). The villa is surrounded by a three-sided arcaded enclosure that can be seen to penetrate through the body of the villa. The front garden wall is interrupted in the center by a large exedra, something Palladio would have seen in his studies of various baths of antiquity in Rome. Angarano is the first villa to use the giant exedra as a form of articulation (the Villa Godi, designed eleven years before, displays a minor exedra in the rear courtyard). Angarano also introduces a giant two-story order that spans the entire front facade, although the entry portico seems to be in the rear. This inversion of main facade and entry, which has been seen in several of the previous villa projects, becomes even more complex as a motif in the Villa Barbaro to follow.
Angarano is in many ways similar to the Villa Zeno in that it has side entries from the barchesse into the villa. Like Zeno, it is oriented in the Four Books with the main entry at the top of the plan. Angarano differs from Zeno, however, in that the villa body is inboard of the barchesse and arcaded courtyard, and therefore the side entries are at the “back” or main entry side of the villa rather than the “front.” The backdrop for these differences is the dominant two-story portico with its giant order that is pressed into and spans the “rear” or courtyard facade. This gives rise to countermanding notations of entry and thus multiple superposed readings of A and B with reference to the location
12.1.
Analytic model of Villa Angarano.
of the portico and transition spaces. All of these movements are dominated by the scale of the large exedra of the garden wall.
One of the recurring conditions of Palladian villas is the relationship between the main body of the villa and the context in which it is placed. Angarano is similar in this sense to Barbara in that the barchessa consists of an elaborate double garden wall with the outboard wall having a large central exedra form. The portico, which encompasses the entire width of the main body of the building, is similar as a notation to the giant portico at Barbara. Defined by three-quarter-round engaged columns on the corners and half-round engaged columns in the center, the portico appears to be compressed into the main body of the villa. Strangely, there are no stairs leading into what has been assumed to be the front of the villa facing the courtyard. Since what seems to be a main staircase and portico are in the rear, it can be assumed that this is the front, causing an inversion between front and back. Like Zeno, Angarano questions the status of received ideas of front and back. Normally, the front is marked by a grand staircase and a portico as a triumphal arch, whether pressed into the facade or freestanding. Here the portico— the triumphal arch motif—is located where the front facade would normally be, but there is no staircase or portico vestibule; instead these are in the rear.
12.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Angarano in the Four Books, 1570.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the ambiguity of front and b ac K is revealed in the analytic model, which overlays several interpretations of the ABCBA notational system, advancing the possibility of seeing Palladian space as heterogeneous as opposed to homogeneous. Again, homogeneous space, deriving from Alberti’s definition, implies the direct expression of the discrete nature of individual components of a building (its literal, physical parts— porticos, walls, columns, etc.—as well as its spatial or volumetric parts) comprising a consistent whole. Heterogeneous space (that is, space that is thought to be conceptually active) implies the possibility of an inconsistent whole with multiple readings. The parts of an inconsistent whole, though by necessity physically discrete, describe superpositions or overlays (A/B, B/C, etc.) that produce differing spatial densities. The idea of spatial density is not a literal term, but rather a conceptual one, where parts can take on simultaneously differing readings. In Palladio’s work this produces, for the first time in the sixteenth century, the possibility of an architectural heterogeneity.
First, the model distinguishes between a portico that is the width of the main villa body appearing to be compressed into the courtyard facade, and an entry portico in the rear that is the width of the central space, C, projecting into the body of the villa. Beyond the courtyard facade, which is shown as both a solid white extruded wall and a framed white volume indicating the virtual or implied depth of this facade, is a set of transition or B spaces. The two outboard volumes in the first interior bay are shown as solid or conceptually passive—that is, homogeneous—gray, while the center volume is shown as void black extrusion—it is conceptually active—which describes its alternate reading as the front arm of a centrally-located cruciform C space. The reading of the central C space as a cruciform (a solid black volume in the center surrounded by four void arms) is in opposition to its nominal reading as a rectangular volume adjacent to the courtyard facade. Both of these readings are expressed through the use of solid, framed, and extruded black components in the model, which suggests that neither reading is dominant. Finally, both garden walls—the arcade that appears to continue through the main villa body, and the rear wall—are shown in the model as gray walls, B, as are the two rooms, bound by the walls, that flank the entry portico in the rear. The L-shaped spaces of the courtyard loggias that extend out from the third interior bay of the body of the villa are shown as framed gray volumes.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
several geometric diagrams describe in more explicit terms the idea of the evolving relationship between the main villa body and the barchesse. These diagrams help support the concept of the Palladian project as one of heterogeneity as opposed to homogeneity, although in a slightly different sense than does the analytic model.
The first two diagrams of Angarano illustrate this point. In isolation, the most basic plan overlay of an ideal square frames the main body of the villa, including the thickened
courtyard facade and its giant order engaged columns, but leaves off the main entry staircase in the rear (12.3). In a series, this ideal square—and the main body of the villa with it—loses its significance when seen in relation to the geometry of the courtyard, which has an approximate 2:1 proportion of width to depth. While the first lateral wall inside the villa body appears to reference only an internal proportion or nine-square organization, in this second diagram it is clear that its position could be seen as related to the organization of the courtyard at large (12.4).
Two other diagrams focus on the internal organization of the main villa body.
In the first, which takes into account the depth of the first two interior bays of the villa’s nine-square plan, the space of overlap between two ideal squares is equal to the width of the central space, C, and the rear portico (12.5). In the second, which defines the depth of the rear two interior bays of the villa, the space of overlap of the squares is equal to the narrow opening between the two freestanding columns of the rear entry portico and the minor doorway on the courtyard facade (12.6). These differences, although they may appear insignificant at first, are important because they express the implied oscillation between spatial dimensions in the villas. The middle bay of Angarano, for example, which is shared by the ideal squares in the previous two diagrams, allows the reading of the internal organization to oscillate between one fixed to the dimension of the central C space and one fixed to the dimension of the narrow opening.
Two final geometric overlays look again at the relationship to the barchesse of a seemingly minor instance in the villa body. While the space between the columns in the rear entry portico and the minor doorway in the front facade defines the overlap of two squares located internally in the previous two diagrams, it also describes the space between two larger squares that are equal in depth to the front courtyard (12.7). Again, what appears to have a 2:1 proportion is not quite mathematically resolved, leaving the difference to be taken up by what seems otherwise to be a minor detail, the gap between portico columns. The relationship in terms of scale between something as small as the dimension of a pair of columns and something as large as the organization of the barchesse as a whole is at once Albertian (following his famous dictum that the house is a small city, and the city is a large house) and uniquely Palladian in its ability to highlight an unexpected relationship. A final diagram puts the proportion of the villa body and its position relative to the garden walls into this expanding and contracting context (12.8).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
WHAT is UNIQUE about Palladio’s vi ll a s is that there is rarely a single base condition to which the plan or facade organizations can be reduced, a characteristic of heterogeneous space made clear at Angarano. There are many alternate base possibilities that confound or question the terms front/back, side/center, or villa/barchessa, all of which may operate either simultaneously or oscillate back and forth. There is no one formal diagram that defines an ideal or originary condition. Any such diagram—for example, nine-square or four-square—at best reveals latent possibilities in the villa but does not ground it or stabilize it in any classical sense. In one variation of the ideal ABCBA
12-3- Geometric diagram of Angarano. The most basic plan overlay of an
ideal square frames the main body of the villa, including the thickened courtyard facade and its giant order engaged columns, but leaves off the main entry staircase in the rear.
12.5. Geometric diagram of Angarano. Taking into account the depth of the first two interior bays of the villa’s nine-square plan, the space of overlap between two ideal squares is equal to the width of the central space, C, and the rear portico.
12.7. Geometric diagram of Angarano. The space between the columns in
the rear entry portico and the minor doorway in the front facade describes the space between two large squares that are equal in depth to the front courtyard.
12.4. Geometric diagram of Angarano. While the first lateral wall inside the villa body appears to reference only an internal proportion or nine-square organization, in this second diagram it is clear that its position could be seen as related to the organization of the courtyard at large.
12.6. Geometric diagram of Angarano. Defining the depth of the rear two
interior bays of the villa, the space of overlap of two squares is equal to the narrow opening between the two freestanding columns of the rear entry portico and the minor doorway on the courtyard facade.
12.8. Geometric diagram of Angarano. A series of squares that put the
proportion of the villa body and its position relative to the garden walls into an expanding and contracting context.
12.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Angarano. In one variation of the ideal ABCBA
organizational diagram, the rear entry portico and the courtyard facade— despite its lack of a literal portico— are shown as A spaces.

12.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Angarano. A reading of the front side-to-side bay as A instead of B produces an unusual sequence from courtyard to rear portico of A, A/C,
B/C, A/B, and A, which leaves out any expression of a discrete C space.
organizational diagram for Angarano, described in the analytic model, the rear entry portico and the courtyard facade—despite its lack of a literal portico—are shown as A spaces (12.9). The third side-to-side interior bay onto which the rear portico is overlaid is rendered as a B space, as it contains the actual interior circulation, a set of staircases flanking the interior portion of the portico. This produces an A/B notation in the rear of the villa. Although there is no indication of a circulation element adjacent to the front facade, the first side-to-side interior bay can also be interpreted as a B space on account of its position beyond the front facade. The central rectangular space is denoted as C, which overlays the front B spaces, producing a B/C space directly inboard of the front facade.
A second virtual diagram of the plan organization of Angarano includes the first lateral interior bay (in the previous diagram part of a B notation) as an entry space, A, with the front facade (12.10). In terms of sequence and location, the middle lateral bay would then necessitate a B notation, followed by the same B and A spaces in the rear of the villa as in the previous diagram. The same central C space exists in this reading. The reading of the front side-to-side bay as A instead of B produces in the virtual diagram an unusual sequence from courtyard to rear portico of A, A/C, B/C, A/B, and A, which leaves out any expression of a discrete C space. A comparison between the virtual and ideal diagrams in this interpretation in particular demonstrates again the amount of compression implied in the villa projects, which produces internal spatial densities and underpins the notion of heterogeneity and a composition of diverse or inconsistent parts.
This is highlighted by the superposition of two distinct diagrams evident in the composition of Angarano. The orientation of the side rooms parallel to the front and back facades and the doorways between the central C space and the surrounding rooms suggests a reading of a central cruciform figure within the nominal nine-square organization of the plan. The dominance of the giant order columns on the front facade as well as the continuity of the arcade and rear garden wall through the villa body alternatively suggest a layered or planar reading from front to back (12.11). These two diagrams operate simultaneously in the villa, and in a manner distinct from any sequential ABCBA notation.
Another important notation occurs at the corner of the arcade, where there is a square column that marks the corner as a hinge. A similar square column is engaged in the outboard side wall of the villa body as a pilaster-like element. The sequence of four square columns (implied in the pilasters attached to the villa walls) is reminiscent of the four giant order columns that mark its front facade (12.12). The same play of scales is seen in the relationship of the four giant order columns to the four minor columns (two freestanding, two engaged) comprising the rear entry portico (12.13). The minor columns, though proportionally appropriate to the rear facade, appear compressed toward the center in relation to the columns on the front facade. A close reading of the articulation of poche is important here. The alternating relationship between the three sets of four columns, for example, allows simultaneously for a reading of the villa body pressing into the space of the barchesse, and a reading of the villa body as something extruded or hanging from the rear garden walls (12.14). Two final diagrams describe minor internal misalignments and asymmetries implied by the orientation and position of interior walls, niches, and openings (12.15,12.16). All of these alternating diagrams describe a villa that is internally complex, as it begins to break down the typological differences between villa and barchesse.
12.11.	Diagram of Angarano. The dominance of the giant order columns on the front facade as well as the continuity of the arcade and rear garden wall through the villa body alternatively suggest a layered or planar reading from front to back.
12.12.	Diagram of Angarano. The sequence of four square columns (implied in the pilasters attached to the villa walls) is reminiscent of the four giant order columns that mark its front facade.
12.13.	Diagram of Angarano. Minor columns, though proportionally appropriate	12.14 Diagram of Angarano. The alternating relationship among the three
to the rear facade, appear compressed toward the center in relation to the	sets of four columns allows simultaneously for a reading of the villa body
columns on the front facade.	pressing into the space of the barchesse, and a reading of the villa body
as something extruded or hanging from the rear garden walls.
12.15- Diagram of Angarano. Minor internal misalignments and
asymmetries implied by the orientation and position of interior walls, niches, and openings.
12.16. Diagram of Angarano. Minor internal misalignments and
asymmetries implied by the orientation and position of interior walls, niches, and openings.
K
VILLA PISANI
BAGNOLO, 1542
while the villa pisani at bagnolo has a more mature, integrated relationship between the villa body and the barchesse than do the Villa Zeno and Villa Angarano, it is still the main body that commands attention (13.2). The entry portico, which is unique among all Palladian villas, is highlighted by flanking stairs that become both an extension outward and a continuation inward of the arcaded space of the barchesse and forecourt. This particular composition of entry and barchesse appears in various manifestations in several of Palladio’s barchessa projects. Here it is important to note that the villa’s front facade does not align with the back wall of the barchessa. This signals the initial disjunction between the body of the villa proper and the barchessa. Several other disjunctive notations place Pisani as partly within, partly without the part-to-whole relationship of the evolving barchessa projects.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the model OF pisani articulates several of these notations, beginning with the displacement of the front facade and the garden wall, which counteracts the reading of the villa as integrally bound to the barchessa by its entry sequence. The entire forecourt is framed in white, A, while its square corner columns and arcade adjacent to the front portico steps are shown as solid, passive white entry elements. This sets the forecourt in dialogue with the actual front portico, which is in fact outboard of the front facade.
13.1.
Analytic model ofVilla Pisani.
The portico steps are shown as a framed or active white volume, while the portico proper is shown as a solid or passive white volume. In this case the space of the portico proper, A, is thought to be conceptually passive because it is a dominant element in relation to the flanking stairs, which are shown as a framed or virtual B volume. The play between solid and void volumes in the front side-to-side arm of the barchessa articulates the effect of several local and minor asymmetries in the reading of the entry sequence as a whole.
While the first interior bay of the villa proper is typically seen as the B space, in the model of Pisani only the front facade and the garden wall are rendered as solid B volumes just beyond the framed B space of the outboard stairs. Instead, the center of the first interior bay is seen as part of the cruciform-shaped central C space, which is shown as a solid black element, while the side rooms are shown in shallow relief, as conceptually inactive. The sequence from forecourt to portico to central space, although comprising a series of displacements and disruptions, is relatively homogeneous; that is, the elements are discrete and therefore can be thought of as conceptually passive. However, in the third interior bay and rear portico of Pisani can be found one of the most active and
13-2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Pisani in the Four Books, 1570.
densely heterogeneous spaces of all the Palladian projects, in which several elements are overlaid, but none is dominant, a condition that the model articulates in several ways.
First, there is a second poched space—what is being called a figural solid—beyond the central cruciform figure, C, which is shown as a solid black lozenge-shaped element. Overlaid onto this second C volume is a framed (virtual or implied) extension of the central cruciform C figure. This extension completes the absent symmetrical cruciform figure. Although it is not literally there, it is possible conceptually to see not only two discrete C figures adjacent to one another but also a doubled C/C space in the superposition of the solid rear lozenge-shaped C figure and the extended “void” or framed arm of the cruciform C figure. This C/C space is then shown overlaid on a gray B space comprising the entire width of the third interior bay, which is highlighted by two extruded tower-like void elements on either side. The rear portico, read here as overlaid subsequently onto the C/C and B spaces, is therefore rendered as a framed or conceptually active volume, A. Finally, the depth of the rear steps is shown as a framed gray B volume across the width of the main villa body, which suggests both the extent and intensity of the heterogeneous nature of the space compressed into the rear bay.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
A series of geometric ov E R lays begins to register the complexity of the relationship between the villa body and the barchesse at Pisani. The most basic diagram aligns a square to the front and side facades, leaving unaccounted for the composition of the front portico and flanking stairs (13.3). The diagram clearly shows what could be thought of as a compression of the villa body from the rear of the villa, even as the front-to-back barchessa walls extend beyond the rear portico. A second diagram repositions the square to align to the outer edges of the laterally oriented front stairs, which is the front of the portico proper (13.4). This shifted square is centered on the central cruciform figure but bears little relation to the rear portico steps. A third diagram describes the relationship of the rectangular volume of the villa body to the dominant central bay occupied by the two major figural C elements (13.5). The space of overlap between two squares that are proportional to the depth of the villa body is equal to the central bay, establishing a relationship between the figural spaces and the side rooms. A fourth diagram relates the width of the central cruciform figure to the depth of the villa from the front of the entry portico to the steps of the rear portico (13.6). These proportional diagrams depict a series of latent relationships between interior and exterior elements in the villa that cannot be otherwise described by squares at a larger scale, as in the first two diagrams.
A further set of diagrams articulate again the disjunctive nature of the composition between villa body and barchesse. A fifth diagram describes the relationship between the open rectangular forecourt and a specific interior dimension: the overlap between two larger squares is equal to the width of the steps of the front portico, which establishes a spine around which the major interior figures are positioned (13.7). When these squares are expanded to the depth between the lateral barchessa arm and the front facade (leaving a narrow gap where the villa extends into the space of the courtyard), the space of overlap
defines the width of the central bay (13.8). Finally, when the squares take into account the entire depth of the courtyard (which is defined inboard of the lateral barchessa arm), the overlap between the two is equal to the narrower width of the cruciform figure (13.9). Though there is little relation in terms of program between various dimensions of the courtyard and the interior spaces of the villa, the oscillating dimensions between inside and outside create the sense of an unstable, heterogeneous space, where the distinctions between barchesse, courtyard, and villa body are no longer easily discernible based on their superpositions and adjacencies.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
in MANY RESPECTS pisani is u NIQ u E because of its two poched figural spaces, which can initially be read, as in the analytic model, as two C spaces (13.10).
This reading forms the basis of the first virtual diagram. Here the outboard porticb in the front and the inboard portico in the rear are seen as A spaces. The dimension of the flanking stairs in the front and the first interior bay of the villa in the rear are seen as B spaces.
In addition to the doubled C spaces, this produces in the virtual diagram an unusual A, A/B, C, A/B/C, A sequence. Because of the extension of the two villa side walls to the rear, the rear portico takes on a double reading: it can either be read as pushed into a B transition space or as overlaid on a poched C space. The ideal diagram ignores the figural nature of the second C space to produce a more typical front-to-back sequence, ABCBA.
The villa also has two lateral stairway connections to the barchessa arcade.
Thus the villa body has a relationship to the barchesse similar to that at Zeno. In Zeno, however, the lateral entries go directly into the main body of the villa. At Pisani, these entries could be seen to form a large front portico, which suggests a second interpretation of the villa (13.11). In this interpretation, the first internal lateral bay, rather than the space of the external stairs, is seen as a B space on account of its location inboard of the composition of the front portico, A. A second B or circulation space occupies the center bay of the villa based on the location of the internal stairs. The C space in this reading is limited to a bilaterally symmetrical cruciform figure, while the rear poched space is seen as part of the rear portico, A, again by location, not by program or articulation. In the virtual diagram, this produces a B/C overlay in the center of the villa, while the porticos
13.3. Geometric diagram of Pisani. The most basic diagram aligns a square to the front and side facades leaving unaccounted for the composition of the front portico and flanking stairs.
13-5. Geometric diagram of Pisani. A third diagram describes the relationship of the rectangular volume of the villa body to the dominant central bay occupied by the two major figural C elements.
13.7. Geometric diagram of Pisani. A fifth diagram describes the relationship between the open rectangular forecourt and a specific interior dimension: the overlap between two larger squares is equal to the width of the steps of the front portico, which establishes a spine around which the major interior figures are positioned.
13.9. Geometric diagram of Pisani. When the squares take into account the entire depth of the courtyard (which is defined inboard of the lateral barchessa arm), the overlap between the two is equal to the narrower width of the cruciform figure.
13.4. Geometric diagram of Pisani. A second diagram repositions the square to align to the outer edges of the laterally oriented front stairs, which is the front of the portico proper.
13.6. Geometric diagram of Pisani. A fourth diagram relates the width of the central cruciform figure to the depth of the villa from the front of the entry portico to the steps of the rear portico.
13.8. Geometric diagram of Pisani. When these squares are expanded to the depth between the lateral barchessa arm and the front facade (leaving a narrow gap where the villa extends into the space of the courtyard), the space of overlap defines the width of the central bay.
and front transition bay remain autonomous. A third virtual diagram (13.12) reads as the superposition of the central cruciform figure over an internal transition space, B, which occupies the first interior lateral bay of the villa as in the previous diagram.
This produces a minor B/C overlay adjacent to the front facade. Here the porticos are seen as outboard of the main body of the villa rather than compressed, while the rear poched bay reads as a B space as opposed to a second C space. These conditions are some of the multiple and unstable aspects of heterogeneous space in Pisani.
These interpretations of ABCBA and their subsequent overlays are activated by several disjunctive notations, which are registered at several scales in Pisani. First, the columns at the corners of the courtyard are square as opposed to round, though they are surrounded by round columns, which is a recurring element Palladio develops in the barchessa projects. Second, the square columns framing the front portico are aligned forward of the staircases themselves, proposing another disjunction. Third, as at Zeno, there are flattened column piers in the rear portico that make the vertical surface of the portico seem cut out of the facade plane (13.13). Finally, there is the cruciform-shaped central space, otherwise only articulated at the Villa Foscari (Malcontenta), and, for the first time, a second or doubled C space, a figural element articulated by its poche (reminiscent of the rear space at the Palazzo Thiene). This doubling of the C space is something that is both disjunctive and defining in the work of Palladio. As proposed previously in this work, if mannerism depends on an existing stable language in order to transgress that language, it would be difficult to categorize Palladio’s work as mannerist, because it is ultimately irreducible to a stable grammar or syntax. Any theoretical consequences of these unstable readings come precisely from an opposite idea, from the instability of any presumed base condition or language; in this case, a single, figural C space that could be read as distinct from the entry or transition spaces. An already or initially unstable architectural language should not necessarily be defined as mannerist.
At Pisani there are two possible countermanding readings of the truncated central cruciform space. In one reading, the cruciform can be seen as extended forward from a normal C position into a B space; in another interpretation, it can be seen as compressed into the rear of the villa (13.14). These alternating readings suggest an important condition of Palladio’s work; that is, they can no longer be read as transformations from a single or idealized base condition, but rather they evolve from often two or more possible conditions, either a stable location of the C space in the actual center of the villa or the more irregular location to either the front or the back of the main villa body.
At Pisani, the cruciform could be seen to occupy any one of these possible locations simultaneously. And as the C space slips from a stable central position, its overlay on other readings produces a spatial heterogeneity.
There are also multiple possible readings of the dominant solid/void diagram of the villa that articulates its relationship to Malcontenta and the Villa Poiana, while at the same time differentiating it from these two. One reading sees the outboard rooms of the villa as poche and the doubled C spaces as voided out from it (13.15a). Another interpretation sees the center spaces as poche with the side spaces voided (13.15b). Because of the location and extent of the entry stairs, there is a potential to read an originating geometry as a square aligned to the front of the stairs (and centered on the cruciform), which gives
13-10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Pisani. In many respects Pisani is unique because of its two poched figural spaces, which can initially be read as two C spaces.
13.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Pisani. A B/C overlay is produced in the center of the villa, while the porticos and front transition bay remain autonomous.

K
13.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofPisani. Superposition of the central cruciform figure over an internal transition space, B, which occupies the first interior lateral bay of the villa.
a sense that the front and rear facades have been compressed into the villa (13.16a). This notation can also be read as a shearing action that occurs between the points at which the barchessa attaches to the villa and at which the arcade of the forecourt meets the portico. While the mass of the building appears to shear or press forward of the line of the barchessa, the portico columns (very similar in their detail to the arcade columns) are pushed back, inboard of the front edge of the staircases. This double-sheared condition—the compressions in from the line of the barchessa and the arcade columns—create in effect a B space beyond the front stairs (which alternatively is read as an A/B, that is, the superposition of the portico and this gasket space). The side-to-side elongation of this gasket or transition space is further defined by the reading of the cruciform arm pressing toward the facade. An alternative reading of this originating geometry is of a square aligned to the front of the main body of the villa, which suggests that the rear facade has been compressed in from the ends of the rear garden walls (13.16b).
In any of these readings, the poche becomes critical. Pisani has some of the most active poche articulations of all the Palladian villas. At the moment of shear between the rear barchessa walls and the front facade, the poche turns from outboard to inboard in relation to the front stair (13.17). This inversion of the poche indicates a warping or distortion from front to back in the villa. There is a similar condition of inversion at the rear of the villa, where the poche of the figural A/B/C space turns outward though the space, appearing to be turned in on itself. In the front-to-back dimension, these shifts occur between the outer walls of the villa and the square columns marking the end of the courtyard arcade and the interior walls framing the central bay (13.18).
The reading of poche as a differentiating element extends to the barchesse, where there is a space between the front-to-back and side-to-side arms of the stables in the front of the complex. The outboard rooms of the lateral element are articulated in plan as corner towers (though they are not shown as towers in the section), allowing the front element to be read as a freestanding bar. If at Angarano the exedra forecourt closes the open barchessa form preexisting in Poiana and Zeno, at Pisani this semicircular form, adopted from the Roman baths, is straightened into a bar.
Turning to the facade, what is unique about Pisani is a second central feature: over the main portico is a second portico-like element, the compressed portico of a Malcontenta or Zeno. There is a similar strategy at Pisani of a central panel and two side panels, a motif that has become known as a Palladian window. Here the overlap is very slight; it no longer completely defines the central bay as it does at Malcontenta, for example. The inboard windows that usually define the outside panels have been removed, so that the clerestory—the second pediment which is here a round arched window rather than a segmented arch—appears now with the columns as a residue on the facade. The blank panels have been moved to the sides of the facade so that the tripartite window arrangement can reach its full expression. If one reads the facade from top to bottom rather than from side to side, there is an exaggerated blankness which produces a problematic understanding as to where the floor of the piano nobile is. A series of horizontal string courses, which typically define the floor lines, have been omitted from the Pisani facade. The resulting blankness of the central part of the facade, with the outboard windows shifted outward, causes an edge stress to be read laterally across the facade.
13.13 Diagram of Pisani. These interpretations of ABCBA and their subsequent overlays are activated by particular disjunctive notations, such as different column types and locations.
13.14. Diagram of Pisani. Two possible countermanding readings of the truncated central cruciform space. In one reading, the cruciform can be seen as extended forward from a normal C position into a B space; in another interpretation, it can be seen as compressed into the rear of the villa.
13-15. Diagram of Pisani. Multiple possible readings of the dominant solid/void diagram of the villa.
13.16. Diagram of Pisani. Because of the location and extent of the entry stairs, there is a potential to read an originating square in two different ways.
*
13-17- Diagram of Pisani. At the moment of shear between the rear barchessa walls and the front facade, the poche turns from outboard to inboard in relation to the front stair.
13.18. Diagram of Pisani. In the front-to-back dimension, shifts occur between the outer walls of the villa and the square columns marking the end of the courtyard arcade and the interior walls framing the central bay.
VILLA TRISSINO
MELEDO, 1553
the last in the s E RIES of the so-called barchessa projects, which represent different possibilities of the villas as extensions into the landscape, is the Villa Trissino (14.2), which relates to Palladio’s drawing of the Temple of Hercules in Tivoli, made sometime between 1538 and 1545- They both exhibit a similar series of parts: an exedra, a similar set of staircases, and a four-part parti with four porticos, one of which is used as the primary entry. Trissino can also be seen as a more elaborate version of the Villa Rotonda in its three-level stepped section crowned by four Rotonda-like, biaxially symmetrical, grand porticos. Two quarter-arcades separate and at the same time join the villa body to the barchessa wings. Interestingly, Palladio turns these models—the Temple at Tivoli and his own Rotonda—into something else. It is in this “something else” that the recurring Palladian conditions become evident; for example, in the way Palladio treats the forecourt, the columns, and the corners. It is important to see how Palladio adapts his reconstructions of ancient Rome—through drawings that are not necessarily historically accurate, but are interpretations of what Palladio saw—and how he translates what he sees into the specific projects for the villas. While doing this, he also translates his perceptions into more generic architectural ideas, after Alberti, of the relationships between part and whole, the differences between wall and column, and the differences between column and pilaster.
14.1.
Analytic model of Villa Trissino.
ANALYTIC MODEL
AS WITH THE model for R o T o N da , the model for Trissino combines both ideal and real characteristics. Similar in its volumetric expression to Rotonda, the model for Trissino, makes explicit some important differences. First, in the model for Rotonda, the front and back porticos are rendered as solid or passive white, A spaces; while the lateral porticos are shown as framed white, that is, neutral in relation to the main body of the villa, comprising B and C spaces. While all four porticos in the Trissino model, including their staircases, are shown in some combination of solid and void, the front and back porticos, or A volumes, invert the reading of the lateral volumes. The solid or passive white volumes of the front and back porticos adjacent to the central C figure (in black) register their position outside the main body of the villa; the front and back staircases are shown as neutral void spaces. The framed or conceptually active white volumes embedded in the B (gray) volumes on the sides show the position of the lateral porticos compressed into the main body of the villa, that is, voiding out solid, while the
14.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Trissino in the Four Books, 1570.
side staircases are shown as solid. Second, while the spatial layering in Rotonda runs perpendicular to the main axis, these same B or transition layers in Trissino are parallel to the axis of entry, except the added B layers—exterior staircases front and back— shown as void gray volumes (neutral elements) surrounding the solid white volumes of the front and back porticos. Finally, there is an important difference in how the central C space is shown in Rotonda and Trissino: because the space predominantly defines the volume in Rotonda, the central drum is what is being called a figural solid; because the elaboration of poche defines the volume at Trissino, it is shown as figural void, extending outward to the front and back porticos to articulate the layered organization parallel to the main axis. The barchesse, although becoming important figural elements at Trissino, are shown in the model as shallow relief, as they remain conceptually inactive.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
there are two different s qua re s that can serve as a base drawing for the geometric analysis of Trissino. One includes all four porticos and their appended squares, no matter their internal relationships, while a second, smaller square can be drawn around the central rotunda and one bay of its periphery (14.3). While this second square does not include a lateral bay on either side, it will be seen in the following drawings that it offers many more options for understanding the spatial relationships at work in the villa. This inscribed internal square excludes both the external and embedded porticos as well as the barchessa developments. A second geometric diagram takes the columns of the four porticos as a base dimension. This square takes into account the outboard stairs front and back, extending beyond the actual extent of the villa body, which is rectangular in plan as opposed to square (14.4). A third geometric diagram extends the initial internal square to two overlaid squares encompassing the inboard spaces of the lateral porticos (14.S). A fourth diagram extends to three overlaid squares, which now encompass the dimension of the outboard staircases of the lateral porticos (14.6). In doing so, they define the dimension of the internal passageway from the central drum to the front and back porticos. It should be noticed that while some alignments such as these exist, there are an equal number of elements that remain outside of both the literal and conceptual boundaries of these diagrams. Thus while some elements are in alignment, other elements are not, and no amount of geometric regularity can overcome these dislocations.
A fifth diagram for Trissino works in a similar fashion to the previous two iterations, but it shifts front and back from the initial square, which produces a dense overlay of squares (14.7). A sixth diagram uses the same procedure as the fifth in that it shifts two squares front and back from the original square until they contain the outboard edge of the front and back portico stairs (14.8). This gives the unexpected result of defining the side-to-side passageway from the central drum to the lateral porticos, which are seen here as outboard elements in relation to the dominant front-to-back organization. The diagram extends one square farther to include the entry terrace, which delineates the dimension of the staircase of the front portico. These six different organizations of squares show Trissino’s particular receptiveness to different interpretations in differing
contexts. No one organization can be said to have more validity than any other. Trissino cannot be described as synthetic in nature, as there is no “original” diagram, only partial aspects of potential originals.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
WHILE TRISSINO APPEARS TO HAVE A SYMMETRICAL PARTI with four porticos and a central dome, the symmetry is subtly dissipated as it is at Rotonda. The first clue to this dissipation from an ideal symmetry is in the disposition of the stairs with respect to the porticos; the second is the location of the porticos themselves. The symmetry is broken down by a series of internal manipulations. In one interpretation of the plan, which begins from a dominant front-to-back striation of the main villa body, the virtual diagram comprises the two side porticos or A spaces, a double-bay B space, and a cruciform-like central organization about the domed center. The ideal state consolidates the rectangular five-bay virtual condition into something more closely resembling the plan of Rotonda (14-9).
In another interpretation, the front portico, A, is followed by a B bay that separates the portico from the domed C space. To the sides and rear there is another layer of B or gasket spaces capped, in a sense, by the lateral porticos. In this reading, the virtual diagram expresses more closely the actual condition; that is, the front and rear porticos are outside the mass of the building, and the two side porticos are subsumed within the building mass, which causes the layering of the main body of the villa to be turned parallel to the main axis of entry from the elaborately composed barchesse in the front (14.10). The ideal diagram now expresses a much more elaborate concentric organization than the previous interpretation. A more conventional reading of the villa from front to back, which is an organization supported by the layout of the barchesse and forecourt, leaves a significant amount of the villa itself as conceptually inactive and cannot account for its many subtle internal displacements and disjunctions (14.11).
Unlike Rotonda, the two lateral porticos at Trissino are subsumed within an extra bay added to the sides of the villa body, while the front and back porticos remain outside the villa body (14-12). There is also a distinction, as in Rotonda, between the exterior and the interior but with two major differences. The interior graining of the spaces runs parallel to the main front-to-back axis in Trissino, unlike in Rotonda, where the graining is perpendicular to the main front-to-back axis. This causes a major change in the relationship between the main volume of the villa and the porticos. The lateral porticos are buried in the main volume by the addition of two pairs of square rooms at the corners. This condition produces a distinct asymmetry between the lateral and frontal porticos, similar to what happens at Rotonda. While on the one hand, the asymmetry of the porticos clarifies the relationship between the front, back, and side porticos, there is a countermanding reading that requires attention. There is a sense that the front and back porticos, although clearly disengaged from the villa body by the laterally oriented outboard entry stairs, in fact belong to an elongated central figure or spine that only adds to the front-to-back striation, an internal energy of the plan. In this sense the lateral porticos
14-3. Geometric diagram ofTrissino. Two squares: one includes all four porticos and their appended squares, no matter their internal relationships, while a second, smaller square can be drawn around the central rotunda and one bay of its periphery.
14.5. Geometric diagram ofTrissino. Two overlaid squares encompass the	14.6.
inboard spaces of the lateral porticos.
14.7. Geometric diagram ofTrissino. Shifting front and back from the initial 14.8. square produces a dense overlay of squares.
14.4. Geometric diagram ofTrissino. A second square takes the columns of the four porticos as a base dimension and takes into account the outboard stairs front and back, extending beyond the actual extent of the villa body, which is rectangular in plan as opposed to square.
Geometric diagram ofTrissino. Three overlaid squares encompass the dimension of the outboard staircases of the lateral porticos.
Geometric diagram ofTrissino. Two squares shift front and back from the original square until they contain the outboard edge of the front and back portico stairs.
and circulation spaces, embedded in the villa body and adjacent to the central space, become an extension and part of the central massing (14.13,14.14).
At first glance, Trissino appears to be defined by its walls, which articulate the possibilities of both an internal ideal and internal virtual condition. There is a minor detail, seen again later only at the Villa Badoer, that again significantly differentiates Trissino from Rotonda. When seen independently, square pilasters on the exterior of the villa walls appear as extensions of the interior walls out toward the barchessa; the walls seem to penetrate the frame established by the villa body (14.15). In this reading, the pilasters follow the Albertian notion of the square column, or pillar, as simply the residue of a wall punctured in several places. These pilasters, when read as engaged square columns, could also be seen as part of an extensive columnar system in the villa, which acts as a scaffolding of sorts for what becomes the diagram of an ideal bilaterally symmetrical project. The differences in the columns themselves are important notations of two counterbalanced systems: one additive; the other subtractive. Counter to the reading of the columns as extensions of the wall, the additive system at work in Trissino follows a second Albertian notion of the column as ornament, a supplemental or added-on figure in relation to the whole. The six square columns that comprise the front and back porticos are part of such an additive system, while the four square columns implied in the intersection of walls surrounding the lateral porticos can be seen as traces of a subtractive system. In the additive system the columns act ornamentally; in the subtractive system they act structurally.
In the front of the villa, these pilasters serve as a way to bring together the planar or striated organization of the villa body with the figural and volumetric elaboration of the barchesse. As a hinge between the villa and the barchesse, the square columns pair alternately with each other and with round columns so that the columns cannot exist qua columns without the pilasters at the corner. In other words, they are, in their redundancy, both ornamental and structural. There is a tripartite ABA organization across the front of the villa, where the wide bay is in the center. There is a compression toward the center on the side bays, which is read in the adjacency of round column to square column to engaged pilaster. The play between round and square columns of various scales continues into the attached arcades and outbuildings, where a series of misalignments and adjustments on the exterior recall the various disjunctions and displacements of the villa interior (14.16).
In particular, at the hinge between the quarter-round arcaded spaces and the squared forecourt, there is another unusual corner condition. There is a misalignment between the square pillars that end the curved colonnade of the barchessa and those that enclose the loggia of the rectangular forecourt. This leaves a double-square column at the point of superposition of the two barchessa systems. This superposition at the corner is different than Brunelleschi’s ambivalent treatment of the corner in San Lorenzo in Florence or Luciano Laurana’s articulation of the corner in the courtyard of the Palazzo Ducale in Urbino. Palladio questions the corner by proposing a conceptual hinge, one that is not continuous or homogeneous, that is, relating one condition seamlessly to another, but rather one that is heterogeneous. The superposition at Trissino of the double-square column is both literally and conceptually a moment of disaggregation, a breaking apart of elements typically associated without interruption. This is one aspect of the heterogeneous space of Palladio.
14.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Trissino. In one interpretation of the plan, which begins from a dominant front-to-back striation of the main villa body, the virtual diagram comprises the two side porticos or A spaces, a double-bay B space, and a cruciform-like central organization about the domed center.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofTrissino. The two side porticos are subsumed within the building mass, which causes the layering of the main body of the villa to be turned parallel to the main axis of entry from the elaborately composed barchesse in the front.
m

14-11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofTrissino.
A more conventional reading of the villa from front to back, which is an organization supported by the layout of the barchesse and forecourt, leaves a significant amount of the villa itself as conceptually inactive and cannot account for its many subtle internal displacements and
disjunctions.
14.12.	Diagram of Trissino. Unlike Rotonda, the two lateral porticos at Trissino are subsumed within an extra bay added to the sides of the villa body, while the front and back porticos remain outside the villa body.
14.13.	Diagram ofTrissino. There is a sense that the front and back porticos, although clearly disengaged from the villa body by the laterally oriented outboard entry stairs, in fact belong to an elongated central figure or spine.
14.14.	Diagram ofTrissino. The lateral porticos and circulation spaces,
embedded in the villa body and adjacent to the central space, become an extension and part of the central massing.
14.15.	Diagram ofTrissino. When seen independently, square pilasters on the exterior of the villa walls appear as extensions of the interior walls out toward the barchessa; the walls seem to penetrate the frame established by the villa body.
14.16.	Diagram of Trissino. The play between round and square columns of various scales continues into the attached arcades and outbuildings, where a series of misalignments and adjustments on the exterior recall the various disjunctions and displacements of the villa interior.
PART III
THE
VIRTUAL
VILLA
THE DISSIPATION OF THE VILLA TYPE
VILLA THIENE
CICOGNA, 1556
one of the earliest of the decomposed barchessa schemes, and the first in the final category of projects called “The Virtual Villa: The Dissipation of the Villa Type,” the Villa Thiene in Cicogna (built for the same family who had commissioned the Palazzo Thiene in Vicenza) straddles two garden walls that extend laterally, the front forming a forecourt anchored by minor outbuildings (15.2). The villa body initially seems symmetrical and stable, but when read in relation to the two porticos and the garden walls, the plan reveals its internal asymmetry. It is also one of the only villas, along with the Villa Valmarana and the Villa Trissino in particular, with internal volumetric stria-tions layered from side to side, similar to the later nineteenth-century plaid grid of ser-vant-and-served spaces. This is unusual, because most Palladian villas consist of en suite interior volumes. Thiene is also marked by two portico entries, one outboard of the front facade and the other internal to the rear facade. In both, the portico columnar structure is aligned with the front and rear facades respectively. Like the Villa Pisani and Trissino before it, Thiene could also be characterized by its elaborate tripartite front stair composition, which, like the arrangement of the garden walls, makes the relationship between the villa and the barchesse ambiguous, where it is difficult to understand which is which. Although the villa itself is still the dominant figure in Palladio’s drawing of the elevation, it begins to dissolve into a series of walls and courtyards in the plan.
15.1.
Analytic model of Villa Thiene.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the increasing compositional significance of the garden walls in relation to the villa body is evident in the analytic model of Thiene, in which the volume of the villa appears to be compressed between the inverted brackets of the barchesse. These brackets, shown as framed gray B volumes, represent the implied continuity of the front and back facades—shown as solid gray extruded walls—into the landscape. The portion of the front portico directly adjacent to the front facade is conceptually passive and thus rendered as a solid white A volume. (The portico steps are shown as a framed white A volume, because they are an implied or virtual extension of the main portion of the portico.) Because the columns of the portico appear to relate more to the facade than to a portico per se, they are shown as solid gray extruded elements belonging to the B space onto which the portico is overlaid. The A/B space directly inboard of the front facade is conceptually active since neither its reading as A nor as B is dominant; thus, it is shown as a “void” or framed white volume, since it is primarily part of the entry sequence when read by both location and type. The flanking rooms are rendered as a
15.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Thiene in the Four Books, 1570.
214
VIRTUAL VILLA
solid transition layer, B, where there is no superposition with the space of the front portico. The framed A/B volume presses directly against the figural extruded volume of the C space, in solid black, while the four arms connected to this center space—reminiscent of the extensions from the central drum of both the Villa Rotonda and Trissino—are shown as black extrusions. Surrounding the central figure and the front and back porticos, there are six solid gray B volumes describing the location of the internal stairs and adjacent transition spaces.
The relationship of the rear portico to the main villa body can be read as an inversion of the villa body to the front portico. In the model, the space outboard of the rear facade—in this case only the portico steps—is rendered as a framed white A volume. The portico proper—an identical mirror of the front interior portico space—which occupies an A/B position inside the rear facade, is shown as a solid white volume. In other words, the rear portico is thought to be conceptually passive since, according to both location and type, its A or entry characteristics are dominant over its B or transition characteristics. Although both front and back porticos are identical within the limits of the main villa body, they are very different elements when seen in relation to the front stair composition and the barchesse organization. Finally, the two rectangular side rooms within the villa, which have the same proportion as the porticos, are shown as virtual porticos, as framed white volumes. These are nearly identical in position and proportion to the side porticos at Trissino. Within the body of Thiene, despite the apparent dominance of the main front-to-back axis, the four-portico biaxial diagram of Rotonda and Trissino can be seen.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THE FIRST TRACES OF A DISSIPATION OF THE VI LLA as the idea of a consistent or stable type can be seen in Thiene. Several geometric overlays—somewhat different than seen in previous villas—describe this decomposition, beginning with an ill-fitting ideal square, which takes into account the width of the villa body and the entirety of the rear portico while leaving off the steps of the front portico (15.3). The squares reveal a series of inconsistencies in the villa-barchesse relationship when shifted front to back into various positions—aligning with the front facade (which projects the square into the rear garden), aligning with the steps of the front portico (which leaves off the steps of the rear portico), and aligning with the front barchesse wall (which projects the square into the first bay of the villa) (15.4). In a third diagram, the initial square shifted side to side describes the space between the unusually figured columns of the front and back porticos (15.5). A fourth diagram finds two squares equal in depth to the volume of the villa between the garden walls, which overlay to define the central bay of the villa (15.6). These squares and two similar squares aligned with the front barchesse wall leave between them the space of the laterally oriented side stairs in the front. Although in one reading of the diagram, the front stair composition appears to press outward from the villa into the forecourt, in this reading, the spaces of the forecourt and the main villa body are equivalent and the stairs drop out.
VILLA THIENE
21S
A fifth diagram once again reveals the difficulty in identifying a consistent or stable geometric original square. A square equal in width to the center three bays of the villa aligns with the rear steps and the front edge of the central space (15.7). However, when this square is shifted to align with the front steps or the back edge of the central space, the opposite edges do not align with anything internally. A sixth and seventh diagram look at squares equal in dimension to the central space. Aligned with the front and back facades, two squares leave between them a depth equal to the dimension between the engaged columns that mark the side walls of the central space (15.8). When these squares are shifted to align with the inboard corners clearly demarcated in the poche of the internal porticos, they slightly overlap in the middle of the central space (15.9). Unlike in some of the previous villas, where there were clearer proportional relationships established internally, at Thiene, these internal relationships are made more ambiguous by the organization of the plan and villa body in relation to the barchesse. These subtle inconsistencies, belying the appearance of a stable part-to-whole organization, are an aspect of what is identified here as the heterogeneity of Palladian space.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
EXCEPT FOR THE COMPOSITION OF THE FRONT STAI RS, Thiene Comes closest to having a true biaxial symmetry than any of the Palladian projects. The front stair can be read in several different ways. In the first interpretation, only the space of the portico itself, including its projection into the volume of the villa but not the exterior flanking or side stairs, is registered as an A space. The rear portico steps and internal volume comprise another A space, while the first internal bays front and back are marked as B spaces, producing two nearly symmetrical A/B spaces within the villa body (15.10). Here the central C space, a figural space defined by its articulated poche, is independent of the A and B spaces, as shown in the only slight variation between the virtual and ideal diagrams. In a second virtual diagram, the portico spaces, A, are seen as the same as in the previous diagram, but the side stairs can be interpreted as a B space. This produces an unusual A/B space outside the villa proper (15.11). In this variation, the C space includes the four small hallway extensions toward the side rooms. The rear B or circulation space, defined by its type, not necessarily its location, comprises the volume
15-3- Geometric diagram of Thiene. An ideal square, which takes into account the width of the villa body and the entirety of the rear portico, leaves off the steps of the front portico.
15-5- Geometric diagram of Thiene. The initial square shifted side to side
describes the space between the unusually figured columns of the front and back porticos.
15.7. Geometric diagram of Thiene. A square equal in width to the center three bays of the villa aligns with the rear steps and the front edge of the central space.
15-9- Geometric diagram of Thiene. Squares shifted to align with the inboard corners clearly demarcated in the poche of the internal porticos slightly overlap in the middle of the central space.
15.4. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Shifted front to back into various
positions, several squares reveal a series of inconsistencies in the villa-barchesse relationship.
15.6. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Two squares equal in depth to the volume of the villa between the garden walls overlay to define the central bay of the villa.
15.8. Geometric diagram of Thiene. Aligned with the front and back facades, two squares leave between them a depth equal to the dimension between the engaged columns that mark the side walls of the central space.
15.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Thiene. The rear portico steps and internal volume make up an A space, while the first internal bays front and back are marked as B spaces, producing two nearly symmetrical A/B spaces within the villa body.
*

15-11-Ideal and virtual diagrams of Thiene. The rear B or circulation space, defined by its type, not necessarily its location, comprises the volume implied by the interior stairs, which produces in its overlay with the figured C space a B/C space occupying the center of the villa.
implied by the interior stairs, which produces in its overlay with the figured C space a B/C space occupying the center of the villa in the virtual diagram.
Thiene is also one of the most highly developed plaid-grid schemes, marked by the clear differentiation in the interior between rooms and circulation spaces. The plaid grid, however, is not expressed on the exterior of the villa, which conveys only a tripartite as opposed to a five-part reading side to side (15.12). While the forecourt ensemble and three-part entry stair is reminiscent of several previous projects, from Malcontenta to Pisani and Trissino, at Thiene, the portico columns are set in line with the front facade. On the front facade there are three layers where the small pilasters protruding from the end walls are seen as the residue of another wall layer (15.13). This shift of the columns from a normative position in the front of the portico to the line of the facade is registered in two ways. The shift is registered both in the unusual attachment of round columns and square pilasters, and in the half-round engaged columns on the highly articulated inward-facing poche of the central space (15.14). The heavy articulation of the central space is in opposition to the relative simplicity of the outer side-to-side villa and garden walls (15.15).
The shifts in the internal plaid-grid organization of the villa (15.16) as well as the elaborate development of the barchessa walls prefigure the projects to follow in a sequence that records the dissipation of the type. In particular the Villa Godi and the Villa Badoer further problematize the relationship between villa and barchesse. While Thiene maintains some distinction between villa and barchesse in the articulation of the poche, the nearly equal treatment of poche in both the villa and garden walls at Godi, for example, begins to put into question what had been until now an established formal hierarchy.
*

15.12. Diagram of Thiene. The plaid grid, which differentiates internal spaces,
is not expressed on the exterior of the villa, which conveys only a tripartite as opposed to a five-part reading side to side.
15.13. Diagram of Thiene. On the front facade, there are three layers where the small pilasters protruding from the end walls are seen as the residue of another wall layer.
15.14* Diagram of Thiene. The shift of the columns from a normative position in the front of the portico to the line of the facade is registered in the unusual attachment of round columns and square pilasters, and in the half-round engaged columns on the highly articulated inward-facing poche of the central space.
15.15. Diagram of Thiene. The heavy articulation of the central space is in opposition to the relative simplicity of the outer side-to -side villa and garden walls.
15.16. Diagram of Thiene. Shifts in the internal plaid-grid organization of the villa.
VILLA GODI
LONEDO, 1537
the villa godi at lonedo is a complex dialogue between a self-contained villa and its barchesse. Here, unlike in any other villa, the barchesse evolve from the planar extensions of the villa itself to the intermediate scale of garden walls and arcades, to the final, grand scale of the entire barchessa organization. In Godi little differentiation can be found between what constitutes the villa and the barchessa. Critics of Godi have called it the poorest example of the Palladian project because it does not conform to an idealized system of interpretation. In fact, Godi, which is one of the earliest projects chronologically, is also one of the most charged of the Palladian mutations because it points to the limitations of the concept of the ideal in the villa-barchessa dialectic, as there is very little about either the villa or the barchesse on their own that can be identified as ideal in relation to Palladio’s work.
ANALYTIC MODEL
the analytic model of godi reveals a paradox in relation to the concept of the ideal. On the one hand, the composition of the plan of Godi is such that it appears as an aggregation of walls and columns, and the villa body itself emerges as a dense collection of these elements. On the other hand, the scale and organization of the interior volumes of the villa distinguish the villa proper from the barchesse (16.2). The model focuses on what could be described as a telescoping effect of the A, B, and C elements. First, the
16.1.
Analytic model ofVilla Godi.
front facade, which is fractured and pressed into the villa body in the center around the portico, is shown as a solid white element, A. The space of the portico in its actual position and the space implied by its “ideal” position (adjacent to the facade rather than pressed into it) are both shown as framed white volumes. Because the portico presses into the main body of the villa, it is thought to be conceptually active, and is therefore shown as a framed volume rather than as solid. The first interior bay is shown as a solid gray B volume, while the second interior bay, including the narrow extensions toward the rear of the villa, is shown as a solid black C volume. The actual central space, C, which is located in the middle of the second interior bay and presses into the rear courtyard, is figured space and thus shown with its barrel vault, as is the center of the front B volume. The rear courtyard is rendered as an extruded gray B space, which is doubled by a framed gray volume. This is because the second B volume registers the virtual position of the rear courtyard, which otherwise appears pressed into and around the back of the villa body. Finally, the staircases framing the rear garden wall are shown as neutral, solid white A elements, since there is no actual portico in the rear of the villa body.
16.2.
Palladio, plan
and elevation drawing of Godi in the Four Books, 1570.
226
VIRTUAL VILLA
THE PLAN OF GODI PRESENTS DIFFERENT ASPECTS of what could be called the spatial notation of traditional components and proportions of a villa in relation to a potential ideal. These various possibilities, latent or virtual registrations of internal relationships, are aspects of what is here being defined as heterogeneous space.
In a first diagram, a square equal in width to the main body of the villa aligns with the front edge of the portico steps and the garden wall framing the exedra in the rear, leaving out the garden entry (16.3). This can be considered a base condition, although it also incorporates secondary or even tertiary elements. In a second diagram, the base square can be shifted front and back. One square can be defined in the front by the wall in the middle of the villa and in the back by the garden entry. Another square can be defined by the front edge of the barchesse (16.4). Between these two squares is an interstitial space, which loosely incorporates the two internal staircases. The base square can also be shifted laterally to align on either side with the garden walls that enclose the larger, open rear courtyard (i6.s). The overlap between these two squares encompasses the elongated central bay comprising the portico and central room. A fourth diagram of the main villa body reveals yet another subtle displacement of an ideal 2:1 proportion. Two squares equal in depth to the villa body overlap in the center when aligned with the exterior side walls (16.6). The overlapping width is equal to the opening in the forecourt as well as the space between the middle two square portico columns.
A fifth diagram, which takes into consideration the dimensions of the barchesse, describes three possible base organizations or proportional relationships between villa and barchesse: one square, whose back edge aligns with the front facade of the villa body, extends forward beyond the forecourt; a second square, aligned with the front garden wall, encompasses the forecourt and villa body; and a third square, whose front edge aligns with the front facade, comprises the villa body and the rear courtyard <16.7).
A sixth diagram describes a sequence of larger squares equal in width to the side courtyards and equal in depth to the forecourt and villa body. The overlap of these squares reinforces the idea that the side walls of the villa itself appear to extend into or become the colonnades of the forecourt (16.8). A seventh diagram identifies the width of the enclosed rear courtyard, which is equal to the dimension of the garden walls defining the larger open courtyard (16.9). Here the overlap is again equivalent to the narrow opening in the exedra walls through to the interior openings framed by the middle columns of the front portico. An eighth diagram, like the third, describes the overlapping space between two squares. Here they are equal in depth to the extent of the forecourt, villa body, and rear courtyard. Aligned with the inside edge of the outer barchesse, the overlap of the squares is equal in width to the central bay (16.10).
LIKE ALL front-to-back, TWO-BAY vILLAs, Godiposes many different possible topological readings, particularly because the side walls at the rear of the main body of the villa extend out from the villa body to encompass the rear court.
This in turn can be read as a B space defined by the walled extensions, plus an A space, the exedra walled figure. Then the front development can be read as an A portico over a B transition space (A/B) and a C space over a second B space (C/B) (16.11). Alternatively, the entire rear court can be read as a B space, a transition between the portico implied by the garden stairs in the rear and the main body of the villa. The front portico can be seen as a discrete A space, and, according to its location, the rear bay of the villa can be seen as a second B space. Here there is an overlay of B and C in the rear of the villa and an A/B overlay in the rear court (16.12). A third alternative considers the front portico comprising only the staircase pressed into the villa (without the interior space of the entry), the B bays within the villa body, and the rear courtyard as the second A space. Because of the shift of the C space into the rear court, this reading renders the central space indeterminate, neither conceptually active nor passive nor neutral; part B/C, part A/C (16.13). As is the case with two-bay-deep villas, such as the Villa Poiana, little distinction is made of the central C space at Godi.
Unlike several of the previous villas with similarly elaborate barchessa extensions, at Godi there is only a single entry staircase in the front. The rear staircase—here outside of the garden walls—has become a residue of a portico, rendered as garden stairs down into the landscape, which produces an unusual relationship between notations.
The main volume of the seemingly symmetrical two-bay block is compressed by the portico into the front entry and extends into the rear court. The extension toward the rear of the villa is registered in the shift of the axial relationship of niches through the center of the front set of rooms to the rear of the back set of rooms (16.14). There are several other readings of the implied symmetry of the interior volumes. While the portico proper compresses into the villa body, which produces various iterations of A and B spaces, a shift outward from the villa body can also be read if the entry stairs are considered as part of the portico, because they are positioned exactly halfway inside and outside the front wall of the villa body. If the portico proper (not including the entry stairs) and the
16.3. Geometric diagram of Godi. A square equal in width to the main body of the villa aligns with the front edge of the portico steps and the garden wall framing the exedra in the rear, leaving out the garden entry.
16.5. Geometric diagram of Godi. The base square can be shifted laterally to align on either side with the garden walls that enclose the larger, open rear courtyard.
16.7. Geometric diagram of Godi. Squares shifted front and back take into
consideration the dimensions of the barchesse and describe three possible base organizations or proportional relationships between villa and barchesse.
16.9. Geometric diagram of Godi. The overlap of three squares is equivalent to the narrow opening in the exedra walls through to the interior openings framed by the middle columns of the front portico.
16.4. Geometric diagram of Godi. Between two shifted squares is an interstitial space, which loosely incorporates the two internal staircases.
16.6. Geometric diagram of Godi. Two squares equal in depth to the villa body overlap in the center when aligned with the exterior side walls.
16.8. Geometric diagram of Godi. A sequence of larger squares equal in width to the side courtyards and equal in depth to the forecourt and villa body reinforces the idea that the side walls of the villa itself appear to extend into or become the colonnades of the forecourt.
16.10. Geometric diagram of Godi. Aligned with the inside edge of the outer barchesse, the overlap of the squares is equal in width to the central bay.
central space are considered to be a combined unit—which appears to have been shifted to the rear of the villa—the centerline of the villa oscillates between the midpoint of this combined unit and the centerline of the lateral bearing walls dividing the villa (16.15). Alternatively, the combined depth of the entry stairs and portico proper is roughly equal to the depth of the central space, which produces a relative symmetry about the lateral bearing walls, with minor discrepancies (16.16). These three alternative readings are simultaneously active, and although the lateral bearing wall at first reads as the primary line of symmetry, it is clear that no one registration of symmetry is dominant. If the axis is moved to an asymmetrical position, it reestablishes symmetry in the main space; if the axis is symmetrical in relation to the side rooms, it produces an asymmetry in the main space. This fluctuation between readings, none of which is stable, is typical of the reading of Palladio proposed here and could be called an aspect of heterogeneous space.
The compressions from front to back and various inward and outward shifts of garden and villa walls in plan (16.17,16.18). are articulated in the facade from side to side and bottom to top. First the side bays press into the central portico, which in turn extends upward on the facade. Because of the compression in from the sides and the extension upward, a shear occurs about what would normally be a symmetrical placement of the windows, which are in fact no longer symmetrical. The front staircase seems to push the center part of the villa up vertically through the roof structure, producing a double pedimented condition and a concomitant compression, which is also noticeable in the arcade of the portico. This lacks the generosity of column spacing seen at the Villa Thiene, for example, and seems cropped on the sides. Rather than two corner towers, as at the Villa Pisani or the Villa Thiene, at Godi there is only one tower in the center, which rises through the body of the building.
Godi is the only Palladian project in which part of the entry staircase is set inside the frontal plane of the villa body. Although in many of the villas the space of the portico is compressed into the front transition B space (sometimes into what appears to be the main central space), the staircases remain outboard of the plane that separates the portico from the interior. At Godi, the portico bay—defined on the facade by the central tower— appears to have been cut into the body of the building. This is made explicit in the spacing of the windows relative to the otherwise unarticulated planes surrounding the portico (16.19). There are three sets of three windows—a basement story, a piano nobile, and an attic—on either side of the portico bay. One would expect the center windows on either side to align with the center of the side bay. However, the center windows are not in the center of the bays; they are shifted in toward the portico bay, producing a compression toward the center and leaving an unusually thin dimension between the inside window and the recessed portico. Furthermore, the space of the blank facade between the piano nobile and attic story windows appears extended, while the basement story windows appear compressed. Previously, windows were merely punched holes for functional concerns; they were not conceptually active. Here Palladio uses the windows to activate the surface of the facade. The solid part of the facade—rather than the windows—can be seen as void and thus becomes active in the Palladian discourse. The play between the expected reading of solid and void leaves little that can be read as stable about the condition of the facade, especially in relation to the plan where the relationship between solid and void is
16.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Godi. The front development can be read as an A portico over a B transition space (A/B) and a C space over a second B space (C/B).
16.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Godi. The entire rear court can be read as a B space, a transition between the portico implied by the garden stairs in the rear and the main body of the villa. The front portico can be seen as a discrete A space, and, according to its location, the rear bay of the villa can be seen as a second B space.
16.13.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Godi. Because of the shift of the C space into the rear court, the central space is rendered conceptually indeterminate; part B/C, partA/C.
equally complex. In a similar way, very little is stable about the relationship between the villa body and the barchesse in that it is difficult to identify or differentiate one from the other. Any identification of an ideal at Godi, therefore, is reduced to something of a straw man diagram, as any number of analytic possibilities of overlays and superpositions are present. These virtual conditions are both simultaneously active and equally legitimate explanations of Palladio’s spatial syntax and its formal inscriptions.
16.14.	Diagram of Godi. The extension toward the rear of the villa is registered in the shift of the axial relationship of niches through the center of the front set of rooms to the rear of the back set of rooms.
16.15.	Diagram of Godi. If the portico proper and the central space are
considered to be a combined unit, the centerline of the villa oscillates between the midpoint of this combined unit and the centerline of the lateral bearing walls dividing the villa.
16.16.	Diagram of Godi. The combined depth of the entry stairs and
portico proper is roughly equal to the depth of the central space, which produces a relative symmetry about the lateral bearing walls, with minor discrepancies.
16.17.	Diagram of Godi. Compressions from front to back and various inward and outward shifts of garden and villa walls.
16.18.	Diagram of Godi. Compressions from front to back and various inward and outward shifts of garden and villa walls.
16.19.	Diagram of Godi. The center windows are not in the center of the bays; they are shifted in toward the portico bay, producing a compression toward the center and leaving an unusually thin dimension between the inside window and the recessed portico.

VILLA BADOER
FRATTA POLESINE,1555
CERTAIN TOPOLOGICAL c o N D iti 0 ns of location and position in relation to type and proportion are unique to Palladio’s work. Embedded in the idea of location (as opposed to those of scale, proportion, or symmetry) is the possibility of seemingly stable forms—porticos, circulation spaces, central rooms—read as unstable elements. Examples include a portico pressed into the main body of a villa or a central room displaced from the center (both conditions that are seen at the Villa Godi). These seemingly stable forms can be seen to occupy both stable and unstable positions, providing no simple or direct relationship between part and whole. At first glance, the main body of the Villa Badoer has a stable, symmetrical organization, where the parts seem to relate in an obvious way to the whole. However, on closer analysis, the condition of location is understood as disruptive or disaggregative. For example, the main villa body at Badoer has a more complex relationship to its barchesse than many of the villas previously discussed because of the location of its component parts. It is linked to its barchesse with a figured, semicircular arcade that fronts the villa to create an entry ensemble. The villa itself also reveals different internal complexities based on not only location but also type (17.2).
As at the Villa Thiene, there is a tripartite entry stair at Badoer, but here there is also an extra flight of stairs before the portico is reached. The flanking stairs on either side of the portico sequence attach to the semicircular barchesse, which terminate at the end of the wall of the outbuildings. This is the beginning of a compositional strategy in which the villa volume becomes part of a more encompassing argument. The main body of the villa is seen as pressing into the exedra-like barchesse. It is important to note the column
17.1.
Analytic model of Villa Badoer.
structure at the corners, which Palladio develops in various ways in the villa projects. Here, sets of doubled square columns terminate the exedra arcade. A similar condition of doubled square columns is found in the exedra arcade at the ends of the flanking stairs. While most of the articulation would seem to be in the front, Badoer also has a tripartite stair configuration in the back, like the Villa Trissino, with which it shares many similarities. It must be noted that Badoer is the only villa drawn with the garden wall surrounding the entire form of the villa body. Although one of the last in the sequence of the disaggregated villa projects analyzed here, Badoer does not comply with previous types because many of the elements that could identify this villa relative to one type or another are not part of any overall reading. For example, the porticos are symmetrical themselves, but asymmetrically positioned in relation to the main body of the building.
17.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Badoer in the Four Books, 1570.
240
VIRTUAL VILLA
ANALYTIC MODEL
THE model OF badoer opens up several of these internal inconsistencies, hallmark conditions of heterogeneous space. First, while the front and back porticos are identical typologically, they are very different topologically in terms of their relationship to the main villa body, and are shown in two different ways in the model. The space of the front portico inside the facade appears to be compressed into the villa body and is thus shown as a framed or void white volume representing a conceptually active condition; that is, marking or imprinting an internal spatial structure. The resulting space can be read as part portico and part transition space (A/B), but its position as a point of entry means that the portico characterization is primary, though neither A nor B is dominant. The front portico steps are conceptually inactive, even though they are part of the entry sequence, as they can be read as part of the four-part stair sequence of the barchesse. The rear portico, however, is rendered in the opposite way—its steps are shown as a framed white volume, in this case as conceptually neutral. The portico proper is shown as a solid white volume; that is, as conceptually passive, as the portico here is the dominant feature in relation to the flanking stairs and transition space, B, shown as a framed gray, neutral volume.
The front facade, which turns inward to follow the inside wall of the portico, and the rear portico, which is set slightly forward of the flanking steps, are shown as solid or passive gray B extrusions, as are the two walls that extend from the center of the villa to the columns of the rear portico. The rectangular side rooms surrounding the front entry represent the obvious or assumed transition from the entry to the central space and are thus shown as solid, neutral gray B volumes. Although small in scale in relation to the side rooms, the central space, C, is clearly delineated. In the model, it is shown as a solid black volume with an indentation across its center indicating the implied continuation of the internal lateral wall from side to side. This wall also marks the centerline of the villa measured from the outboard line of the front portico to the rear portico. The transition spaces toward the rear of the villa are shown as framed gray volumes, as they are secondary, or neutral, in relation to the facade. Finally, although the barchesse are shown mostly as inactive elements in shallow relief, the garden wall framing the villa is shown as a solid, extruded element, that is, conceptually present, although passive in relation to the villa body.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THE ASPECTS OF HETEROGENEOUS SPACE IN BADOER are exemplified in a series of geometric diagrams, none of which fully describes the many possible interpretations of the plan. The most basic diagrams place a square equal in width to the main villa body in relation to the porticos. A first diagram (17.3) aligns this square with the edge of the front portico steps. This alignment takes into account the flanking stairs in the rear, but leaves out the rear portico steps. When the square is shifted to the back to include the rear portico steps (17.4), it aligns with the front facade of the villa body but leaves unaccounted for the front portico steps. A third diagram locates the same square
in relation to the front staircases extending from the barchesse (17.5). A square aligned with the rear facade encompasses the main body of the villa and the front portico but does not fully take into account the flanking stairs in front. Instead, it aligns with the back edge of the square columns that mark the end of the barchessa colonnade. When the square is set to align in the front with the steps belonging to the barchesse, it subsequently aligns with the centerline of the lateral wall that divides the villa body. These proportional relationships are not made explicit at Badoer, where the organization of the barchesse, porticos, and villa body is quite complex.
A fourth diagram establishes a relationship of the side and center bays to the depth of the villa body, including the slot of space between the facade and the flanking steps in the rear (17.6). This slot of space, although outside the main body of the villa, can be read as part of the villa volume. A fifth diagram focuses on the center portico bay of the villa. A square can be drawn that includes the central space as well as the narrow transition rooms (and internal staircase) flanking it (17.7). When this square shifts front and back to align with the steps of both the front and rear porticos, it roughly divides the original square into thirds, reinforcing the significance of the interior lateral wall as a defining element in the spatial organization of the villa itself. Looking again at the relationship of the villa body and the barchesse, a sixth diagram begins with a square equal in width to the space defined by the continuous garden wall framing the villa (17.8). One location of this square aligns the rear portico columns with the front edge of the square columns terminating the colonnade of the forecourt. A shift in location again describes a relationship between the rear facade of the villa and the stairs projecting into the forecourt. In both cases, there are slight displacements from the ideal squares of the related elements—stairs, columns, etc. Finally, a seventh diagram describes the overall composition of Badoer as having approximately a 3:2 proportion, although the large squares overlap in their side-to-side distribution to define the width of the garden walls (17.9).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
THE MANY POSSIBLE INTERPRETATIONS of the locations of the porticos, A, the staircases and transition spaces, B, and the central space, C, show the difficulty of assigning a single stable or dominant reading to the organization of Badoer. While the simplest ideal diagram establishes a clear ABCBA reading from front to back, its corresponding virtual diagram produces an unusual sequence of A, A/B, A, C, A/B, A (17.10). In this interpretation, the front portico is seen to comprise the entire depth of the two sets of stairs leading into the front of the villa. Across this portico or entry space, A, is the space implied by the flanking stairs, B, one of the first examples in Palladio’s work of the inscription of a transition from the barchesse to the villa body. The C space occupies the center room, while the rear B space is again outboard of the villa body; in this reading there are no interior B spaces. The rear portico, A, includes both the steps and the space of the portico proper, which is overlaid on and thus becomes the rear B space.
A second interpretation of the virtual villa disregards the elaborate front stair composition and focuses on the internal compressions and overlays within the main villa
17.3.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. A square equal in width to the main villa body in relation to the porticos takes into account the flanking stairs in the rear, but leaves out the rear portico steps.
17.6.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. There is a relationship of the side and center bays to the depth of the villa body, including the slot of space between the facade and the flanking steps in the rear.
17.9. Geometric diagram of Badoer. Six squares describe the overall composition of Badoer as having approximately a 3:2 proportion, although the large squares overlap in their side-to-side distribution to define the width of the garden walls.
17.4.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. A square
shifted to the back to include the rear portico steps aligns with the front facade of the villa body but leaves unaccounted for the front portico steps.
17.7.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. A square can be drawn that includes the central space as well as the narrow transition rooms (and internal staircase) flanking it. When this square shifts front and back to align with the steps of both the front and rear porticos, it roughly divides the original square into thirds.
17.5.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. A square
aligned with the rear facade encompasses the main body of the villa and the front portico but does not fully take into account the flanking stairs in front.
17.8.	Geometric diagram of Badoer. Two squares describe the relationship between the rear facade of the villa and the stairs projecting into the forecourt.
volume (17.11). Here the porticos, marked A, comprise only the space inside the adjacent columns. Because Badoer has a two-bay-deep organization, much like Godi (as opposed to a three-bay or nine-square structure), both interior bays can be seen to be transition or B spaces. Thus, in the virtual diagram the C space is overlaid completely onto the B spaces, producing two internal B/C notations. The compression of the front portico into the main volume of the villa produces an A/B space, which is adjacent to the B/C spaces, followed by an articulated A space at the rear of the villa.
In a third interpretation, the front and back porticos, marked A, incorporate the steps and space of the porticos proper (17.12). The first internal bay can again be read as a B or transition space, while the lateral space implied by the flanking steps in the rear can be seen as a B space overlaid on the rear portico. The C space in this reading incorporates the central room and the four smaller rooms surrounding it. This reading produces in the front a partial A/B and B/C condition, while in the rear the overlay of the transition bay and portico produces an A/B space. What remains is a narrow side-to-side C bay adjacent to the rear facade of the villa.
While Badoer belongs to the category of the two-bay villas, it distinguishes, unlike Godi, between major and minor spaces front and back. In fact, the staircases at both entrances dominate the conceptual development of the villa. The front staircase is a four-part composition (17.13) with an elaborate extended front landing. The actual portico, which appears to be compressed into the villa, loses significance because of the orientation and attenuation of the side rooms situated perpendicular to the cross-axis. The C, or main space, extends nearly the entire depth of the two bays of side rooms.
This leaves the rear portico in an ambiguous situation, outboard of the main body of the villa, yet still contained by the extension of the villa walls outward from the body. This is one possibility that begins the disaggregation of the villa. A tripartite stair less elaborate than the front one dominates the rear entry.
It is important to notice the poche at Badoer, which also marks a significant difference between front and back. In the rear of the villa body, where the portico is outboard, the poche is continuous on the sides (17.14). In the front of the villa, where the portico is pressed into the main building volume, the poche is interrupted with niches. This interruption in the poche allows the front portico to be read in two ways: first, as pressed into the building, framing the central C space; and second, as articulating the row of she columns (with engaged three-quarter rounds on the corners) comprising the center of the facade as a continuation of the front wall of the villa body.
These seemingly minor distinctions are similarly articulated in the interior spaces. The side rooms in the main body of the villa are asymmetrical in terms of their relationship to a centerline of the villa body. One set is square, the other rectangular. However, in terms of their position in the sequence from portico to side room, they can be seen as conceptually similar. This is another characteristic of heterogeneous space, which is both geometric and topological—two spaces can be both literally asymmetrical and conceptually similar.
This heterogeneity allows for several possible and significantly different conditions to be read in Badoer. A displacement occurs between the central C bay and side bays and, depending on their reading, a different central figure emerges (17.15a, 17.15b). If the wall that divides the villa into front and back is read as the center of the main body, then the
17.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Badoer. While the simplest ideal diagram establishes a clear ABCBA reading from front to back, its corresponding virtual diagram produces an unusual sequence of A, A/B, A, C, A/B, A.
17.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofBadoer.
The C space is overlaid completely onto the B spaces, producing two internal B/C notations. The compression of the front portico into the main volume of the villa produces an A/B space, which is adjacent to the B/C spaces, followed by an articulated A space at the rear of the villa.
246 VIRTUAL VILLA
K
17.12.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Badoer. In the front there is a partial A/B and B/C condition, while in the rear the overlay of the transition bay and portico produces an A/B space. What remains is a narrow side-to-side C bay adjacent to the rear facade of the villa.
porticos form a stable element and the side bays can be read as shifted (17.16a). The porticos are the same dimension, and they form a symmetrical piece about the wall dividing the side rooms. If the outer dimension of the side bays is read as a base condition, then the central bay, including the front and rear porticos, appears displaced from the center (17.16b). Finally, the main body of the villa inclusive of the rear staircase reads as a square and can be seen as stable. In this reading, a centerline can be drawn through the symmetrical niche of the square side rooms, which causes the center space and the side rooms to be read as displaced (17.16c).
One reading of the centerline gives a regular geometric figure about which the sides are displaced; another reading considers as center the centerline of the side bays, in which case the porticos appear to shift; a third reading displaces the entire body of the villa when the extent of the rear portico is taken into account. No one reading or diagram is dominant or stable. The fact of these multivalent readings—the fact that there are three possible and different readings active in the space—is what is being identified in Palladio’s work as spatial heterogeneity.
It is also important to note a unique condition at Badoer: the six columns in the front and rear split the staircase from the porticos. This split marks the disaggregation between the villa volume and the barchesse. The columns on the sides are engaged into the corners of the side bays while the columns in the middle stand free, hinging the plane of the staircase and the plane of the building. There is also a slight movement forward of the end wall with the engaged columns forward of the building line. This occurs in a more dynamic fashion in the rear, where the wall extends past the flanking staircases to engage the end columns (17.17). While the rotated flanking stairs in the rear come to the full dimension of the side bays, there is a void between the back wall of the main building and the inboard side of these stairs. These stairs and voids begin to be read as a symmetrical counterpoint about the center wall of the main volume and extend the entire composition into the landscape (17.18).
What is taking place is a two-fold process. First, as the spaces become internally more complex, they move from being considered homogeneous to heterogeneous. Second, when the plan organization becomes more based on position and the intrinsic movement of its parts—in other words, as the parts disaggregate from a simple volume—the villas become more topological and less geometric.

17.13- Diagram of Badoer. The staircases at both entrances dominate the conceptual development of the villa.
17.14 Diagram of Badoer. In the front of the villa, where the portico is pressed into the main building volume, the poche is interrupted with niches.
In the rear of the villa body, where the portico is outboard, the poche is continuous on the sides.
17*15* Diagram of Badoer. A displacement occurs between the central C bay and side bays and, depending on the reading ([a] or[b]),a different central figure emerges.
»
17.16.	Diagram of Badoer. One reading (a) of the centerline gives a regular geometric figure about which the sides are displaced; another reading (b) considers as center the centerline of the side bays, in which case the porticos appear to shift; a third reading (c) displaces the entire body of the villa when the extent of the rear portico is taken into account.
17.17.	Diagram of Badoer. Six columns in the front and in the rear split the
staircases from the porticos. The columns on the sides are engaged into the corners of the side bays while the columns in the middle stand free, hinging the plane of the staircases and the plane of the building.
17.18.	Diagram of Badoer. While the rotated flanking stairs in the rear come to
the full dimension of the side bays, there is a void between the back wall of the main building and the inboard side of these stairs.
VILLA BARBARO
MASER, 1554
WHILE THE VILLA barbaro at maser is one of the best-known Palladian villas, published extensively with glossy color photographs, little work has been done on an analysis of its organization. Upon close reading, Barbaro is one of the most complex of all the Palladian villas. It comprises an elaborate barchesse organization that dominates the villa body. Unlike any other Palladian villa, two exedrae frame the elaborate forecourts that surround the barchesse and the villa body. While the dominant figure in the Villa Foscari is the embedded cruciform (similar to the Villa Angarano and the Villa Pisani), here the cruciform seems merely appended to a complex sequence of garden walls, arcades, and stairs. In that context, the giant order on the front facade of the main villa body also seems an out-of-place addition to the whole (18.2).
ANALYTIC MODEL
THESE UNUSUAL characteristics define the model of Barbaro, which simultaneously elaborates an idea of the figure of the main villa body and the complexity of the barchesse. As at Angarano, there is no evidence of a portico in the front of the villa. Thus, only the facade and its implied depth in relation to the dimension of the giant order columns are rendered as the entry, or A component. The facade itself is shown as a solid extruded white element, while the implied or virtual depth is denoted as a white framed volume. Directly inboard of the facade is a transition space, B. The two outer
18.1.
Analytic model of Villa Barbaro.
rooms of this bay are shown as solid or passive gray volumes. The center bay is simultaneously part of the transition space, B, and part of the cruciform figure of the central space, C. Because the B and C spaces are overlaid here, they are thought to be conceptually active; that is, neither is dominant, although the figural coherence of the central cruciform is primary. Therefore, this central bay in the front layer of the villa is shown as a framed, active black volume, having the notation B/C.
The main crossing of the central cruciform figure, C, is shown as a solid, passive black volume, while the arm extending toward the back of the villa is shown as a framed, active black volume, like the front arm, because it is read as overlaid onto a B space in the rear. Given the ambiguity of the transition from the villa body to the barchesse in the rear, there are several layers of walls and spaces rendered as gray B spaces. The three side-to-side walls of the barchesse (the first is a loggia comprising rectangular piers), which frame the pair of doubled staircases entering the top arm of the central space, are shown as solid gray elements extending to the large barchessa arms on the sides. The center portion of the rear garden wall slightly protrudes into the rear courtyard. This can
18.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Barbara in the Four Books, 1570.
254
VIRTUAL VILLA
be seen as a rear entry space, A, which is shown in the model as a solid white wall framed by a larger white voided volume representing the implied dimension of the virtual rear portico. Finally, this implied rear portico frames a transition bay, B, comprising three rectangular rooms shown as solid gray volumes connecting the rear two garden walls.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
several geometric d I AG ram s reinforce the ambiguity of the villa body and barchesse relationship. The most basic diagram of an ideal square describing the main villa volume at Barbaro leaves much of what could be seen to comprise the villa body unaccounted for (18.3). When this square is shifted back to include the depth of what could be described as the entire villa body, it overlaps the original square in a space equal in depth to the narrow rectangular rooms adjacent to the staircases leading into the villa from the arcades (18.4). A third diagram shows two overlapping squares equal in depth to the villa volume defined by the central cruciform figure (i8.s). Aligned with the side walls of the villa body, the two squares also align with the first set of rooms adjacent to the villa body in the rear side-to-side barchessa arm. A fourth diagram takes the dimension between the barchessa rooms and shows again a single basic square, which is also equal in depth to the entire villa body (18.6). A fifth diagram shifts this larger square both side to side and front to back (18.7). Shifted side to side, the squares align with the space between the front-to-back barchessa arms framing the forecourts while overlapping in the center. The dimension of the overlap is equal to the width of the center room in the lateral barchessa arm, which is slightly wider than the width of the central cruciform figure. Shifted back, the squares align with the inside edge of the rear lateral barchessa and the end walls of the front-to-back barchessa wings. A sixth diagram positions two large squares equal in depth to the front-to-back barchessa elements, which overlap in the center by the width of the villa body (18.8). The centerline of these two squares falls on the loggia that divides the overall composition of Barbaro.
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
BARBARO IS DOMINATED BY TWO UNIQUE C O N D IT 10 N S . One is the linear extension of the barchesse organization as a continuation of the villa body as the barchesse arcade passes through the rear-most portion of the cruciform central space. The other is that the central cruciform space, C, is interrupted by the penetration of the arcade into the villa body (see 18.2). The entire front of the villa is crowned by a giant order portico pressed into the building, as in Angarano. The notation of the villa’s organization becomes complex if the arcade is read as a point of entry, or an A space, in which case there would be several alternate readings of the villa body itself. As indicated by the analytic model, the first proposal of an ABCBA notation in Barbaro renders the front facade and rear set of three rooms as A or entry spaces (18.9). While the front transition space, B, is straightforward—set inside the front facade—the rear transition
spaces comprise the three side-to-side barchessa walls as well as the space of the side staircases. These are overlaid on the central cruciform figure, C, producing from front to back an unusual A, B/C, C, B/C, A/B, B sequence. A second interpretation focuses on the central villa volume (18.10). While the A and C spaces remain the same, the rear transition or B space can be seen here as comprising only the side staircases and the narrow rectangular interior rooms adjacent to the central figure. This produces a more typical (and almost symmetrical) A, B/C, C, B/C, A sequence from front to back. The ideal diagram in this case renders the C space as a lateral space rather than as a cruciform figure. Finally, a third interpretation suggests that the front entry comprises both the facade and the first interior bay of rooms, which were previously rendered as B or transition spaces (18.11). Here the two layers of transition spaces occupy the rear lateral barchessa arm.
This produces again an unusual sequence A, A/C, C, B/C, A/B, where there is a doubling of the B spaces adjacent to one another in the rear, caused by the interlocking of the garden walls and the villa body.
Overlaid onto the plan of the villa body is a cruciform read as surrounded by four corner rooms of unequal dimensions (the two in the rear are compressed, while the two in the front appear elongated). There are two staircases embedded in the rear two corner rooms that suggest a reading of an extension of the cruciform through to the wall of the gardens in the rear (18.12). That extension is registered outside the main building in the slight projection of the rear garden wall in the center, corresponding to the width of the villa body. Because of the dominant central cruciform figure, there appears to be a symmetrical reading of the villa body, but this reading is challenged if the implied volume located inside the rear facade projection is considered part of the villa body as opposed to the barchesse; then the axis of symmetry is not the center of the cruciform but farther back (18.13). A symmetrical reading is further challenged by the placement and different orientation of doors to the front and rear rectangular rooms. The doors to the rear side rooms are oriented to the lateral arm of the cruciform, while the doors to the front side rooms are oriented along the front-to-back axis of the cruciform (18.14).
The main body of the villa could be read as a cubic volume that has been stretched toward the rear garden and attached to a series of long barchesse walls. The front is marked by a portico stretching across the width of the villa comprising four engaged giant order columns, similar to that of Angarano. The columns at the corners are three-quarter round, articulating a possible conceptual turning of the corner (18.15).
18.3. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. An ideal square describing the main villa volume at Barbaro leaves much of what could be seen to comprise the villa body unaccounted for.
18.5. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. Two overlapping squares equal in depth to the villa volume defined by the central cruciform figure.
18.7. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. Shifted side to side, the squares align with the space between the front-to-back barchessa arms framing the forecourts while overlapping in the center.
18.4. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. When the initial square is shifted back to include the depth of what could be described as the entire villa body, it overlaps the original square in a space equal in depth to the narrow rectangular rooms adjacent to the staircases leading into the villa from the arcades.
18.6. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. A single square, which is equal in depth to the entire villa body.
18.8. Geometric diagram of Barbaro. Two large squares equal in depth to the front-to-back barchessa elements, which overlap in the center by the width of the villa body. The centerline of these two squares falls on the loggia that divides the overall composition.
The rear wall of the main cubic volume (through which the cruciform extends) continues laterally as a colonnade of flattened, rectangular columns. On either side of the villa body along this wall, the extension of the villa body as poche aligns with the columns of the arcade. This slight extension forward could be read both as the end wall of the villa proper and as part of the barchesse or extended loggia (18.16).
There is also a unique condition at Barbara in terms of its central cruciform figure. In actuality, the cruciform figure is intact. However, it can be seen as broken apart in relation to its virtual or implied positioning. In this reading, the articulation of the poche is especially important. Along the side-to-side arm of the crossing of the central cruciform figure, there is an unarticulated wall-like poche that is different from the articulations running across the front of the main building. It is as if the tripartite organization of rooms embedded in the center of the rear garden wall has been sheared away from the main building by the extension of the cruciform toward the back. The poche is completely flat against the rear edge of the cruciform and becomes articulated in the extension of the three rooms framing the cruciform, which in turn produce the slight protrusion of the rear wall (18.16). These rooms could be read as either having been moved from the rear wall of the villa (through which the cruciform extends) (18.17) or from the rear edge of the cruciform’s crossing (18.18). If the rooms are read in this position, there is an implied symmetry about the center of the cruciform, only the proportions of the three rooms have been inverted: two narrow rooms frame a larger center room against the rear garden wall, while the narrow space is in the center in the villa proper. Neither reading is dominant. These multiple readings indicate relationships between parts of a building that in their specificity do not add up to a whole. These do not define a geometric base condition, but rather a series of destabilizing topological devices that Palladio uses to produce a counterargument to Alberti’s part-to-whole synthesis.
18.9.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Barbara. The first proposal of an ABCBA notation in Barbara renders the front facade and rear set of three rooms as A or entry spaces.
18.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Barbaro. The rear transition or B space can be seen as comprising only the side staircases and the narrow
rectangular interior rooms adjacent to the central figure, which produces a more typical (and almost symmetrical) A, B/C, C, B/C, A sequence from front to back.

18.11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams ofBarbara. An unusual sequence A, A/C, C, B/C, A/B, where there is a doubling of the B spaces adjacent to one another in the rear, caused by the interlocking of the garden walls and the villa body.
18.12,	Diagram of Barbaro. Overlaid onto the plan of the villa body is a cruciform	18.13. Diagram of Barbaro. Because of the dominant central cruciform figure,
read as surrounded by four corner rooms of unequal dimensions (the two	there appears to be a symmetrical reading of the villa body, but this
in the rear are compressed, while the two in the front appear elongated).	reading is challenged if the implied volume located inside the rear
facade projection is considered part of the villa body as opposed to the barchesse; then the axis of symmetry is not the center of the cruciform but farther back.

18.14.	Diagram of Barbaro. The doors to the rear side rooms are oriented to the lateral arm of the cruciform, while the doors to the front side rooms are oriented along the front-to-back axis of the cruciform.
18.15.	Diagram of Barbaro. The front is marked by a portico stretching across the width of the villa and comprising four engaged giant order columns. The columns at the corners are three-quarter round, articulating a possible conceptual turning of the corner.
18.16.	Diagram of Barbaro. On either side of the villa body along the rear wall, the extension of the villa body as poche aligns with the columns of the arcade. This slight extension forward could be read both as the end wall of the villa proper and as part of the barchesse or extended loggia.

18.17
Diagram of Barbaro. The tripartite organization of rooms embedded in the center of the rear garden wall could be read as having been moved from the rear wall of the villa (through which the cruciform extends).
18.18. Diagram of Barbaro. In an alternate reading, the tripartite organization of rooms could be seen as having been moved from the rear edge of the cruciform’s crossing.
VILLA REPETA
CAMPIGLIA, 1557
ONE OF THE LATER VILLAS IN SEQUENTIAL TI M E, the Villa Repeta at Campiglia clearly illustrates how far Palladio’s villas are from any concept of an ideal type, and points instead to their virtual status as an integral body as well as their opening up to a uniquely dispersed or disaggregated topology. All that remains here of any villa body is a modest four-column portico with an oculus and two corner towers. The three-sided columnar arcade is interrupted and closed by a garden wall with a large central exedra on the fourth side, which recalls the barchessa form of the Villa Barbara. Further accentuating the diminution of a villa body is a portico that fronts the only void in the barchesse, in the center of the facade opposite the exedra. There is no central volume to speak of; instead, what was a forecourt or garden in previous barchessa projects has become, at Repeta, the only discernible central and internal courtyard space.
ANALYTIC MODEL
except for A series OF support rooms in the front of the villa (Palladio’s drawing shows the entrance at the top of the page instead of the bottom) (19.2), the model for Repeta comprises mostly planes as opposed to solid volumes. The use of extruded planes and framed voids reinforces the reading of Repeta as without the conventional attributes of the villa type; that is, without an articulated portico, circulation bay, or interior central space. The turning inside-out of the villa renders what would be the portico
19.1.
Analytic model of Villa Repeta.
and central spaces conceptually active, a condition represented in the models as framed voids. The only solid or conceptually passive elements are those making up the B spaces, shown in gray, which are located on either side of the implied portico.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
THERE ARE many geometric ab s t racti o N s that can explain parts of the plan of Repeta. For example, while two overlaid squares define the total perimeter of the villa (19.3), the amount of overlay does not define any interior organization, as with several overlaid squares of other dimensions. A second overlay diagram shows an anomalous geometry of two nested squares (at a 45-degree angle), which define two front-to-back dimensions but not any of the side-to-side dimensions of the villa extensions (19-4). However, in a third diagram, there are two overlapping squares that define the outboard edge of the two corner towers while simultaneously defining the central void in the side-to-side barchessa arm (19.5). A fourth geometric overlay frames the three barchessa arms as the periphery of two overlapping squares, with the overlap again defining the central
19-2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Repeta in the Four Books, 1570.
void on the lateral arm (19.6). In order to maintain a centerline without an overlap in the central void, the overlaid squares are moved outward. Now placed to the inboard faces of the outer walls front and back, another set of squares defines the overall dimension between the two towers side to side but does not take into account the extension of the towers to the rear beyond the lateral barchessa arm (19.7). A sixth diagram shows two adjacent squares that define the overall dimension between the front-to-back barchessa arms but leave out the lateral arm at the back of the villa (19-8). It should be noted that the dimension of these squares does not correspond, as might be expected, to the garden wall exedra, which in this reading is small in relation to the overall dimension of the villa. A final diagram shows two abutting squares that define both the inner courtyard space and more closely the dimension of the exedra (19.9).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
any projection of an ideal for r e p eta is at best speculative, without much basis in visual evidence. It becomes necessary, for example, to read the arcaded rear courtyard as a central, C, space to be able to have any reading at all of an ideal ABCBA villa (19.10). The alternative produces an almost illegible organization of component parts. Here the portico, A, transition, B, and central space, C, are compressed into the space of the front entry. The ideal organization of this version of Repeta makes explicit the view of the villa as half of a palazzo or courtyard scheme, the other half of which is virtual in the sense of being implied but not drawn (19.11).
There are several possible interpretations of such a virtual condition. If the geometric center of the central courtyard space is read as an implied axis of symmetry, the villa can be seen as a closed-courtyard, four-corner-tower project, similar in its organization and dimension to the Palazzo Thiene, for example (19.12). This interpretation, which views the central courtyard as already a closed space, is reinforced by the minor detail of the engaged square pilaster on the rear garden wall. The close proximity of the square pilaster to the adjacent round column is a condition Palladio often used to turn corners in exterior courtyards. Here the same round-square-round corner condition also occurs at the front of the arcade, which allows for the rear condition to be read as a corner. This interpretation again recalls the organization of Barbara (19.13a), where a circulation bay in the center acts as an axis of symmetry for a rectangular plan with an exedra in the front and the rear (19.13b). The engagement of the rear pilaster might also suggest that the rear garden wall is itself an axis of symmetry through a larger square courtyard with a round feature in the center, similar to the Villa Sarego at Santa Sophia, which follows this analysis (19.14).
A minor detail, the compression of the garden wall into the rear of the arcade, allows for several interpretations, none of which is more stable than any other. The compression in the rear implies an extension or separation of a solid wall from the colonnade in the front of Repeta, which produces a B or transition bay just beyond the portico (19.1s). Conversely, between the actual and the virtual position of the rear garden wall there is an implied gasket or B space, if the organization of the villa is taken nominally as ABCBA
(i9.i6). In addition to these minor displacements in the overall organization, there is a series of slight asymmetries and disjunctions in axial arrangements that further animate Repeta (19.17,19.18). Whether these are irregularities or misalignments in the location of internal walls, openings, niches, or columns, they point to the near impossibility of a single stable reading of part to whole. Likewise, any attempt to locate ideal geometries in both plan and elevation quickly dissipates. What once could be called consistent elements that were still recognizable as belonging to a villa type have become inconsistent, referring not to any type but to an indeterminate origin.
19.3. Geometric diagram of Repeta. While two overlaid squares define the total perimeter of the villa, the amount of overlay does not define any interior organization.
19-5- Geometric diagram of Repeta. Two overlapping squares define the
outboard edge of the two comer towers while simultaneously defining the central void in the side-to-side barchessa arm.
197. Geometric diagram of Repeta. Placed to the inboard faces of the outer walls front and back, a set of squares defines the overall dimension between the two towers side-to-side but does not take into account the extension of the towers to the rear beyond the lateral barchessa arm.
19.9. Geometric diagram of Repeta. Two abutting squares define both the inner courtyard space and more closely the dimension of the exedra.
19-4. Geometric diagram of Repeta. Two nested squares (at a 45-degree angle to one another) define two front-to-back dimensions but not any of the side-to-side dimensions of the villa extensions.
19.6. Geometric diagram of Repeta. Two overlapping squares frame the three
barchessa arms, with the overlap defining the central void on the lateral arm.
19.8. Geometric diagram of Repeta. Two adjacent squares define the overall dimension between the front-to-back barchessa arms but leave out the lateral arm at the back of the villa.
19.10.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Repeta.
It becomes necessary to read the arcaded rear courtyard as a central, C, space to be able to have any reading at all of an ideal ABCBA villa.
19-11.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Repeta. The portico, A, transition, B, and central space, C, are compressed into the space of the front entry. The ideal organization of this version of Repeta makes explicit the view of the villa as half of a palazzo or courtyard scheme, the other half of which is virtual in the sense of being implied but not drawn.
19.12. Diagram of Repeta. If the geometric center of the central courtyard space 19.13a. Diagram of Repeta. The reading of the central courtyard as a closed space is understood as an implied axis of symmetry, the villa can be seen as a	recalls the organization of the Villa Barbaro.
closed-courtyard, four-corner-tower project, a reading reinforced by the minor detail of the engaged square pilaster on the rear garden wall.
19.13b. Diagram of Repeta. In both Barbara and Repeta, a circulation bay in the center acts as an axis of symmetry for a rectangular plan with exedra front and rear.
19.14.	Diagram of Repeta. The engagement of the rear pilaster suggests that the rear garden wall is an axis of symmetry through a larger square courtyard with a round feature in the center.

19.15.	Diagram of Repeta. The compression in the rear implies an extension or separation of a solid wall from the colonnade in the front of Repeta. which produces a B ortransition bay just beyond the portico.
19.16.	Diagram of Repeta. Between the actual and the virtual position of the rear garden wall there is an implied gasket or B space, if the organization of the villa is read nominally as ABCBA.
19.17.	Diagram of Repeta. Minor asymmetries and disjunctions in the barchessa arms.
19.18.	Diagram of Repeta. A closed barchessa arm in opposition to an open barchessa arm further animates Repeta.
VILLA SAREGO
SANTA SOPHIA, 1565
THE LAST IN THE SEQUENCE OF BARCHESSA P R OJ E C T S, the Villa SaregO at Santa Sophia can be seen as a series of thickened walls rather than a building—three courtyard spaces comprising a wall of rooms in the front and along the sides (20.2).
The plan itself resembles Palladio’s drawing of the Baths of Trajan in that it articulates an object within a square apsidal field, though the building is predominantly a series of loggias. There is little notation in Palladio’s drawings of an actual villa body or indication of the limits of inside and out. However, Santa Sophia is not a typical barchessa project in the sense that it establishes a clear hierarchy between the main elements of what would be the villa body and the outbuildings. It is also possible to trace a lineage in the transformation of the villa type from the notation of the bilateral and symmetrical central plan of the Villa Rotonda, to a project that breaks apart the central plan and its symmetrical axes in the Palazzo della Torre, to the almost total dissolution of the villa itself in the Villa Repeta and Santa Sophia. These latter two projects turn the villa type inside-out in both a physical or spatial and a conceptual sense. Since Santa Sophia was developed almost simultaneously with Rotonda, the most classical villa of all Palladian villas, it is difficult to see either of these as defining a direction in Palladio’s work. What is interesting is that the means of understanding the two villas—that is, the virtual diagrams—are almost identical. At the same time, the physical evidence as proposed by Palladio’s own drawings could not be more different. Comparing the two reveals a striking transformation from the homogeneous ideal villa type to the heterogeneous space of a virtual villa.
20.1.
Analytic model of Villa Sarego (Santa Sophia).
ANALYTIC MODEL
the transformation from the classical villa volume to the absence of a villa volume is especially clear in the model for Santa Sophia, which is rendered almost entirely as extruded walls and framed volumes, indicating a majority of conceptually active spaces. What could be said to comprise the front entry space or portico, in reality the villa’s forecourt, is shown as a continuous extruded white A wall. The central space, the villa’s main courtyard, is similarly shown as an extruded wall, here in black. The only solid volumes are in the gray B layer surrounding the central courtyard. In the back of the villa, there are two framed gray B volumes and one framed white A volume in the space between the central courtyard and the exedra; all three are considered virtual positions of B and A spaces.
20.2.
Palladio, plan and elevation drawing of Santa Sophia in the Four Books, 1570.
GEOMETRIC DIAGRAMS
there are VERY few A B s T R A c T10 N s of an ideal square geometry that can help explain the component parts of Santa Sophia. A first diagram isolates the central courtyard, but marks its obvious asymmetry (20.3). A second diagram has two overlaid squares: the original from the first diagram and one shifted toward the exedra, again accounting for the asymmetry of the central court (20.4). A third diagram shows two squares shifted side to side and overlaid on the original, which, when aligned with the dimension of the gardens left and right of the central court, give in their overlay the dimension of the center circulation bay comprising the two elliptical staircases (20.5). A fourth diagram shows the complex relationship between the inboard edge of the front lateral element of the central court and the staircase appended to the exedra in the rear, marked by two squares, which define in their overlay the space of the rear loggia of the central court (20.6).
IDEAL AND VIRTUAL DIAGRAMS
all of the elements of previous v IL L a s are present at Santa Sophia: an arcaded interior courtyard, an arcaded exedra, and barchessa wings. But there is something missing: the central massing of a villa body. Instead, what surrounds the internal court is a single two-story U-shaped envelope of rooms. What is interesting about these parts without a whole is that they can easily be read as the ABCBA organization of an ideal villa, although it is difficult to speculate here, as in Repeta, on the nature of an ideal villa—or even a virtual villa—without the presence of a villa body. Here, not even the corner towers of Repeta remain. Nonetheless, the open arcade in the front of Santa Sophia can be read as an A, the lateral element with the poched, elliptical stairs as a B, and the central arcaded court as a C (20.7). Of course this leaves open to interpretation the arcaded exedra. In one sense, the space between the exedra and the garden wall is a B space and the exedra itself is an A. But the entire rear courtyard can be seen as a B space, leaving an absence of a rear entry or A space.
The particular organization of the forecourt at Santa Sophia is one that is not merely innovative but inventive. It could be argued that innovation involves the transformation of an existing type, and that invention involves changing the relationships of a type entirely. Significantly, Palladio himself calls some of his projects inventions in the Four Books. The body of Santa Sophia has been transformed into two courts compressed into one another, including a forecourt, a rear court, and an exedra-shaped exterior rear court—three sets of courts with two fountains. The villa is basically a series of peripheral rooms surrounding exterior courts.
Here the Palladian type relationships—the ABCBA notations, portico, transition, and main spaces—have been, because of the poche articulation, seemingly turned inside-out. A similar inside-out condition exists at Della Torre, where, because of the inverted poche, it is difficult to mark inside and outside. The articulation of poche at Santa Sophia occurs on the inboard face of the exterior courtyard (20.8). It is interesting to note the unconventional or inverted sequence of spaces: what typically is the portico or A space is at Santa Sophia the main court or C space. The B or transition space turns
out to be, in its positioning, the only place where there are actual rooms. There are no other actual rooms in the progression from the front to the back except in the B space.
In a sense, the villa has been compressed into one large gasket or interstitial space; even the volume appears to be turned outward (20.9). This is one of the most unique and problematic conditions in the Palladian project—the distinction between inside and outside, between the body of the building and the outside space. The strange articulation of the columns and openings further dissolves the differences between interior and exterior, between what is the building and what is not. This villa seems to break apart all of the known or traditional hierarchies that have been associated with Palladio.
Only one part of the loggia at Santa Sophia was built, and it is unusual for its stonework, which seems like flattened layers of a series of tori. Also built was a sequence of courtyard spaces, which in their tripartite alignment represent the most highly developed of the barchessa schemes. While it can be assumed that the central rectangular court is the heart of the villa, other than the two staircases the rest comprises barchesse, which have alternating, fragmented readings and internal misalignments. The forecourt is larger than the central courtyard, which suggests either that the forecourt has been expanded outward or that the central court has been compressed (20.10). Several interpretations of the incomplete symmetrical relationship of the tripartite organization are possible: one that reads a missing rear bay to the central courtyard (20.11), and another that reads the rear wall of the central courtyard as a mirror line, which suggests the expansion of the villa into a large rectangular palazzo-like building (20.12).
Beyond the fragmented condition of the villa plan as a whole, Santa Sophia is one of the most detailed studies on the articulation of the column section as a component of the whole. The forecourt is marked in the front by two outboard L-shaped corner columns. There are a series of flattened columns along the sides and two inboard L-shaped corners with round columns attached to them. Along the rear of the forecourt, there is a sequence of round columns with square attachments (20.13). The study of the column and wall, represented in all their various manifestations in the work, constitutes a unique discourse in Palladio’s development.
The columns in the elevation of the villa are also unique in Palladio’s work because they explicitly represent a force of vertical compression. They are round in both their section and elevation; stacks of pancake-like components form the columns (see 20.2). Between the column section and the capital there is an unusual use of material: the column as a vertical element is inverted, as the emphasis typically placed on the vertical fluting here becomes a series of horizontal slabs. The flattened and rounded stacking is similar to the treatment of structure by Giulio Romano at the Palazzo del Te (1524). While at the Palazzo del Te, the columns are engaged in a wall, at Santa Sophia the wall is gone and all that is left is a loggia, which further recalls the double-story loggia of the Palazzo Chiericati in the way the columns turn the corner. This corner condition is also present in many of Palladio’s Venetian projects, for example, in the remainder of a round column nestled into abutting corner rectangles. The interior wall of the forecourt consists of a series of partial square elements, while the exterior wall is a series of engaged round elements. Thus Palladio returns ultimately to Alberti’s idea of the column as an ornamental device, creating figuration that animates the vertical surface. Here the disaggregation of parts themselves and the organization of the whole is at its most extreme.
20.3. Geometric diagram of Santa Sophia. A single square isolates the central courtyard but marks its obvious asymmetry.
20.5. Geometric diagram of Santa Sophia. Two squares shitted side to side and overlaid on the original, aligned with the dimension of the gardens left and right of the central court, give in their overlay the dimension of the center circulation bay comprising the two elliptical staircases.
20.4. Geometric diagram of Santa Sophia. Two overlaid squares, the initial
square and one shifted toward the exedra, account for the asymmetry of the central court.
20.6. Geometric diagram of Santa Sophia. Two squares showing the complex relationship between the inboard edge of the front lateral element of the central court and the staircase appended to the exedra in the rear define in their overlay the space of the rear loggia of the central court.
20.7.
Ideal and virtual diagrams of Santa Sophia. The open arcade in the front can be read as an A, the lateral element with the poch£d, elliptical stairs as a B, and the central arcaded court as a C, leaving open to interpretation the arcaded exedra.
20.8.	Diagram of Santa Sophia. The articulation of poche occurs on the inboard face of the exterior courtyard.
20.9.	Diagram of Santa Sophia. In a sense, the villa has been compressed
into one large gasket or interstitial space; even the volume appears to be turned outward.
20.10.	Diagram of Santa Sophia. The forecourt is larger than the central
courtyard, which suggests either that the forecourt has been expanded outward or that the central court has been compressed.
20-ti. Diagram of Santa Sophia. An interpretation of the incomplete symmetrical relationship of the tripartite organization reads as having a missing rear bay in the central courtyard.
20.12. Diagram of Santa Sophia. An interpretation of the incomplete symmetrical relationship of the tripartite organization sees the rear wall of the central courtyard as a mirror line, which suggests the expansion of the villa into a large rectangular palazzo-like building.
20.13. Diagram of Santa Sophia. Beyond the fragmented condition of the villa plan as a whole, Santa Sophia is one of the most detailed studies on the articulation of the column section as a component of the whole.