elements of architecture*
rem koolhaas
taschen
ceiling
roof
door
wall
stair
toilet
window
balcony
façade
corridor
ramp
elevator
escalator
fireplace

elements of architecture is based on two harvard graduate school of design studios, conducted in rotterdam and Cambridge, organized by dean mohsen mostafavi. the students' research formed the basis for this book and the exhibition "elements of architecture" at the 2014 Venice architecture biennale.
studio
rem koolhaas Stephan trüby Stephan petermann james westcott
harvard-amo rotterdam studio 2012
heather dunbar elizabeth eckels elle gerdeman patrick hamon jenny hong arthur liu jielu lu will lambeth kurt nieminen tiffany maria obser nicholas potts max wong
harvard-amo rotterdam studio 2013
cynthia dehlavi Stefan dileo andrew gipe see jia ho jingheng lao alison ledwith elizabeth macwillie alison kung difei ma kangil ji annie wang eric williams
elements of architecture
rem koolhaas amo/harvard graduate school of design stephan trüby james westcott stephan petermann
irma boom
manfredo di robilant tom avermaete c-lab (inaba/clouette) keller easterling  jiren feng niklas maak Sébastien marot kevin mcleod friedrich mielke institut für scalalogie hans werlemann alejandro zaera-polo  fang zhenning
AMO
FLOOR
Infinitely harmless, the floor Is obliged to offer Its occupants stability - yet receives from Its users systematic harshness, If not abuse, in return.
keller easterling
FLOOR
PAGE 1
floor
...once a surface for symbolic expression - defining the way spaces are used, implying the 'rules of the game' - floors in the 20th century tended towards a purely Cartesian surface... rational, undecorated, unloved, perfectly flat, ideally soundless-simultaneous with our neglect of programmatic, symbolic, and haptic potential, floor space became the dominant economic measure of architectural space: real estate adopted a fetish of the m2, masking the reality of the three-dimensional volume, and the floor itself is typically a thick slab, sometimes a 'false floor' containing mysteries similar to those of the ceiling...
PAGE 2
FLOOR
...staking the claim of civilization on the raw ground, encoding usage and assuming decoration, the floor then accrues complexity in its section while simplifying its surface details...
FLOOR
PAGE 3
relative floor
International Space Station
—	Domino House
—	No Stop City, Continuous Monument
—	Floor Area Ratio (FAR)
false floor
— Raised floor systems
Automatic Guided Vehicles (AGVs)
Virgin Air glass floor
stacking
PAGE 4
FLOOR
negotiating between gravity and
keller easterling
The floor is the customary technology for negotiating between gravity and the upright body. Every step is magnetized to its surface. It is the architectural element that is almost always touching the body. Floors can fall away or out from under, but they are usually there, idling beneath us. Throughout most of its history, the floor has been a basic assumption, often a starting point. Occasionally, it has been a place to display elaborate patterns and graphic story telling, or a surface reflecting mathematical fascinations like tessellation. But for eons, the floor was simply the surface of the earth or a technical, architectural response to make that surface more habitable or useful. It has also sometimes been a muted registration of cultural practices and construction technologies.
Early 19th century Guide to prostration: Akstafa prayer rug from Azerbaijan, featuring niche pattern, a reference to the mihrab in every mosque, which points towards Mecca, with stylized hand prints.
FLOOR
PAGE 5
1962 Guide to pleasure: Andy Warhol's Dance Diagram, 5 (Fox Trot: "The Right Turn - Man").
the upright body
From prayer rugs to tatami grids to basketball courts, the floor has established a few presumed, if unspoken, rules of the game.
A contemplation of architectural elements does not assemble an encyclopedia or reinforce a canon. It does the opposite. A prolonged look at each element presents puzzles about cultural habituation -something like architectural why-stories that defamiliarize, even upset, conventions.
It may also expose a fatal error when a set of limited cultural habits have stiffened around the element, eliminating a whole range of techniques for making space. A contemplation of the floor returns to one of those forks in the road - territories sidelined in history that can become fresh projects for the discipline.
PAGE 6
FLOOR
1725-1730 Floor plan of the mosaic at Saint Mark's Basilica, Venice, painstakingly depicted by architect and painter Antonio Visentini (who systematically records Venice in his later collection Osservazioni of 1771). Visentini is the first to map Saint Mark's 2,100 square meter mosaic, constructed by craftsmen from Constantinople (or Byzantine Greece), who covered the entire floor with geometric patterns made from marble and highly polished stone.
Luckily, the floor is then an element that has not been the subject of endless scrutiny and bombast in the discipline of architecture. Vertical surfaces are arguably favored as the canvas of an optical culture - a lens as well as a projection of mental constructs. The modern mind, elevating the human from cruder instincts, can keep afloat a number of immaterial constructs, but the heavy inevitabilities that it can no longer suspend must fall to the floor.
Because the floor has often been regarded as an inert supporting player to the vertical, it has been, in a sense, free or wild. It is a reservoir of more primal or potent desires. It is also the untutored surface that escapes the dominant logics of a modern man. More recently, the floor has even been able to slip away, to gather intelligence and technology on the flip side of those logics, and it may
FLOOR
PAGE 7
1963-8 Emptiness: plan of the Neue Nationalgalerie, Berlin, by Mies van der Rohe. As well as typical architectural details of the plan, like walls (just four of them, made of glass) and columns, (also just four major ones), Mies decides to draw the pattern of the floor itself, without which the emptiness of the drawing might be unreadable as a plan of occupiable space. The floor grid consists of 3,136 tiles, forming a surface that extends beyond the glass walls, claiming the area under the extended roof as floor too.
now be returning to architecture for an important chapter in its history as something like an expressive software for space with enormous powers to shape building morphology. But that is just one of many unexploited capacities of the floor - an element for the "non-modern" man.1
ground
In many languages the word for the surface underfoot shares etymologies with pavement, plate, or other flat things. The English word "floor," most immediately comes from Middle English, as in, "What houndes liggen in the floor adoun" from Geoffrey Chaucer's Canterbury Tales (1475).2 But the Old English flor (1,000 AD), meaning floor, ground, pavement, and bottom (as in the bottom
PAGE 8
FLOOR
2014 Featureless and soundless (except for sneakers, which squeak on it), an architecture office's expansive gray rubber floor, by manufacturers Nora, provides the most neutral possible platform for work.
of a lake), could be both an Indoor and an outdoor condition.3 The threshing floor - an outdoor floor technology predating the ancients - was a bit of hardened or paved ground for stamping, thrashing or grinding grain, often located on high ground to catch the wind. From Neolithic times onward, in cultures all around the world, the threshing floor was a place of work but also a place of gathering, dancing, ritual, and worship. It evolved into the square or plaza - the meeting ground of the demos.
A place of assembly and negotiation, it is then perhaps the first "floor," as that word is used in "the floor of the parliament" or "the floor of the stock exchange."
FLOOR	PAGE 9
On a distribution center floor, circular wheel tracks betray the Automatic Guided Vehicle's minuet with transponders.
Threshing floors are landmarks in the bible - the place where Joseph mourns Jacob and Ruth seduces Boaz; but one biblical threshing floor has, for millennia, occupied one of the most hallowed and politically disputed spots on the globe.4 In the familiar story, King David - a bloody, sexy character who, like any hero or charismatic child, is always asking for forgiveness and getting it - buys a threshing floor as an act of contrition. David hopes to persuade God to retract a harsh punishment of plague by building an altar to him on the site.5 Significantly, David buys the threshing floor. It is then both a monument to his earnest contrition and the property of a single God - monotheism displacing the worship of false idols. David later instructs Solomon, his effete and architecturally sophisticated son, to place the Ark of the Covenant on the site, and it eventually
PAGE 10
FLOOR
ca. 18th century Spinal floor: patterned with cow vertebrae, which act as boot scrapers, the rajuela floor of Pátzcuaro, Mexico.
becomes the core of Solomon's extensive temple compound in Jerusalem. Today in the center of Jerusalem, buried somewhere in one of many contested layers of development - lies this patch
of rough floor.
The floor can be a place of inclusion, but can also be an exclusive religious or political domain. The crust of the earth is thick with layer after layer of floors. Each one, suppressing the one before with a tabula rasa and a new datum, hopes to wrest territory from the other by establishing an authentic historical ground.
FLOOR
PAGE 11
Floor slab over the tomb of Pieter Claessoen Palinck and Josina Willemsdochter van Foreest (both died 1546), at St. Lawrence's Church, Alkmaar, Netherlands. The practice of shared burial beneath the stone church floor begins in the Middle Ages and continues until the 19th century in the Netherlands - the faithful becoming part of the foundation of the church.
tricks
The ancient kings often report that God wants them to have a palace and that he has been very specific about its many luxurious appointments. In these palaces, the floor, no longer rough and durable earth, receives refined adornments and magic technologies. A crucial accessory of the royal powerbase, it is sometimes portrayed as a platform of superior knowledge and clever engineering -a plane on which the king makes the rules and the king always wins.
The Mahabharata, written between 1000-900 BC, tells stories dating back to around 3139 BC about the Pandava, the five sons of Pandu. Krishna decides that one of the brothers, Yudisthira, needs a fabulous palace. The architect/illusionist Maya, who owes another Pandava son, Arjuna, who saved
PAGE 14
FLOOR
Rules of the game: asphalt parking lot in Massachusetts, floor-ified by overlapping markings,
orchestrating an alternative use as basketball court.
several cringe-worthy apocryphal versions suggesting that Solomon's tastes may have been a little over-developed. In one version, he is able to see that one her legs looks like that of a goat.
In another he sees that her legs are beautiful. And in yet another, he develops his own recipe for an arsenic depilatory. In any event, the two probably coupled and may be the ancestors of Haile Selassie. The whole elaborate ruse with the floor paid off for Solomon. But then almost everything paid off for Solomon - the original smoothy architect.
FLOOR
PAGE 15
2010 Reprogramming the urban floor: running track pattern applied to a section of Graz, Austria, by architects Sandra Janser and Elisabeth Koller.
firmament
Gods give men palaces, and, in return, men give gods supernatural planes above the earth.
In Greek mythology, on Mount Olympus Zeus and his council drink wine from golden cups above a golden floor while watching the dramas of man on Earth.7 The biblical God has the firmament of heaven, described in Exodus as a semi-transparent floor of jewels or sapphire paving through which He too could see entertaining humans.8
On Earth, places of worship offered equally dazzling floors and optical effects. In the Greek temple of Zeus, a 12-meter tall statue of the god made of gold, ivory and colored glass sat on a black limestone floor. Designed to hold a shallow pool of olive oil, the floor reflected the immense figure
PAGE 16
FLOOR
1906 Trading floor: as the 20th century dawns, the New York Produce Exchange's wheat pit is already the symbolic nerve center of capital. Goods and services exchanged on the sunken, concentric circled floor: "Hay, seed, feed, elevating, inspectors, weighers, measurers, tallow, greases, fertilizer, naval stores, millers, custom brokers, lawyers, bakers, coffee, lumber, vinegar, dried fruits, beans and peas... and so it goes on." (E.R. Carhart, "The New York Produce Exchange," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences 38:2, 1911, p. 536.)
while suspending it in infinite space.9 Since Christian churches transported worshippers into a microcosm believed to house the presence of God, and since heaven was believed to be a doubling of the Earth's surface - a firmament with its own seas - the floor of the church was often treated as a sea. Wave patterns in the inlaid Carystian and Proconnesian marble mimicked moving waters. The name 'marble' derived from Greek and Sanskrit roots that meant glistening or shimmering, and stones, when polished, appeared to be wet. Marble embedded with fossilized sea creatures was even regarded as "petrified water." Innumerable churches, including Hagia Sophia (537-1453) and Saint Mark's in Venice (832-1673) have watery floors.10
THE WHEAT PIT; PRODUCE EXCHANGE
FLOOR
PAGE 17
Frieze at the Annapurna Temple, Indore, depicting the "Palace of Illusions" In the Sanskrit epic Mahabharata: "One time the princely Dhartarastra came, in the middle of the hall, upon a crystal slab, and thinking it was water, the flustered prince raised his robe; then, bitter and shamefaced, he roamed about the hall. Again, seeing a pond with crystalline water adorned with crystalline lotuses, he thought it was land and fell into the water with his clothes on". (The Mahabharata: 2, The Book of the Assembly Hall; 3, The Book of the Forest, translated by 3.A.B. van Buitenen, 1981, p. 109.)
Renderings of Oceanus and sea creatures often appeared in soupy mosaic depictions of the floor as sea, as did many other animals, landscapes, humans and deities in the iconography of the floor. Jewish, Islamic and Christian traditions mixed on the floors of churches, cathedrals and temples well into the Middle Ages. Combining geometric and mosaic patterns, they also became tablets on which to inscribe narrative content. In the Jewish tradition, the floor was an acceptable place to depict stories without erecting graven images. The most long-winded floors, like those in the Siena Cathedral (1215-1263), are wall-to-wall cartoons of biblical epics and local politics created over the course of centuries.
PAGE 18
FLOOR
1959 Moppable: Gold Seal Congoleum Rugs offer the luxuriant patterns of an old time carpet, with the benefit of easy cleaning. "These modern, sanitary rugs cling tight to the
floor without any kind of fastening." Pattern no. 528 retails for $9.
field
"And the Earth - we have stretched it out like a carpet; and how smoothly have we spread it forth!" (Quran 051:048-Rodwell trans.) Mosques do not use the floor to simulate a celestial plane but rather to establish a global surface for prayer. Mosques enclose large floor areas (the Great Mosque at Cordoba is 180 x 130 meters) almost like a roofed or tented segment of the Earth's surface. Reflecting a nomadic existence, where the sky is the canopy and the Earth is the place of dwelling, the floor is a flat plane, continuous with the plane of its exterior court. Informed by astronomical knowledge of the qibla, it is oriented to a single spot on the planet, the Kaaba at Mecca. The Quran repeatedly describes the Earth as a remarkably smooth carpet, like the floor of a mosque completely covered
FLOOR
PAGE 19
3rd-4th century Underneath a military prison in Israel, the oldest Christian Church in the Holy Land is discovered in 2005 by an inmate working on the prison's expansion - which halted after the find. Dating from the end of the period when Christianity was illegal under the Roman Empire, the 6x9 meter mosaic features a medallion of fish and inscriptions in Greek, including: "The god-loving Akeptous has offered the table to God Desus Christ as a memorial."
in prayer rugs. Establishing a clean surface for bare feet, the rugs are modules sized to the kneeling or prostrate body. The prayer rug is no longer an even field, but a depiction of monotheistic hierarchies to which the body conforms. With its imagery of Mecca, the rug is like an mnemonic, a pixel in a worldwide field that can essentially recreate the condition of the mosque anywhere on the globe. While floors as tessellated planes have existed since ancient Sumerian civilization (4000 BC), in Islamic culture, they developed an extra degree of mathematical intricacy. The tile in tessellating patterns is not just a spot of color in a fluid field; it is a precise shape interfacing with other tiles to completely subdivide the field geometrically. Carpets, woven for centuries in the Middle East and Central Asia as practical flooring for nomadic tents, may have contributed both aesthetic preferences
PAGE 20
FLOOR
, obeisant, the floor becomes the natural vantage contemporary art.
2003 A surface for the prostrate, awe-struck from which to absorb monumental contemporary
and technical skills in Islamic tile making. Their repeating, interlacing patterns geometricized surfaces with patterns that celebrated god, stars, light, and astronomical navigationdIn the stories of modern architecture culture, the floor as a global surface is equally imbued with spirituality. In Miesian logic, for instance, the floor is a plane of infinitely expansive space. Yet its universality comes not from declaring a single deity, astronomical direction or proportional grid. Rather it is a universal and expansive plane because it invites overlapping orders - as many perspectives as it has inhabitants and as many events as can be held in a trajectory of time.
FLOOR
PAGE 21
430-420 BC Olive oil floor: writing about Zeus's temple 600 years after it was built, Greek geographer Pausanias claims its floor was covered in olive oil in order to dehumidify the atmosphere, thus preserving the wood and ivory of the enormous statue. A contemporary commentator adds that it likely also contributed "mysterious, shimmering, animating light." Jeffrey M. Hurwit, Periklean Athens and Its Legacy: Problems and Perspectives, 2005, p. 142; painting of the temple by Sian Frances.)
area
"Stand at the door of a church on a Sunday and bid 16 men to stop, tall ones and small ones, as they happen to pass out when the service is finished; then make them put their left feet one behind the other, and the length thus obtained shall be a right and lawful rod to measure and survey the land with, and the 16th part of it shall be the right and lawful foot."12
While in Latin there were several words for floor, the word for a level open space like a building site, a threshing floor or any other place where things were aired was area - an early marker of lasting cultural conventions associated with the floor. Area, not volume, dominates financial and cultural valuations of space, and the floor is instrumental in this cultural preference.
PAGE 22
FLOOR
2012 At the Hajj, the deck above the ka'ba circling area (out of shot, to the right) is transformed into an outdoor floor through concentric circles of prayer rugs, on which pilgrims relax for now-a realization in microcosm of the Quran's ideal
of the Earth as a continuous, smooth carpet.
Volume has always been a practical measure for fluids, but space has never really been regarded as a fluid volume of air to be contained, and two-dimensional measure has been considered sufficient. Plots of land, measured with something like the Roman "pace" or the foot, favored horizontal two-dimensional measure and perhaps also fostered cultural habits for quantifying space with area. Still, across cultures and millennia, the cubit - the distance from the elbow to the tip of the middle finger -has been the most persistent corporeal unit, one that does not necessarily make horizontal area measurement more convenient. The biblical God was clear that Solomon's temple, for instance, should be measured in volumetric cubits.13
FLOOR
PAGE 23
2004 "They who pray do with the members of their body that which befits supplicants; they fix their knees, stretch forth their hands, or even prostrate themselves on the ground". (St. Augustine, "De cura pro mortuis gerenda," quoted in The Catholic Encyclopedia, 1913, p. 424). Deacon candidates at the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels, Los Angeles, lay on the floor, pointed, like the ray-patterns on the parquet, towards the altar at the center.
In architectural convention, volume is usually regarded as the geometric result of two-dimensional drawings of section, elevation and plan. The plan is arguably the dominant conceptual document, and the logic of orthographic projection replaces the magic of the floors in temples and palaces. While architects are connoisseurs of spatial containers, the art of making the volume inside those containers is one that, surprisingly, is rarely discussed. Those outside the discipline might assume that architects have developed elaborate aesthetic practices regarding volume, speaking to each other about it like an enologist describes wine or a 'nose' describes perfume. Yet most architects don't readily know the cubage of even the most iconic spaces. Despite the pleasures associated with volume, the discipline has not developed, in hundreds of years of space making,
PAGE 24
FLOOR
1979 Inaccessible floor #1: "Billy White, cell 18, and Jerry Bird, cell 19. Hands came out of adjoining cells to play dominoes on the run* or chess on handmade boards suspended by string from the bars where the cells joined. Men would compete in dominoes or chess for years without ever seeing one another's faces as the moves were made or contemplated." Dominoes. Death Row, Texas, by Bruce Jackson. (Bruce Jackson and Diana Christian, In This Timeless Time: Living and Dying on Death Row in America, 2012, p. 49). *The shared, reachable floor / corridor between cells.
an artful, technical, practical, or even silly vocabulary for describing it. If an examination of architectural elements returns the discipline to historic junctures - perhaps fatal errors or lost opportunities - the floor returns attention to the strange neglect of volume, offering a chance to contemplate alternative histories for this under-rehearsed or under-indulged pleasure.
platform
Not only in myths and ancient palaces but also in domestic, religious and court architecture, the floor as an elevated platform has been a universal technology for separating the clean from the dirty, the sacred from the profane, and the ruling from the ruled. In the church, clergy and royals, as anointed
FLOOR
PAGE 25
1998 Inaccessible floor #2: Biennial Brussels Flower Carpet, consisting of more than a million flowers, transforming the square Into an enormous festive surface that may not be walked on.
humans, maintained exalted positions. Orchestrating rank in processional movement, approach and tableau has been the primary reason for architecture for most of its history, and the discipline of architecture still internally organizes itself with a residual taste for hierarchy.
Aspiring to be a universal manual of building standards, the Chinese Yingzao Fashi (1065-1110) documented and developed a tradition of elevated floors, pagodas, and gate towers to celebrate rulers and deities. Even Neolithic dwellings had timber-framed stories, but the Chinese had formalized a storied architecture since the Han Dynasty (206 BC-220 AD). Elaborating on these traditions, Yingzao Fashi, written during the Song Dynasty (960-1279), recorded techniques that had been practiced for centuries and passed on in verse. In recreating the entire aesthetic regime, the manual
PAGE 26
FLOOR
The exact use of the "pecked circles" of the Maya is unknown: surveyor's marks? Astronomical recordings? Divination? "One view is that they represent the propagation of a symbol whose form remained essentially unaltered but came to be used for different purposes. An alternative is that many if not all of these purposes were interrelated." (Clive L.N. Ruggles, Ancient Astronomy:
An Encyclopedia of Cosmologies and Myth, 2005, p. 260-261.)
left nothing to chance, with strict rules for every aspect of material preparation and assembly. Borrowing techniques from the Chinese, around 800-900 AD the Japanese developed an aristocratic domestic architecture entirely around the elevated floor - the Shinden-zukuri style. Early dwellings -often earthen pits or bowls covered with rushes or roofs and mounded against the water of nearby rice fields - eventually began to incorporate platforms like those used to protect grain stores from water. Houses sometimes hosted cooking on the earthen floor but maintained the elevated platform as a clean surface for sitting and sleeping. The Shinden style elaborated this wooden platform as a surface for both walking and sitting. Arata Isozaki has noted, "earth-floored areas that were extensions of the outside ground were abandoned, and the whole building was converted into
FLOOR
PAGE 27
Jan. 6, 1959
Filed July 26, 1956
J. H. BENTON
FALSE FLOORING SYSTEM
2,867,301
2 Sheets-Sheet 1
1956 Shortly after the advent of the false ceiling, the false floor is patented by J.H. Benton. Cables and ventilation systems can be easily hidden-but still accessed-in a new cavity in architecture. Benton's innovation is a system of small "pedestals" on which to balance floor tiles, rather than resting them on beams that previously had to be nailed to the "real" floor. The benefit: "when there are apt to be future changes in the installation, artificial flooring is especially desirable to enable one to make such changes without ripping up the floor." Benton believes that artificial flooring should from now on "be included among the construction plans of the new building."
an outsized kind of furniture."14 Initially, mats of woven rush - tatamis - were made in different sizes as a means to further rank inhabitants and guests. In the later Muromachi or Ashikaga period (1300-1500s AD), the tatamis, always in a 2:1 ratio, were sized to accommodate two seated people (roughly one meter by two meters). Eventually they covered the entire surface of the platform and formed the base for additional softer materials and bedding. It only took about 1,000 years for tatami to become common in the general population.
By the turn of the 18th century, they dictated room sizes and proportions, as in a four-mat, six-mat, or eight-mat room. The module also determined the structural grid of the entire dwelling. In the postwar housing crisis, minimal dwellings were expressed as tatami, and the modular unit has remained in
PAGE 28
FLOOR
The apparently solid floor (designed by Kingspan) becomes a secret cavity for hiding the building's support systems, mostly wiring. The constant change implied by the open plan office requires a system for easy adaptation hidden in the floor, formerly the most stable element, now another a symbol of impermanence.
play to shape contemporary domestic architecture in Japan.15 In Isozaki's descriptions of Shinden architecture, the floor was the governing surface. In response to the body seated on the floor, ceiling heights dropped, and to shade the body in this lowered position, roof over-hangs deepened. Culture even developed a taste for horizontal visual panoramas. The occupation of the floor shaped the morphology of the entire house as well as the visual culture of the period.
FLOOR
PAGE 29
2012 Wall-through-wall carpet: in an effort to break the monotony of ubiquitous wall-to-wall carpet, Dutch firm Carpets for Buildings lays the floor plan (In a computer) over a massive gradated pattern, with carpet then printed and laid as glimpses of this Invisible, larger whole.
bearing
The sensual floor - always touching or communicating with the body - participates in the body's bearing and movement. The floor can organize behavior with graphic patterns and level changes, but it can also cue much more intimate responses with just an embossing of the surface.
In mosques, the prayer rug instructs the worshipper with pictures of Mecca or the mihrab, the niche that indicates the direction of Mecca. Often the rug even provides a template for the exact position to assume, with a pattern indicating where to sit as well as where to place the hands and forehead when prostrate. Sometimes a picture of a comb and pitcher reminds the worshipper to wash and to comb his hair.
PAGE 30
FLOOR
A symbolic picture of the universe, the mandala of Tibetan Buddhism is the subject of a meticulous ceremony: first a pattern is laid out, then colored sand is applied using metal funnels; finally, it is destroyed...
Japanese architecture developed a rich Braille for bare or stocking feet that, radiating through the body, prompted posture or attitude. Squatting, with knees up, on flat feet was the sitting pose for earthen sections of floor, while sitting with legs akimbo was customary on the elevated platforms that eventually dominated. Carefully stepping over sills or kekkai (a Buddhist term for separating the sacred from secular things or from women) triggered a crouching or stooping gait.16 A genkan, the area where shoes were removed, was the last in a sequence of telescoping thresholds from the outdoor terrain to the indoor world. Featuring increasingly refined stepping-stones and textural changes, it gradually conditioned behavior for the transition.
FLOOR
PAGE 31

1974 "Humphrey Street, Englewood New Jersey, was a typical suburban home In a higher than standard negro neighborhood that was destroyed for an unrealized urban 'renewal' project. The three stages of the work were: cutting a one inch wide slice through the center of the house, beveling down half of the foundations to a low point of one foot, and...tipping the back half of the house to its new foundations, splitting open the center." Humphrey Street Splitting, Gordon Matta-Clark. (Gordon Matta-Clark,
Works and Collected Writings, 2006, p. 161.)
For the aristocrats in Shinden architecture, the desire for quiet treading on the soft floor materials even evolved into a style of walking or gliding that distinguished them from commoners. Now best reenacted in Noh theater, the walk maintained weight on the back foot, and the feet brushed against each other as they were successively pushed forward. Once the foot was in the forward weightless position, the toes were curled up and back down as the final flourish of each pace.
The equally exaggerated gait of commoners was something more like cross-country skiing. When performed outdoors, it was capable of excavating parallel furrows in soil, thus helping in the cultivation of the land.
PAGE 32
FLOOR
2015 Kiva robots retrieve and arrange shelves in an Amazon warehouse. Algorithms determine which robot is sent to collect which shelf to be brought to which workers, the system turning "what is normally a serial process into a massively parallel process," according to the manufacturers. In 2012, Amazon, Kiva's biggest customer, buys the company outright. Kiva claims its robots triple the speed of order-fulfillment, and reduce staffing needs by two thirds. For safety reasons, humans are
banished from floor areas where Kiva robots operate.
The biotopological floor in Arakawa and Gin's Bioscleave house (2007) is an undulating terrain with one-meter high hills and hundreds of small bumps like large stepping stones in a genkan. For their Reversible Destiny Foundation (perhaps as ambitious as it was clownish), the designers made spaces that, they hoped, would cause the body to stop aging. Rather than the perfectly flat floors of one-story buildings typically recommended for the elderly, the biotopological floor was designed to defamiliarize walking, put users off-balance and even cause them fall. In We Have Decided Not to Die, a catalogue for their Guggenheim exhibition of 1997, Arakawa and Gins wrote, "Comfort, the thinking goes, is a precursor to death; the house is meant to lead its users into a perpetually 'tentative' relationship with their surroundings, and thereby keep them young."17
FLOOR
PAGE 33
2013 The floor of the Epoka University Student Center in Tirana, Albania, designed by Zambak and CoRDA (Center of Research and Design in Architecture), is treated like a painting. Materialized from two different types of marble, white and dark green, the two stone colors compose a repetitive pattern that reads on first sight as only two-dimensional. From the upper level though, the pattern starts to gain three-dimensional depth, hinting at the staging capacity of the space as an exhibition venue for student design projects as well as the main circulation of the building. Because of the ¡conographic Intensity of the Escher-like pattern tattooed on the floor you can sense this staging capacity even when there is no exhibition Installed. The floor actually features two images: one is the graphic pattern produced by the two differently colored stones, but because the marble Is polished, it also produces a reflective image of the hall's interior superimposed on the intrinsic figuration of the stone. The optical effervescence of the floor's reflective surface is further increased by the fact that all other material finishes are highly tactile — the rough concrete of the celling, the earthy touch of the bricks building the wall. The floor, even though forming but one element of the structure, conditions the perception and performance of the entire building. —Andreas Ruby
Dance floors encourage extraordinary movements involving both discipline and abandon. Whether in a 19th century ballroom or a contemporary club, a dance floor is designed to contain a sea of couples covering its entire extent and dancing rhythmically. The floor is also sometimes treated with powder to make it easier to slide and spin with moves that defy gravity or deliberately upset the norms of polite comportment. The buzz or the moonwalk danced by Cab Calloway in the 1930s,
Bill Bailey in the 50s and Michael Jackson in the 1980s, is a sliding dance to create the illusion of inverted or unearthly conditions - a move strangely similar to the Shinden gliding walk in reverse. Just as vast expanses of flat floor inspire tumbling to test the body's bounciness in gravity, an extended length of floor, like a catwalk or red carpet inspires a variety of equally exaggerated behaviors.
PAGE 34
FLOOR
Resurfacing for holiness: "And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness." (Exodus, 24:10.)
■whose Dance Diagram (1962) shifts the site of art from an optical vertical plane to a zontal plane, considered the fashion catwalk to be the new theater. On the catwalk, models invariably walk with a distended march in which the feet cross over each other and the face never smiles. Similarly, the red carpet, that flatters guests and celebrities by treating them with the of royalty, is a theater for both humans and cameras to admire the walking and posing leased from the grave expression essential to fashion, teeth are bared in ambitious smiles and eyes narrow as bodies strike special torsional poses.
The floor deliveres instructions to the body that need not be translated into language. Inducing ling, the cues rely not on "knowing that" but rather on "knowing how."18 "Giving the

FLOOR
PAGE 35
2006 Digital prayer rug: the EL Sajjadah (EL = electroluminescent; Sajjadah = prayer mat), by designers Soner Ozenc. Electroluminescent fibers brighten as the matt is turned towards Mecca; a glowing vector drawing inspired by the Green Mosque of Istanbul is powered by rechargeable batteries, or plug-in power. Despite tremendous publicity, a 2012 Kickstarter campaign to fund EL Sajjadah fails.
floor" to prompt or indulge a spectrum of behaviors is perhaps another underexploited power worth retrieving from a study of architectural elements.

section
A historical fast-forward through the changing cross-section of the floor would remain steady on hardened earth for centuries, eventually incorporating aggregates of stone and wooden timbers. Floors in ancient palaces and temples across all civilizations, paved with every possible stone and metal, would animate the section slightly. The Greeks introduced beams combining stone and iron to resist bending. Romans introduced the chemical composite of concrete also occasionally
PAGE 36
FLOOR
2008 Renewable resource: the floor of Watt, a Rotterdam nightclub,
generates electricity and light when danced upon.
embedding iron into the mixture. These and the sophisticated joinery of Chinese carpentry would all appear in an increasingly complex sandwich of materials.
The wood-framed floors of storied architecture, a prevailing technology for centuries of the last millennium, have long been accomplished with countless, minute variations that would flicker by in the time lapse. The length of wooden timbers dictated the width of structures like row houses, which, in turn determined the width of lots, thus formatting the urban fabric of cities like New York and London with an on-going structural increment. Acting as beams, these timbers make the longest span (approximately three meters), and smaller, perpendicular framing members span between the beams. Still smaller planks span the joists to create a subfloor. Appearing in the
FLOOR
PAGE 37
2011 Excavation: the Natural History Museum of Utah employs the trope of super-tough glass flooring over historical artifacts, simulating discovery of bones In the ground.
early-to-mid 19th century, balloon framing used larger numbers of tall wooden framing members from which the floor was suspended. Currently popular platform framing establishes each floor as a separate unit.
Wrought iron, making a relatively brief appearance as a structural member in the 19th century, was quickly replaced with steel, after which the fast-forward through a changing floor section would begin to jump and palpitate more rapidly. A Bessemer steel alloy, patented in 1851 made skeletal structures possible. Grids of beams and girders appearing in the floor section accomplished longer spans, but they also inspired trusses that increased the depth of the floor as well as the span between supports.
PAGE 38
FLOOR
2008 The most solid-seeming floor might consist of multiple hollows: bubble decking uses a field of small recycled plastic balls, held in place with a mesh, to replace areas in concrete slabs that are non-load bearing, and would otherwise be dead mass. With no diminishment in structural performance, slabs with bubble decking use 35 percent less concrete, making them much lighter, creating a domino effect of advantages: taking pressure off beams, columns, and load bearing walls, saving money and reducing CO2 emissions in the production of concrete.
Modern reinforced concrete, yet another material technology in the diversifying floor section, assembles concrete and steel in countless combinations. For instance, steel beams may support metal decking into which concrete is poured. But the reinforced concrete may also be poured to provide both beams and decks in one-way slab or two-way 'waffle' slabs. Concrete may be pretensioned or post-tensioned, with steel cable threaded through an open channel and tightened to bow the concrete slab against loading forces. One of the newest reinforced concrete sections, Bubble Decking, uses a grid of small beach balls to displace and reduce the quantity of material, thereby significantly lowering the C02 emissions that result from concrete production.
The fast-forward that begins with dense hardened earth eventually features floor sections as
FLOOR
PAGE 39
1948 The concrete floor slab - also serving as foundation - upon which one of 17,000 families will build a new life in postwar America, in the planned communities of Levittown. "When the slabs were dry, carpenters erected partially prebuilt frames of identical one-story 'Cape Cod' two-bedroom homes. Next, closely coordinated, one crew on the heels of another, came roofers, floor layers, plumbers, electricians, and painters. One man did nothing but bolt washing machines to floors, trotting from one house to another." (Joseph Conlin, The American Past: A Survey of American History, Enhanced Edition, Volume 2, 2007, p. 755)
lightweight as air and as transparent as glass. Inverting the historically strenuous attempts to strengthen and rigidity structural materials, Cedric Price's Infla-floor (1964), joining a number of designs for inflatable floors, replaced the solid floor section with gaseous air.19 Slabs of structural glass, reinforced with polymers and set into a steel (or glass) grid can create an exceptionally strong floor in a section only around 10 centimeters thick.20 Like the trick floors of ancient palaces, these transparent floors now sometimes appear as special platforms at the top of sky-scrapers, offerir a popular photo-op of the body suspended in mid-air hundreds of feet above the ground.
PAGE 40
FLOOR
1952 The road to the modern linoleum floor begins in the 1850s, with the efforts of British manufacture Frederick Walton to accelerate the congelation of linseed oil. By the end of the 1800s the synthetic floor, famed for being durable and easy to wash, is big business. The first half of the 20th century is its golden age, when it assumes its enduring association with the kitchen. Thereafter, it is superseded
by PVC flooring - still often colloquially called linoleum.
stack
While the elevator is often considered to be the germ of the modern skyscraper, it was the combination of vertical conveyance and the stacked floors of skeletal steel structures that, together, launched an era of staggering global changes to building morphology.
Great stalks of building proliferated first in Chicago and then in New York. In these mercantile cities, again not volume but area, is the commodity to be stacked and sold as real estate. Delirious New York 091 3) reproduced a 1909 Life magazine cartoon joking that even the grounds of suburban estates might be continually layered on top each other until they reached into the clouds. Also figuring into the argument was a section drawing of the New York Athletic Club in which the floors were separate
FLOOR
PAGE 41
2012 Surveillance: the SensFloor, a textile underlay embedded with 32 sensors per square meter. Used in a home for the elderly in Pfaffenhoffen, France, SensFloor is an expedient way to monitor 70 rooms remotely, detecting falls and summoning nurses, serving as a switch to turn on lights or open doors, alerting staff to potential intruders, and tracking the movements of those staff.
worlds-swimming pools, offices spaces, formal areas, dining rooms, offices, and residential accommodations - all shuffled in a stack of floors and strung together with vertical circulation.
For Le Corbusier, arguably one of the projects of 20th century architecture was to declare universal laws and aesthetic regimes for this stacking of floors. His Maison Dom-lno diagram levitated on columns floor slabs that were structurally independent of load bearing walls. Each slab was a platform for the "free plan," where interior partitions could float freely and exterior walls could be relieved of load. In Le Corbusier's formulations, a two-dimensional grid based on his modulor proportional system would be universally applied, and planimetric order was a primary articulation of the proposition.
PAGE 42
FLOOR
13b/ installation ot refrigeration piping at i\iew rorKS iviaaison square uaraen. me nocKey rinn converts into a basketball court as vinyl panels are fitted over the ice, and 285 wooden pieces placed atop. Centimeters below, the frozen layer remains. The system is notorious though for leakage: humidity from the basketball court often causes evaporation, and a dangerously slippery surface for the players: "You can't put them brakes on when you want to because you didn't know if you're going to slip," Boston Celtics forward Rasheed Wallace reports In 2010. "I saw a couple guys out there slipping like Peggy Flemming on ice. That's part of it when you play in arenas with ice under mem."
In the stacks of modernist housing, the floor was also one of the mathematical surfaces on which to calculate minimal requirements for healthy living. ClAM's (Congress of Modern Architecture, 1928-59) exhibition "The Minimal Dwelling Unit" in Frankfurt in 1929 brought together a number of experiments from Germany and other European cities. The exhibition indexed floor area and window area as well as cubage. The floor area for multi-family units ranged from 23 to 91.2 square meters.
An average three-bedroom unit with 52.4 square meter floor area offered 9 square meters of window area and 204 cubic meters of volume.21 Yet eventually volume was again discarded, and floor area remained the only surviving metric.
In the modern skyscraper, the convention for assessing urban building is Floor Area Ratio (FAR),
FLOOR
PAGE 43
Late 19th century "The word tatami stems from tatamu, meaning to fold, to pile up; for the early form of the object, as depicted in early scroll paintings illustrating the Kojiki and Manyoshu, was but a thin skin cover or a grass mat that could be easily folded. It might also be possible that several layers, one upon the other, were used simultaneously. In the Kamakura period (1185-1336) thickly knit straw mats, called tsuka-nami, appeared for the first time in the residences of the nobility. Yet, they did not cover the whole surface but were carried to a desired place. The size of this mat, as is evident in picture scrolls, corresponds to a space occupied by two men sitting, and was already fairly standardized. At the beginning of the Murmachi period (1393-1573) the entire floor was covered for the first time. Thus tatami had become floor itself." (Heino Engel, Measure and Construction of the Japanese House, 1985, p. 36)
a ratio of total floor area in the stack to site area. Adopted in early 20th-century New York, FAR has now become the global shorthand for monetizing and negotiating urban space within building and zoning codes of the contemporary city. While there can be height restrictions, the simple ratio does not precisely address volume or bulk. For instance a floor area ratio of 2 can be configured as two floors the size of the lot but sited 40 feet in the air. Nor does FAR control or inform density. Rather it is a loose regulation, or perhaps even a useful rule of thumb to help developers advantageously satisfy (or circumvent) municipal law.
PAGE 44	FLOOR
1545 Tragic Scene, Sebastiano Serlio. In his stage sets for the Palazzo Porto in Vicenza, the flat front of the stage, where the action takes place, cedes to a sloped rear section, clad with scenery, creating the illusion of depth.
The plunging perspective lines of an imagined street complete the effect, designed to align so as to provide the Royal Chair with a perfect view. Serlio's treatise On Perspective features schemes for Comic, Tragic, and Pastoral
variations on this set.
commodity
The stack, primarily regarded as a collection of two-dimensional floor plates, perfectly unites the preferred planimetric documents of architects and the habitual area calculations of real estate. While both architectural and market ambitions are expressed in the floor plan, real estate values, not modernist utopian standards or proportional grids, have formatted the world. (When planning rationalized the minimal dwelling product, it served up to real estate what would be regarded as the maximal dwelling product.) Telling many stories of fantasy and luxury, and appearing in full page ads, the floor plan is a reliably enthralling and broadly received real estate cartoon about monetized aspirations.
In the 1960s, two Italian, counter-culture architecture groups, Archizoom and Superstudio, featured
FLOOR
PAGE 45
1971 Abolition of the ground: Superstudio's Supersurface, a premonition of a world in which nature and culture collapse together on an endless global floor.
the floor in a hyperbolic critique of market ubiquity. Archizoom's wry, dystopian project No-Stop City (1969) simply drew the world as if it were an infinitely gridded floor plan - an uninterrupted air-conditioned layer of commodified space like an office plate or a supermarket. Different from the Miesian universal space for hosting many minds and occupations, the plan was a repetitive field of market values. Similarly, in Superstudio's Continuous Monument (also 1969) a new blank gridded strip traveled around the planet uninterrupted by the normative boundaries of political territories.
It was the urbanism of another sovereignty - the abstract space of Capital, engulfing cities as relics of another time. Yet in other Superstudio projects, a similar gridded surface also portrayed a primordial platform or infrastructure for a reoccupation of the environment - the return to
PAGE 46
FLOOR
45-minute time-lapse photo charting the course of an illuminated Roomba. The robotic vacuum cleaner's algorithm is based on the study of how animals search for food: it begins sweeping the floor in a circle until it hits a solid object, after which it follows that periphery before beginning to crisscross
space to determine the area It is roving in.
a fundamental plane that always maintained some degree of refusal or separation from the prevailing political and economic reality. As such, it was perhaps the floor as an ultimate, inconsolable
tabula rasa.22
Just as the flood of Florence in 1966 may have hallucinated some of the apocalyptic environmental content of Superstudio's work, flood waters in cities around the world establish a new bankable floor level.23 In the wake of urban floods, whether in Bangkok or New York, banks, insurance companies and planners monetize the risk of floors at different heights. While building near water has prompted highly developed vernacular traditions for floating houses or houses on stilts, the houses of recent insurance negotiations often appear to be the same grade-level commodity simply raised to a new financially viable elevation.
FLOOR
PAGE 47
1929-1930 For the roof terrace of the De Beistegui apartment in Paris, Le Corbusier fabricates an outdoor living room, with a small meadow as floor.
void
In the urban stack of repeatable floor plates, hidden cavities between the flooring and the ceiling house structure and building systems - voids between commodities that appear to belong to no one.
In generic office construction, dropped ceilings and raised false floors extend this space.
The dropped ceiling, made of a lightweight metal grid and foamy acoustic tiling, is an inexpensive system for concealing HVAC and lighting systems. Raised floors are often used as a plenum or chase for the wiring and cabling of telecommunications and data. A similar metal grid holds removable particle board tiles that allow work spaces to be easily reconfigured and rewired. Ventilation tiles on either surface shine a bit of light into a dark space of forced air, dusty wires and electronic heat.
PAGE 48
FLOOR
11th century Scroll 1 of the Genji Monogatari Emaki (Handscrolls of the Tale 1951 Farnsworth House's floor system - charged with elevating Mies's glass of Genji), removes the roof to reveal wall-to-wall tatami in a typical aristocratic box in the woods above the ground, though not high enough above the
residence of the Helan period (794-1185 AD).	latter day flood plane of the nearby Fox River.
These cavities are the space of horror and science fiction - the Twilight Zone of parallel universes, or the place for hiding secret treasures and spy equipment. The floors of churches and Cathedrals have long been tombs filled with corpses, but the sense that this void is unknowable or beyond jurisdiction was already apparent when Edgar Allan Poe's protagonist in "The Tell-Tale Heart" (1843) so arrogantly and triumphantly stuffed the remains of his murder in between the wooden joists of his victim's room. He was sure that it all would have worked, and that it would have been completely untraceable had it not been for the tap, tap, tapping underneath the floorboards.
"I felt that I must scream or die! and now - again! - hark! louder! louder! louder! louder!
'Villains!' shrieked, 'dissemble no more! I admit the deed! - tear up the planks! here, here! -It is the beating of his hideous heart!'
FLOOR
PAGE 49
2012 After a lecture at Harvard Graduate School of Design, in which Patrik Schumacher shows a slide of three curvacious, parametricist skyscrapers, Preston Scott Cohen asks about the treatment of the floor: PSC: "I wanted to ask you about a few things that seem to be holdbacks that you can't seem to surmount. You showed us a tower where all the floors are a different shape. However, there is something intractably identical about all of them. They're all flat. And they're all arrived at by the same elevator and the same door repeating floor after floor, relentlessly. We still have Fordism. We have an intractable Fordism collaged with parametricism. They're absolutely flat, that property never changes. Shape changes but flatness doesn't."
PS: " I'm not phased by what you're saying. I have no problem with flat floors if I vary a lot of other aspects - the size of the floor, the fenestration, the penetration..."
1885 / present Start of the stacked floor: digital reconstruction of William LeBaron Denney's Home Insurance Building, Chicago (demolished in 1931) — the first reported use of structural steel in a building. The advent of Chicago-style reinforced steel construction puts an end to former limits on the multistory building.
compact
Floors, as they are responsible for bearing weight, are part of a social compact - the dependable foundation that is expected to quietly do all the heavy-lifting. In colloquial expressions, to be level is to be true or to establish a platform of fairness. The engineering and inspection of floors is a matter of law. Yet the identical floors in a stack or in a population of formulaic spatial products provides a tantalizing opportunity for cheating when the savings from a cost-cutting measure multiplied across a number of floors - inflates into attractive profits.
The merchant builders of the postwar suburbs constructed neighborhoods in which the site was an assembly line that sequenced building tasks. The mass-produced suburb of Levittown was built
PAGE 50
FLOOR
I
1903 Floor creeps up the bed... a contiguous surface, piled with seamless white angora sheepskins: Adolf Loos's bedroom, Bosendorferstrabe 3, Vienna, designed for his 19-year-old wife, Una.
1961 "In the Milam beach house [in Jacksonville, Florida], essentially a series of platforms, the floor plan drops to form an extended conversation pit in the living area, rises to create a platform for dining, and four risers higher becomes an inglenook defined by a low parapet." —"Four Current Projects by Paul Rudolph," Architectural Record, March 1961, p. 140.
by pouring 17,000 slabs and then framing, siding and roofing 17,000 houses on top of those slabs.
In this kind of abstract formula, reducing the floor slab thickness from 30 centimeters to 15 centimeters would generate real profits if multiplied by 17,000. A compromised structure was invisible to consumers until it subsequently failed - as in the case of the postwar suburban homeowner who found morning glories growing between the floor slab and the baseboard of their home.
In The Crack in the Picture Window (1956), ]ohn Keats reported many similar conditions when investigating bottom-line chiseling during this period in the US home building industry.
In populations of stacked slabs - with their increased heights and potential for domino effects -the slightest bit of cheating can be catastrophic. The 2013 collapse of the Rana Plaza garment
FLOOR
PAGE 51
1875 The Floor Scrapers, Gustave Caillebotte. The Musee d'Orsay, which houses the painting today, calls The Floor Scrapers "one of the first representations of urban proletariat," subject matter considered so low, literally and figuratively, that it was rejected by the jury of the 1875 Salon.
Tactile Paving. In 1965, Japanese hotelier Seiichi Miyake develops the idea for braille tiling to assist the visually impaired in navigating spaces, with the first units installed in Japan in 1967 in his native Okoyama and then spreading throughout the world. A code beneath the feet not generally understood by the sighted: fields of dashes indicate "go" and suggest the direction of travel; fields of dots, "stop."
factory in Dhaka, Bangladesh was one of the deadliest structural failures in human history, leaving 1,127 people dead and approximately 2,500 people injured. Three floors had been illegally built on the top of a building that had probably been designed to carry minimal rather than maximal loads. This floor was not the political floor of turf wars that is a staple of epic history-telling. It was the registration of the final straw, a slowly unfolding form of violence that only captured historical attention when the scene resembled that of warfare. For all the extra layers and plenums in the most well^
appointed buildings around the world, at Rana Plaza, there was only an alarmingly thin floor -a good barometer of the undeclared, even hidden, but potentially violent political dispositions immanent in the global labor market.

PAGE 52
FLOOR
I
Mosque rugs in present-day Ephesus, Turkey. Islamic prayer rugs have existed since the birth of Islam in 632 AD. The primary purpose of the rugs is to ensure a clean surface on which to pray, though the Quran does not specifically require a rug.
Marcel Breuer's Seymour Krieger House (1958) under renovation, including renewal of original radiant slab heating, the lifeblood under the floor.
sound
"They set off, and immediately the cunningly sprung boards gave out penetrating squeaks and groans."24 The floor is a sonic environment. People do not ordinarily walk along the edge of rooms tapping on walls, but they are almost always making some percussive sound on the floor.
The choice of instrument/shoe is designed to have particular powers in specific spaces.
While the Japanese developed a special walk to avoid even the rustle of stocking feet on tatami, other cultures clatter over their floors in oblivion or even enhance the sounds of shoes. Heeled shoes offer not only height, but also intimidating sounds of political, sexual or military authority.
In tap and flamenco dance, the floor is made into a musical instrument. Wood floors with their
FLOOR
PAGE 53
i
Holy ground: Araunah's threshing floor on Mount Moriah, Israel - a finely manicured circle in which wheat is compacted by the weight of a woman on a sled dragged by oxen. In the Bible, the threshing floor is a site of various associations, from sex ("Do not rejoice, O Israel, with joy like other peoples, for you have played the harlot against your God. You have made love for hire on every threshing floor," Hosea 9:1) to judgment ("He will thoroughly clean out His threshing floor, and gather His wheat into the barn; but He will burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire," Matthew 3:11-12).
The Temple of Solomon, which scholars contend was the first to be built on the site of Jerusalem's Temple Mount, is supposedly built around the alter David constructed on the threshing floor he purchased from Araunah the Jebusite, on the order of God.
1949 Jackson Pollock painting with gravity on the floor of his Long Island studio, in the well-known photo for Life magazine by Martha Holmes, which establishes Pollock as a maverick, eschewing the easel. Life also brands him "Jack the Dripper, " begging the question that will torture Pollock more than anyone else: Can a painter who works on the floor be serious? (Though the inverse, painting on the ceiling, carries the indisputable aura of genius.) Pollock's stained studio floor is preserved as a site of pilgrimage.
own creaking sounds appear as a standard bit in comedy and horror movies. In 1960s film noir, the sound of footsteps on wet pavement enhanced the sharpness and glamour of the characters, and it was dubbed in and retained even if slightly out of sync and impossibly loud. In the post Shaft era, the theme music that accompanies cinematic walking drowns out these little clicks.
A great deal of effort is also made to construct floors that dampen noise. Floors provide plenty of quotidian inspirations for stories like Poe's "Tell-Tale Heart." In stacked floors, some of the sound that migrates between them is carried in the air, but most is the transferred through vibration. It is not enough to block or diffuse the waves with rigid or puffy materials - to insulate against sound as one might insulate against temperature. The floor must deliver separations between materials
PAGE 54
FLOOR
1684 Regal parquet: Hall of Mirrors, Palace of Versailles. Until the 17th century, wood flooring is a symbol of humble means; the wealthy choose stone or terracotta, or later marble. The use of intricate wood floors at Chateau de Fontainebleau in 1664 sparks a new style. By 1673 the change in style is complete, with the Parisian society magazine Mercure Galant explaining: "Important people have gotten rid of the rugs in their bedrooms since they do nothing but collect dust; they have replaced them with parquet, even using different colors of wood In the patterns." Versailles' parquet has a more practical Impetus as well: while marble floors required constant cleaning - the resulting moisture was rotting the underlying wood joists - parquet can withhold more dirt without looking ugly, (Joan Delean, The Age of Comfort: When Paris Discovered Casual - and the Modern Home Began, 2009)
"Floor swimming" (aka hallway swimming): school children propel themselves back and forth across highly polished corridors in schools throughout the US. As of April 2014, YouTube returns more than 36,000 results for "Hallway Swimming."
to stop the transfer. This long-standing technical problem continues to attract invention. According to Viollet-Le-Duc, sound-deadening techniques date back to medieval times. Reeds, twigs, mortar, cockle shells, felt, paper, kamptulicon (cork powder and rubber, first patented in 1843), "Dutch biscuits" made of mud, straw and clay and even a foot thick layer of broken crockery were among the materials stuffed into the structural section to silence the floor.25
The most remarkably noisy floor - the Nightingale floor - was a 17th century Japanese security device. Special metal fasteners for the floor boards, placed all along the length of each wooden beam, chirped under the slightest pressure. Not just the stray creak of an ordinary wood floor, this floor made the sound of a flock of birds. Built into the corridors of several temples and the Dijo Castle
FLOOR
PAGE 55
2013 On April 1st, Virgin airlines releases renderings of the world's first glass-bottomed airplane, an "experience that will enable ... passengers to appreciate the beauty of the British landscape."
2013 Email to the editors from Jeffrey Osterlund, NASA's Exploration Chief Engineer, on the definition of "floor" in space: "NASA does have an orientation that defines the 'floor' per se. Although without gravity, any surface within the habitable modules that comprise ISS where a human can feasibly 'walk' could be considered a floor by definition, NASA has designated the surface that is normal tangential to the Earth as the floor (i.e., closest surface facing the Earth). This defined orientation enables positions and therefore defines storage or equipment locations."
in Kyoto, they were designed to protect against spies, special agents or assassins called ninjas.
In You Only Live Twice, Ian Fleming sent Dames Bond over nightingale floors and through Japanese castles with hidden plenums and shafts. In one scene, while musing about the nightingale floor, Bond took one step too many on a very different trick surface. This corridor was like a seesaw in section, and once over the center fulcrum, Bond was plunged into a dungeon or oubliette -a forgotten place below the floor.26
PAGE 56
FLOOR

1950s Seki farmhouse, photographed by Yukio Futagawa. Sonkyo (squatting) is the correct posture for sitting on the earthen floor portion of a Japanese dwelling (lower third of image), while various forms of seiza (sitting straight, usually on one's heels) is appropriate for the raised platform floor (upper portion).
1929 "[l]f there is a building in which the horizontal slabs are absolute, it is Mies's Barcelona Pavilion ... the whole building is designed almost in two dimensions." (Reyner Banham, Theory and Design in the First Machine Age, 1960, p. 323.) Projecting into the exterior and connecting with nature through the reflecting pool, the floor of the Barcelona Pavilion represents the architectural face of Germany's postwar Republic: rational, tranquil, in harmony with its surroundings.
extreme
"That in the floor I lay, as I were deed."—Chaucer, Canterbury Tales.27
The floor is a site of the body in extremis. In tragic history plays and epics, at the point of climax, characters must keel over or fall over backwards onto the floor. Over and over in Homer's Odyssey, the "floors are running with blood." While kneeling and bowing are common liturgical postures, the fully prostrate body on the floor of a giant cathedral is a stirring, ultimate signal of submission or humility. To be "floored" is to be, either literally or figuratively, knocked senseless. In these cases, in literature, it is important not just to drop into a chair, but to really fall all the way down onto the floor. In Jane Austen's Pride and Prejudice, when Marianne hears the truth about
FLOOR
PAGE 57
Wickham, she falls to the floor. A tantrum is also ideally performed, kicking and screaming, on the floor. The floor holds the same entropic thrall over inanimate objects. Failed things, no longer able to resist gravity, lose their place and become detritus on the floor. Things strewn on the floor are signs of chaos. The Japanese custom of meticulously maintaining the floor or the Shaker custom of keeping things up off the floor attempts to deny this failure or loss of control.
Perhaps because things are not supposed to be on the floor, bodies on the floor are disquieting, sometimes shocking. The Japanese developed a genteel domestic existence in houses that revolve around the proper occupation of floor. Yet in most social situations, even in cultures that don't consider themselves to be highly ritualized or superstitious, it would be very disquieting if someone
1936-1939 Instructions hold that the floors of Fallingwater be buffed with "two coats of shellac and one of Johnson's Wax to gain the same color and texture of the bedrock of the stream." (Donald Hoffmann, Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater: The House and Its History, 1978, p. 59) One iconic Frank Lloyd Wright building of the 1930s is thus connected to another, the Johnson Wax Headquarters, by means of the floor...
2011 Rather than using the typical tape-on-parquet, ASB's GlassFloor (with anti-slip treatment) lights up different lines depending on the required sport.
1964 Member of the Royal Canadian Air Force honor guard faints during a visit by Queen Elizabeth II.
2012 The potential of trampoline-based conveyance tested with a 51-meter installation, called " Fast Track, " by Estonians Salto Architects, in the forest of Nikola-Lenivets, Russia.
lay down on the floor, especially when others are sitting in chairs. While leaning against a wall would be acceptable, the simple act of lying on the floor, with no special costume or declaration, might cause significant discomfort. Few things so simple have so much power.
Countless late 20th-century interiors were designed to liberate the body from convention by bringing it closer to the floor. The pillow on the floor or the shaggy carpet, with or without a reclining figure, was a well-worn trope signaling a future or a counter-culture designed to loosen up the 'squares' for another kind of encounter. Paul Rudolph's 1970s bachelor pads usually included 'conversation pits' -seating cut into the floor and often continuous with the carpet.
The one that Rudolph designed for Halston in Manhattan was covered in a menswear grey fabric
FLOOR
PAGE 59
1968 Weightless in space, the character Poole runs around the hamster wheel of the Discovery ship in 2001: A Space Odyssey thanks to its artificial gravity-creating centripetal motion, throwing him out towards space as it spins - while the floor holds him in. To simulate this synthetic gravity Stanley Kubrick commissions military engineers Vickers to build an actual centrifuge, taking six months and costing $300,000.
The resulting machine turns at a maximum speed of about five kilometers per hour, "not enough to parallel the force of gravity - the equipment inside the centrifuge has to be bolted to the floor - but it has enabled Kubrick to achieve some remarkable photographic effects"
(Jeremy Bernstein, Stanley Kubrick: Interviews, 2001, p. 41).
2010 Floor vs. ramp: SANAA'S Rolex Learning Center in Lausanne, built as a single massive chamber with an undulating floor. The uneven topography is an attempt to force "bumping into" between disciplines, and an effort to claim an inclined surface as equally liveable and usable as the floor.
and served as the primary staging area for cocaine-fueled parties of the Studio 54 era. Demonstrating again its power over bearing, the floor also draws the body into a libidinous force field. In film, the floor is the place for sex that cannot wait for a bed, and a bed on the floor can be a place for special desires - what Brando's character in Last Tango in Paris calls the "good ship lollypop." In the performance piece Seedbed (1972), Vito Acconci was concealed in an inclined floor and footsteps cued his solo sexual exertions. One of the most erotic floors in architecture culture appeared in the bedroom that Adolf Loos designed for Lina Loos, his 19-year-old wife. Architects often publish a 1903 photography of the room with little or celibate commentary. Draperies coat all the surfaces, and a thick fur - less like a carpet and more like a tall grass - covers the floor and creeps up the side of a low bed.
PAGE 60
FLOOR
2005 Killing floor: "The blood runs so thick, at times two inches ... that every now and again during the production the workers have to first sweep it away into the gutter that will take it to another part of the factory where it is processed into animal feed etc."—Juhan Kuus, photographer, describing Maitland abattoir in Cape Town.
1924 Spectators scrutinize catwalk models on the Allée des Acacias, Paris.
surface
Some of the earliest attempts at surface treatments of the floor were remarkably similar to contemporary techniques. Bathroom floors in ancient Sumer (approximately 2800-2200 BC) were made with baked brick that was coated with bituminous material and impregnated with pulverized limestone. Water drained toward channels surfaced with glazed tiles.28 The Yingzao Fashi established standards for tiles, with exacting recipes for composition and glazing as well as the technologies related to kiln drying that had been practiced for centuries before. The manual developed techniques for hardening and polishing the tiles by rubbing them with talc or soot, as well as techniques for painting and stamping patterns - although these were usually reserved for tombs or shrines.
FLOOR
PAGE 61
A man liberated from the floor, momentarily.
ca. 1536 Jacob Koebel, a German surveyor, illustrates the proper procedure for determining the "rood," a proto-measure of standardized length. (Plate from "Geometrei. Von künstlichem Feldmessen und absehen" by Charles H Judd, Educational Psychology, 1939, p. 275.)
The Yingzao Fashi also included a formula for glaze with metal oxide used during the Song Dynasty. Like the encaustic tile used in Europe during the 13th century, the tile was formed using different colors of clay so a pattern could be made without mosaic fields of inlay.29
Almost every material has been used as a flooring surface - stone, wood, rubber, steel, asphalt and carpet, but for a century, from the first patent in 1860 to the emergence of vinyl in the 1960s, the most widespread floor covering was Linoleum (linum-flax, oleum-oil). Since the 15th century, some version of floor clothes had been used, and they were protectively treated with such things as Arabian gum, white lead, tallow or wax. British manufacturer/inventor Frederick Walton's recipe for Linoleum used linseed oil that was hardened onto a cloth backing, and in the 19th century,
PAGE 62
FLOOR
2013 From an unfinished shell or a building with concrete slab floors, hundreds observe the collapse of similar floors at the Rana Plaza factory, opposite them, in Dhaka, Bangladesh.
industrialized manufacturing of the material produced it in sheets or rolls using heated pressing machines and block printing.30 Linoleum was advertised as a surface that could absorb the shock and sound of footsteps while being warmer than tile, skid resistant, waterproof, and easy to clean. There were even some claims that the floor acted as a germicide.
"linoleum is always warm as contrasted to the coldness of tile and marble... and unlike rubber tile, it does not 'draw' the feet or make them hot and feverish."31
Walton's patents expired in 1877, and the brand name Linoleum became the generic term for similar flooring that appeared before the Second World War. Products like Armstrong Cork Floor, Congoleum, Linoflor, and Del Ware had pattern names like Marbeline, Marbletone, Terano, Sealex Veltone
1914 Blank slate: Maison Dom-ino, Le Corbusier's framework of floor slabs balanced on relatively thin columns. The proposition allows for the universalization of the free plan, as Interior partitions float freely: "a typical housing unit was established, and it is repeated in the most varied combinations". (Le Corbusier, Precisions: on the Present State of Architecture and City Planning), 1930.
FLOOR
PAGE 63
1972 "Halfway across the empty gallery room, the floor ramps up to the far wall... Under the ramp, I'm lying down, I'm crawling under the floor on top of which visitors are walking, I hear their footsteps on top of me ... I'm building up sexual fantasies on their footsteps, I'm masturbating from morning to night (I depend on the visitors above me, my fantasies about them keep my activity going)." Vito Acconci on his nine-day performance, Seedbed, under the floor at Sonnabend Gallery, New York.
Raised up on miniature columns, the false floor generously provides an extraordinary volume of under-floor space for wires.
Marble, and Marbelle.32 These films, most less than half a centimeter thin, could surface over any kind of subfloor. Everything from churches to battleships was coated with it. Many things were dumped into the slurry - from asbestos to cork - providing an index of scientific developments or colonial empires. Machines were developed for creating inlays, pre-adhesive and pre-waxed floors. Homeowners could choose from artificial marble, wood, or parquet floors.
The 1912 Jahrbuch des Deutschen Werkbundes singled out Linoleum's imitation designs as an early subject in the debate about truth to materials.33
Perhaps considered to be the dirty or untamed element continuous with landscape, the floor has always been obsessively cleaned - even scrubbed, polished and made to gleam. In the
PAGE 64
FLOOR
1843 "I then took up three planks from the flooring of the chamber, and deposited all between the scantlings. I then replaced the boards so cleverly, so cunningly, that no human eye-not even his-could have detected any thing wrong." —Edgar Allen Poe, The Tell-Tale Heart (illustrated by Daniel Horowitz, 2012)
1521 Vaulted floor, illustrated by Cesare Cesariano, ready for the introduction of pipes.
17th century, wood floors were cleaned with sand, and rugs were beaten. As the floor became a materials test bed in the 20th century, each material was paired with a maintenance chemical. Maintenance devices and performance standards, often developed for the military or in response to litigation, have also set the specifications for what are called "contract" surfaces - surfaces tested for their durability or even for the risk of tripping or slipperiness that they pose.
After the Second World War, vinyl tiling and synthetic wall-to-wall carpet were broadly consumed along with other plastics, bringing with them new expectations of hygiene, new appliances like vacuum cleaners, and product names that sounded like scientific advancements.
Although plastics like polyvinyl chloride had been created in the 18th century, vinyl tiling was
FLOOR
PAGE 65
Types of bowing within the Eastern Orthodox Church (right to left):
1) head-only bow, 2) Belt-low bow (noncHoii noicnoH) or ordinary bow, 3) Belt-low bow touching earth with hand 4) metanie (MeTaHMe,), a less severe version of an earth-low bow 5) Zemnoy poklon (3eMHoh noKnoH), earth-low bow, and 6) Full prostration, used only during the service of imposition of holy orders.
1964 In Cedric Price's Inflafloor system-in which the entire floor surface becomes like a bouncy castle-potentially any area of the floor can be further inflated to pop up and become furniture. The English architect's fascination with air-based architecture leads him to co-found the Lightweight Enclosures Unit (LEU) to explore the potentials of air-based architecture, in 1969.
finally favored for being cheap and inert in the presence of cleaners or other chemicals. Photographically printed to mimic other materials, these floors provide affordable pictures of an unaffordable material. Yet while they are indestructible polymers, they are designed to quickly go out of style. Since they are glued down with nearly permanent adhesives, they often encourage continual resurfacing with more and more thin layers of material in cycles of instant fulfillment and perennial disappointment.
PAGE 66
FLOOR
Continuous floor, in section, composed of any possible variation of materials, layers, structures
statics
The structural calculations used to design the load-carrying capacity of floors are part of a branch of mathematics called "statics." These calculations quantify the counterbalancing forces necessary to stabilize the floor when loaded. Most of the world's floors - for theaters, retail, hospitals, and office space - are designed for loads of approximately seven bar. Only residential construction, requires half that capacity and only industrial buildings, warehouses and a few other uses require more psi. Consequently many uses can migrate between building types and many buildings can be reused or reprogrammed. Yet now the most sophisticated structural engineering does not design entire floor plates for a single general loading. Computers allow the structural engineer to
FLOOR
PAGE 67
modulate forces all along the surface so that different sizes of steel are used in different areas, engineering a floor with variable strength. This highly sophisticated tailoring of structure saves money on steel but may also render buildings unfit for some types of reuse.
While designed with "statics" calculations, floors are usually always moving, if only slightly, as they accommodate both the weight and the movements that impact them - both the dead load and the live load. Any ordinary floor must be responsive to the vibrations of moving people, and failure often results when these movements synchronize. On the Millennium Bridge in London - the site of a structural failure shortly after it opened - people sympathetically and unconsciously walked in lockstep causing a structural "excitation." Floors collapse at weddings and nightclubs not only because
- Reinforcing bars; both ways
- #4 reinforcing bars; spaced evenly around \ perimeter
Isolation joint at highest elevation
Apron
Slope down
10
3’ - 0"
3' - 0"
lOt
———————
PAGE 68
FLOOR
they are overloaded but also because of the rhythmic movement they inspire. In seismic structures, the entire building must respond to trembling and shaking. The highest swaying floors of the tallest skyscrapers, or the rocking floors of trains and planes are fully or partially airborne, and so must be able to right themselves in response to wind or other forces. They must move to be stable.
In the film 2001: A Space Odyssey, the "centrifuge" of the US spacecraft Discovery One is shaped like a wheel or torus, and by spinning in outer space, its centrifugal force simulates gravity. Astronauts work or sleep in pods inside the torus shape. In one shot, Dr. Frank Poole is even able to run inside
FLOOR
PAGE 69
the wheel at the same speed that the wheel is turning so that the floor is always beneath him. Since the surface that is the floor is always changing, the film also plays with positioning the camera at the center of the axis rather than from the point of view of the character. In one scene, after picking up a tray of food, a stewardess appears to be walking on the ceiling in order to access other parts of the station. Wearing a costume designed by Hardy Amies, she walks with the aid of white Pan Am-branded "grip shoes," to negotiate moments of zero gravity. Her deliberate gait is, in some ways, only a heightened version of the oscillating, sometimes halting, gait that humans use to march around on earth.34
PAGE 70
FLOOR
As a standard operating procedure, The International Space Station is always positioned the same way relative to the surface of the earth's gravitational field, so in some ways, unlike the sci-fi Discovery One, it always has a datum that is regarded as the floor. Still, the station interior is a weightless world where anything can be a floor, and simple directional orientation is a matter of ad hoc agreement. Things are easily misplaced because one cannot assume that they will eventually land on the earth's familiar surface for finding lost or unwanted things. Anything that would have settled in gravity is airborne or drifting near any surface, and vacuuming ducts draw away debris. Astronauts report that, "Every surface is essentially a floor, gathering dirt, flakes of skin, stray drops of sweat and bits of food."35
FLOOR
PAGE 71
Not surprisingly, weightlessness in a tiny space makes perceptions of volume prominent. When the floor is no longer a dominant datum, and floating or flying is the norm, astronauts describe a "3D way of life."36 NASA, when asked to quantify the cost of the space station per square meter even replied that the two dimensional measure was relatively meaningless and instead provided a cost per cubic meter ($144 million per cubic meter).37 Still weightlessness only remystifies gravity, and the wobbling upright bodies glued to the floor on earth have perhaps even more need for volumetric pleasures.
PAGE 72
FLOOR

"Old method" of soundproofing, according to soundproofing.org: featuring just two layers above the floor structure and no insulation
between metal channels and gypsum ceiling board.
technology
The floor has also recently become the reservoir of technologies that potentially make it among the most information rich of all the architectural elements. The computer has escaped the box, and its sensors, processors and circuits are embedded in everything from buildings to handsets.
As floors absorb digital media they too become part of this "internet of things."
While vertical surfaces are naturally transformed into media screens, there are also "digital carpets" -projections from the ceiling that make the floor into a very large computer screen in which the body is something like a cursor. Some of the initial demos feature the tedious defaults of interactivity (parting fields of flowers or flowing patterns triggered by interrupting an infrared light). Yet when

FLOOR
PAGE 73
Increasing fastidiousness: the "New method," again according to soundproofing.org, featuring four (4) layers above the floor structure, padding tape beneath metal channels, and foam beneath wool fibre.
the carpet can be used to kick a ball or play a giant piano, it allows the body to move within a world previously confined to keyboards and screens. Like a dance floor, the floor as computer screen can educate both the mind's body and body's mind.38
Alternatively, the floor itself can be an electronic device. An interactive gym floor, made of layers of coated glass and LEDs, can change its markings to create a court for tennis, handball, volleyball, basketball and badminton. EL Sajjadah is one brand name for an electronic neoprene prayer rug with patterns that illuminate when facing Mecca (El for electro-luminescent and Sajjadah prayer rug). Another electronic prayer carpet is equipped with chips that remind the worshipper of all the sequenced motions (Sajda) and other requirements (Raka') of the prayer rituals.39 With a technology
PAGE 74
FLOOR
2012 Underside of the floor above: 'Holedeck' waffle-slab construction by Spanish architects Alarcon+Asoclados.
similar to that of touch screens some floors also generate energy from footsteps. The turnstiles in the Tokyo Subway, a sidewalk in Toulouse, paving at the 2012 London Olympics, the checkout lines at Sainsbury's supermarket and Watt, a former Rotterdam dance club, all store and harvest electrical power. Floors are also capable of learning about and reacting to people who are walking on them. Scientists at the University of Manchester are working on carpets that measure the gait and temperature of an inhabitant. In the case of the elderly, they can not only detect illness, but also learn habits and anticipate or react to a fall.40 New experiments with floor technologies even propose floors that 'clean' users as they walk on them. The floors are colonized with selected bacteria that will detect toxins or pathogens, swarm around them and destroy them.41
FLOOR
PAGE 75
software
Relying not only on embedded technologies for their intelligence, floors are software as well as hardware. As a primary surface for scripting routines and sequences between objects, they are a motherboard - or better, an operating system - in the internet of things.
In the logistics landscapes of container ports and warehouses, the floor has been exercising some of these powers as the brains of an intelligent navigation system. Automated guided vehicles (AGVs) and automated stacking cranes (ASCs) glide along at 18 kilometers per hour in a driverless ballet, receiving containers from ships and then stacking them into automated fields. The movement of containers is just the first stage in a choreography of storage and retrieval that
The 'Dutch Biscuit' (name possibly apocryphal): insulation, soundproofing, and fire barrier all in one, lengths of wood wrapped with straw and mud into small packets, then stuffed into the grooves between the rafters
PAGE 76
FLOOR
2008 "If 2,000 people come to Club Watt and they experience sustainability and say, hey man, this for me was a new way to look at a sustainable lifestyle, this for me is the ideal night," says Michel Smit of Sustainable Dance Club (now Energy Floors), which manufactured the world's first energy-producing dance floor, harnessing the movement of Rotterdam's revellers. It boasts a maximum output of 20 watts per dancer-enough to generate flashing lights, though not enough yet
to power the club itself.
extends to warehouses and fulfillment centers. Intricate networks of belt and skate-wheel conveyors together with horizontal and vertical carousels work with robotic gantries and AGVs of all kinds to constantly redistribute the contents of the container and deliver the individual units for sale. These devices respond to GPS or other airborne signals as well as magnetic transponders in the pavement. Potentially sponsoring another chapter of exuberant graphic display, some even read lines and patterns painted on slick, clean, engineered floors. These technologies are now transferring to passenger travel and buildings, and the floor will likely direct their new repertoires. New cars like the one used in Masdar City (FROG/2getthere) or personal rapid transit like the ULTra system at London's Heathrow Airport (ULTra Global PRT) now join the Google car as prominent examples of automated
FLOOR
PAGE 77
1626 Ninja-proofing: should any assassin attempt to pass unnoticed into the shogun's quarters at Kyoto's Ninomaru Palace, the "Nightingale floor" (uguisu bari), squeaks to alert inhabitants to danger through a system of metal clamps rubbing against nails beneath the floorboards.
transport. These cars - with no driver, no running engines or exhaust, and no front and back - can congregate in tight packs anywhere in a building, organized by floors that make no distinction between inside and outside. Automated vehicles are also merging with elevators to perform a hybrid repertoire of both horizontal and vertical movement in buildings. Vertical and horizontal shafts potentially replace the columns and slabs of the Maison Dom-lno to model a new paradigm. A vehicle might shuttle passengers horizontally in a parking lot, and then scale a vertical shaft like an elevator.42 Or the floor itself becomes something like a horizontal elevator shaft - a passage through which automated vehicles wait and store materials until summoned to take vertical conveyance.
A number of vehicles are designed to navigate these logistical spaces in hospitals, universities,
PAGE 78
FLOOR
Restoration of Çatal Hüyük, Turkey, one of the world's first cities, dating from ca. 6,500-5,000 BC. The floor is clad with woven grass matting, with communal space broken into platforms for sleeping and other uses. Many houses contain graves under the floors of the living areas.
and mail centers. Reibi, an automated Japanese vacuum cleaner or an industrial sized Roomba, moves through skyscraper floors and elevators after working hours, both reading and cleaning
the floor.
All these new devices are powerful germs of building morphology and urbanism. Like the contagious elevators that altered urban morphology, as new AGV systems are adopted, they may gradually cancel the conventional logics of floor - rewriting relationships between core and skin, generating continuities between inside and outside, or collapsing the distinction between elevator, parking lot, and road. In addition to stacking vertically, buildings may unspool horizontally, taking the form of both tower and landscape.
FLOOR
PAGE 79
1997 See-through glass floor of the Educatorium, a student center at the University of Utrecht by OMA. Soon after completion, the glass is frosted, to obscure the views of spectating students underneath and to allay vertigo for people stepping onto it.
base
With or without their technological enhancements, the floor as a medium of activity has always been a software - a spatial software for both technologies and bodies. Architecture's vertical surfaces may often serve as the readable registration of formal silhouettes and signs. But more than mental abstractions or signifying stories and texts, the floor communicates information about relationships and activities - not only "knowing that" but also "knowing how." It is the medium of another intelligence - a rich field of information that is not declared but rather enacted.
Since the floor does not manifest as an object form to be admired for shape, outline or profile,often the most sophisticated thing about it is that it can be flat. While architects are well-versed
PAGE 80
FLOOR
2013 Floor's-eye view: an apartment seen from the bottom-up in Michael H. Rohde's einblick mit absicht.
in making object form, the floor is a medium of active forms that organize interplay and interdependence with spatial consequence. The design of active forms, like the scripting of bits of code in a software, opens onto an expanded field of endeavor - perhaps twice as large as the one the discipline currently inhabits and one for which the floor offers a simple rehearsal. Presumed to be in place as a rationally engineered silent player that never fails, the floor often communicates some of the most banal modern logics. Still, as a place to which the base, corporeal or non-modern is often banished, it also bypasses the modern, leading away to forgotten histones and neglected opportunities. An elemental contemplation of the floor even offers to cultural and disciplinary habits some breathtaking trap doors.
FLOOR
PAGE 81

1961 Figure from The Forces Applied to the Floor by the Foot in Walking. Pt. 1: Walking on a Level Surface, published by Her Majesty's Stationery Office, London.
Research for this essay was supported by Elise Jaffe + Jeffrey Brown. Students who assisted with research include:
A.J. Artemel, Swarnabh Ghosh, Amy Mielke, Jack Morley, Henry Ng and Craig Rosman.
(b) View, via mirror, of sole off foot
PAGE 82	FLOOR
notes
1	Bruno Latour, We Have Never Been Modem (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1993).
2	Geoffrey Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales,
The Knightes Tale, 2205-06, from Rev. Walter W. Skeat, M. A., editor, The Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer (Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1900), www.gutenberg.org/files/22120/22120-h/22120-h.htm
3	Oxford English Dictionary
4	Genesis 50:10
5	1 Chronicles 21
6	www.sacred-texts.com/hin/m02/m02003.htm
7	Homer, llliad 4 1 ff: "Now the gods at the side of Zeus were sitting in council over the golden floor, and among them the goddess Hebe poured them nectar as wine, while they in the golden drinking-cups drank to each other, gazing down on the city of the Trojans."
8	Exodus 24:10, KJV: "And they saw the God of Israel: and there was under his feet as it were a paved work of a sapphire stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness."
9	Fabio Barry, "Walking on Water: Cosmic Floors in Antiquity and the Middle Ages," The Art Bulletin, Vol. 89, No. 4 (Dec., 2007), 635-36.
20	www.nytimes.com/2009/07/07/ science/07glass.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0; www.cntower.ca/en-ca/plan-your-visit/ attractions/glass-floor.html. A number of glass floor demonstrations appear at the top of tall buildings, like the Sears Tower in Chicago, the CN Building in Toronto or the CCTV headquarters in Beijing.
21	Eric Mumford, The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928-1960 (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002), 41-42.
22	Peter Lang, William Menking, Superstudio: Life Without Objects (Milan: Skira, 2003).
23	Ibid., 43-45.
24	Ian Fleming, You Only Live Twice (Fine Communications, 1995), 62.
25	Theodore H. M. Prudon, "Deafening: An Early Form of Sound Insulation," Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology, Vol. 7, No. 4(1975), 5-13.
26	www.zen-garden.org/html/page_ nightingalefloor.htm; Lian Hearn, Across the Nightingale Floor (Riverhead Trade, 2003).
27	Chaucer, The Canterbury Tales, The Wife of Bath's Prologue, 796.,www.gutenberg.org/ f iles/22120/22120-h/22120-h .htm
28	www.ancientworlds.net/aw/Article/340475
10	Barry, 635-36. Until the 17th century, crystal was believed to be "a form of ice...frozen by primordial cold."
29	Qinghua Guo, "Tile and Brick Making in China: a Study of the Yingzao Fashi," Construction History, Vol. 16. 2000.
11	S. Jan Abas, Islamic Geometrical Patterns For The Teaching of Mathematics of Symmetry, 62-3.
12	16th century German treatise on surveying, reproduced in Compton's Pictured Encyclopedia, 1929 edition. Chicago: F. E. Compton & Company.
13	1 Kings, 6.
14	Arata Isozaki, "Floors and Internal Spaces in Japanese Vernacular Architecture: Phenomenology of Floors," Anthropology and Aesthetics, No. 11 (Spring, 1986), 66.
15	Ken Takashi Oshima, "Postulating the Potential of Prefab: The Case of Japan," in Barry Bergdoll and Peter Christensen, eds., Home Delivery: Fabricating the Modem Dwelling (New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2008), 33.
16	Isozaki, 73.
17	Arakawa and Madeline Gins, Reversible______
Destiny - Arakawa/Gins (We Have Decided Not To Die), exhibition catalogue (Guggenheim Museum, 1997); and interview with Jgnna Sutela and Joke Post, 2014. The Bioscleave house was designed in the late 1990s and completed in 2007. Arakawa died in 2010, and Madeline Gins died
in January of 2014. Fred Bernstein, "A blouse Not for Mere Mortals," New York Times, April 3, 2008.
18	Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (Chicago: University of ChicagoJ’ress, 1949), 27-32.
19	www.cca.qc.ca/en/collection/907-cedric-price-designs-for-inflatable-architecture-and-air
30	Bonnie Wehle Parks, "The Flistory and Technology of Floorcloths/'iAPT^p/(efjn, Vol. 21J No. 3/4 (1989), 44-54.
31	Pamela FI. Simpson, "Linoleum and Lincrusta: The Democratic Coverings for Floors and Walls," Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, Vol. 7, Exploring Everyday Landscapes (1997), 286; Pamela FI. Simpson, "Durable, and Decorative: Linoleum's Rise and Fall from Grace," APT Bulletin, Vol. 30, No. 2/3(1999), 21,
32	Cornelia Dyer Plaister, Floors and Floor Coverings (Chicago: American Library Association,
1939), 41.
Pamela FI. Simpson, "Comfortable, Durable, and Decorative: Linoleum's Rise and Fall from Grace," APT Bulletin, Vol. 30, No. 2/3 (1999), 17-24.
34	2001 and Hardy Amies: When Fashion and Film Collide; www.hardyamies.com/videos/ stanley-kubrick-hardy-amies/
35	www.washingtonpost.com/sf/ national/2013/09/14/the-skies-the-limits/
36	www.dwell.com/interviews/article/life-space-email-iss
37	www.bdonline.co.uk/international-space-station/5000525.article
38	www.flixxy.com/digital-carpet.htm; www. techeblog.com/index.php/tech-gadget/futuristic-digital-rug-changes-as-you-walk-across-it
39	London-based Soner Ozenc designed the mat, and MoMA acquired one of the first prototypes. www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/12/new-muslim-prayer-mat-sheds-light-when-facing-mecca_n_1668696.html; muslimgamer.com/ electronic-sajjada-el-sajjadah-electronic-light-up-prayer-rug/; www.youtube.com/ watch?v=jDa035GyYtQ
40	www.manchester.ac.uk/aboutus/news/ display/?id=8648
41	www.architizer.com/en_us/blog/dyn/94597/ futuristic-product-design-drexel/; www.dezeen. com/2013/11 /13/bio-surfaces-containing-hacked-bacteria-tashia-tucker/
42	Miriam Lacob, "Elevators on the Move," Scientific American (October 1997). Otis marketed the Odyssey system to skyscrapers planned in China, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Korea, and Singapore but has since discontinued the project.
FLOOR
PAGE 83
biliography
Banham, Reyner. Theory And Design in the First Machine Age. 2d ed. New York: Praeger, 1960.
Barringer, Dudith M., Jeffrey M. Hurwit, and ] ]. Pollitt. Periklean Athens and Its Legacy: Problems and Perspectives. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2005.
Buitenen, 1 A. B. van. The Mahabharata. University of Chicago Press, 1973.
Carhart, E.R. "The New York Produce Exchange," Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences 38:2, 1911.
Clark, Gordon, and Gloria Moure. Gordon Matta-Clark: Works And Collected Writings. Barcelona: Poligrafa, 2006.
Conlin, Joseph Robert. The American Past: a Survey of American History. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1984.
DeJean , Joan. The Age of Comfort: When Paris Discovered Casual - and the Modern Home Began. Bloomsbury, 2010.
Engel, Heino. Measure and Construction of the Japanese House. Rutland, Vt: C.E. Tuttle Co., 1985.
Hour Current Projects by Paul Rudolph," Architectural Record 129, March 1961.
Harper, F. C., and B. L. Clarke. The Forces Applied To The Floor By The Foot In Walking. London: H.M.S.O., 1961.
Hoffmann, Donald. Frank Lloyd Wright's Fallingwater: The House And Its History. New York: Dover Publications, 1978.
Horowitz, Daniel. "The Tell-Tale Heart' in Pictures." The Paris Review - Writers, Quotes, Biography, Interviews, Artists, www.theparisreview.org (accessed May 2, 2014).
Jackson, Bruce, and Diane Christian.
In This Timeless Time: Living And Dying On Death Row In America. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012.
Jeffrey Osterlund, Exploration Chief Engineer, NASA, email to editors, September 2013.
Judd, Charles Hubbard. Educational Psychology. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1939.
Kubrick, Stanley, and Gene D. Phillips. Stanley Kubrick: Interviews. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2001.
Le Corbusier. Precisions: On the Present State of Architecture and City Planning. Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1991.
Ruggles, C. L. N. Ancient Astronomy:
An Encyclopaedia Of Cosmologies And Myth. Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO, 2005.
The Catholic Encyclopedia And Its Makers. New York: The Encyclopedia Press, 1917.
floor, keller easterling
Achenbach, Joel. "The Skies. The Limits." The Washington Post, September 14, 2013. www.washingtonpost.com/sf/ national/2013/09/14/the-skies-the-limits/ (accessed November 25, 2013).
Chaucer, Geoffrey, and Walter W. Skeat. "The Wife of Bath's Prologue."
In The Canterbury Tales. Oxford:
The Clarendon Press, 1900. 164.
Abas, S.J. "Islamic Geometrical Patterns for the Teaching of Mathematics of Symmetry." Symmetry Ethnomathematic 12, no. Symmetry in Ethnomathematics, 2001. 65.
Chaucer, Geoffrey, and Thomas R. Lounsbury. "The Canterbury Tales." In The Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1900. 2205-06.
Compton's Pictured Encyclopedia and Fact-Index. 1968 ed. Chicago: F.E.
Compton Co., 1968.
"Digital Carpet' Reacts To Walkers." Flixxy.com. www.flixxy.com (accessed October 2, 2013).
Enkidu, Leah . "Sumerian Houses." AncientWorlds. www.ancientworlds.net/ aw/Article/340475 (accessed May 2, 2014).
Fleming, Ian. You Only Live Twice. New York: New American Library, 1964.
Fountain, Henry . "As Unbreakable as... Glass?" The New York Times, July 6, 2009. www.nytimes.com/2009/07/07/ science/07glass.html?pagewanted=all&_ r=1 & (accessed July 6, 2009).
"Futuristic Digital Rug Changes as You Walk Across It." Techeblog Posts, www.techeblog.com (accessed October 2, 2013).
Guo, Qinghua. "Tile and Brick Making in China: A Study of the Yingzao Fashi," Construction History, Vol. 16. 2000.
Arakawa, Shusaku, Madeline Gins, and Michael Govan. Reversible Destiny: Arakawa/Gins. New York: Guggenheim Museum Publications, 1997.
"An Electronic Sajjada? "The El Sajjadah Prayer Rug!." Muslim Gaming Community @The Muslim Gamer, muslimgamer.com (accessed May 2, 2013).
Barry, Fabio. "Walking on Water: Cosmic Floors in Antiquity and the Middle Ages," The Art Bulletin, Vol. 89, No. 4. 2007.
Bernstein, Fred A. "A House Not for Mere Mortals." The New York Times, April 3, 2008. www.nytimes.com/2008/04/03/ garden/03destiny.html?pagewanted=all&_ r=0 (accessed August 8, 2013).
"Cedric Price: Designs for Inflatable Architecture and Air Structures."
Canadian Centre for Architecture (CCA) I An International Research Centre And Museum Devoted To Architecture, www. cca.qc.ca (accessed May 2, 2014.)
Henessey, Rachel. "This Floor Can Detect Bacteria, And Other Product Prototypes Fit For A Sci-Fi Film." Architizer. http:// architizer.com/ (accessed November 2, 2013).
Isozaki, Arata . "Floors and Internal Spaces in Japanese Vernacular Architecture: Phenomenology of Floors." Anthropology and Aesthetics, Spring 1986.
St
Lacob, Miriam. "Elevators on the Move." Scientific American, October 16, 1997.
Lang, Peter, and William Menking. Superstudio: Life Without Objects.
Milano (Italy): Skira, 2003. 43-45.
Latour, Bruno. We Have Never Been Modern. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993.
"'Magic Carpet' Could Help Prevent Falls." The University of Manchester, News. www. manchester.ac.uk (accessed May 2, 2013).
PAGE 84	FLOOR
Markoe, Lauren. "New Muslim Prayer Mat Sheds Light When Facing Mecca."
The Huffington Post, December 7, 2012. www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/07/12/ new-muslim-prayer-mat-sheds-light-when-facing-mecca_n_J 668696.html (accessed August 2, 2013).
Mugan, Chris. "Stanley Kubrick & Hardy Amies: 2001: A Space Odyssey, When Fashion and the Future Collide." Hardy Amies, http://hardyamies.com/heritage/ heritage-the-film/ (accessed May 2, 2014).
Mumford, Eric Paul. The CIAM Discourse on Urbanism, 1928-1960. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
"Nightingale floor, Uguisubari (III)"
The Tsubo-en Zen Garden. A free online guidebook, a living-guide, on how to make a Dapanese garden., www. zen-garden.org (accessed May 2, 2014).
Nixon, David. "International Space Station." Building Design, www.bdonline. co.uk/ (accessed May 2, 2014).
Ohtake, Miyoko. "Life in Space:
Email from the ISS." Dwell. www.dwell.com (accessed May 2, 2014).
Oshima, Ken Takashi. "Postulating the Potential of Prefab: The Case of Dapan." In Home Delivery: Fabricating the Modern Dwelling, edited by Barry Bergdoll, Peter Christensen and Ron Broadhurst, 33. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 2008.
Plaister, Cornelia Dyer. Floors and Floor Coverings. Chicago: American Library Association, 1939.
Prudon, Theodore H. M. "Deafening:
An Early Form of Sound Insulation."
Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology 7,1957. 5-13.
Ryle, Gilbert. The Concept of Mind. , ;| London: Hutchinson's University Library,, . 1949.	A .
Simpson, 1 A., and E. S. C. Weiner.
The Oxford English Dictionary. 2nd ed. Larendon Press, 1989.
Simpson, Pamela H. "Comfortable, Durable, and Decorative: Linoleum's Rise and Fall from Grace." APT Bulletin 30,
1999. 21.
Simpson, Pamela H. "Linoleum and Lincrusta: The Democratic Coverings for Floors and Walls." Buildings & Landscapes: Journal of the Vernacular Architecture Forum 7,1997. 286.
"The Memory Prayer Mat." YouTube, www.youtube.com (accessed April 30, 2013).
Wehle Parks, Bonnie. "The History and Technology of Floorcloths." APT Bulletin 21, 1989. 44-54.
FLOOR
PAGE 85
PAGE 86
FLOOR
FLOOR
PAGE 87
image sources and courtesy
P4 Viigar Dada§ov, © Azerbaijan Rugs, www.azerbaijanrugs.com.
P5 The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts.
P6 Antonio Visentini / Procurator^ di San Marco.
P7 Jäger, Joachim. Neue Nationalgalerie Berlin: Mies van der Rohe. Ostfildern, Germany: Hatje Cantz, 2011.
P10 Barb Dickie - Flickr username barbdpics.
P11 The MeMO project Utrecht University. P13 NASA.
Pt4 Parking Lot Markings Overlap Basketball Courts © Alex S. MacLean.
P15 Ochoresotto.
P16 Ryan Carlson / tradingpithistory.com. P17 Robert D. MacDougall.
P18 Congoleum Corporation.
P19 Ronen Zvulun / Reuters.
P21 Sian Frances.
P23 Communist Party of Vietnam Online Newspaper.
P24 Bruce Jackson / University of North Carolina Press.
P25 Jassy-50 / www.flickr.com/photos/ jassy-50/12467328323.
P26 American Philosophical Society.
P27 J. H. Benton / Patent US2867301.
P28 Kingspan Access Floors.
P29 Carpets for Buildings /
Photo: Kees Bennema.
P30 ©TimKellerArts.com.
P31 Gordon Matta-Clark / © Neue Galerie am Landesmuseum Joanneum.
P 32 Kiva Systems.
P33 Andreas Ruby.
P34 The Warburg Institute.
P35 Superstudio.
P36 image by energy-floors.com.
P37 Gretchen / http://desertsurvivor. blogspot.nl/2011/12/natural-history-museum-of-utah.html.
P38 Rick Flynn / Eric Stoltz.
P39 Time & Life Pictures / Getty Images / Photo: Tony Linck.
P40 Fischer, Franz, Margot Voelter, and Philipp Eggers. Der neuzeitliche Polsterer und Dekorateur. Stuttgart: Conradin-Verl., 1952.
P41 SensFloor®.
P42 John Lindsay / Associated Press.
P43 Smithsonian Institution Online Collection.
P44 Double Portion Inheritance / doubleportioninheritance.com.
P45 Soner Ozenc Product Design Studio.
P46 Chris Bartle.
P47 Marius Gravot / Harper's Bazaar February 1938.
P48 Genji Monogatari Emaki / New York Public Library / Spencer Collection;
Sarah J. Hahn Resource Center.
P49 Zaha Hadid Architects; Video by
P50 Tournikiotis, Panayotis. Adolf Loos. San Francisco: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996.; Architectural Record /
The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
P51 Miki Yoshihito.
P52 J. A. Belcher; Photo courtesy of Foley Mechanical, Inc. Lorton, VA.
P53 Balage Balogh / Archaeology Illustrated; Martha Holmes—Time & Life Pictures/Getty Images.
P 54 Devin Hayes; Chateau de Versaille / www.panoramio.com/photo/59704116.
P55 Richard Branson blog / Virgin Atlantic; NASA.
P56 Hannah Degotardi; Yukio Futagawa / Ada Edita Global Architecture.
P57 Lind, Carla. The Wright style.
New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.;
ASB Systembau Horst Babinsky GmbH / www.asbglassfloor.com.
P58 Salto architects / photo: Karli Luik;
© Bettmann/CORBIS.
P59 2001: a space odyssey directed by Stanley Kubrick / Warner Bros Pictures; Pedro Kok.
P60 Bettmann / Corbis / AP Images;
Juhan Kuus.
P62 Le Fondation Cobusier; Stringer Bangladesh.
P63 Photo: Ealan Wingate / SEEDBED by Vito Acconci / Sonnabend Gallery,
New York; "Beneath-the-raised-floor-Oa.jpg" by Adamantios is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
P64 Daniel Horowitz; Harvard Art Museums.
P65 Arseni / Wlkimedia Commons /
Public Domain; Cedric Price / Canadian Center for Architecture.
P72 Super Soundproofing Co.; acousticalsurfaces.com.
P74 Holedeck.
P75 Vince Michael.
P76 Energy Floors.
P77 http://e4510nin.exblog.jp/page/4/
By "syouki-sisa".
P78 "Catal Huyiik Restoration B'' by Stipich Bela licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
P79 Balkow, Dieter. Glass construction manual. Basel: Birkhauser, 1999.
P80 Michael H. Rohde.
P81 Harper, F. C., W. J. Harlow, and
B.	L. Clarke. The Forces Applied to the Floor by the Foot in Walking. I.
Walking on a Level Surface. London:
H.M. Stationery Office, 1967.
P86 Collage by Annie Wang.
WALL

In 1961, the DDR decided to encircle West Berlin with a wall -a huge effort: to complete the enclosure, the wall needed to be at least 500km long... The first 'version' of the wall was a line
of soldiers, meticulously positioned on the line of the border. Even this fragile human wall was enough to separate 'the' East from 'the' West.
WALL
PAGE 1
...some walls are essential: they provide structure... others are less substantial: they divide space... the former is seemingly as stable as the human need for shelter; the latter as changeable as our forms of interaction... architecture oscillates between openness and the cellular: huts with no internal walls give way, over millennia, to subdivided plans, with the partition the agent of cell division... inheritance chains, new standards of modesty, increasingly complex hierarchies and bureaucracies, and eventually individualism demand ever-more walls around evermore types of cells... in modernity, the cycle repeats, and the demand for openness, sharing, flexibility and flow re-emerges, amounting to a declaration of war on the wall...
wall
2001 As thin as possible: fantasy of the two-dimensional wall, sketched in 3D by SANAA for the Kunstlinie Almere, Netherlands.
PAGE 3
WALL
The meaning of the wall is just as diverse as the uses of vertical surface can be, but there are at least two essential functions: providing structure and dividing space. The two can be separated, and thus the category of 'wall' divides into two: the bearing wall, separating roof from ground; and the partition wall, organizing movement within the resulting container. The former, it would seem, is as stable as the human need for shelter; the latter as changeable as our forms of sociability.
If we follow Gottfried Semper's hypothesis, which type of wall came first is somewhat counterintuitive. Semper declared the archetype of the wall as the hanging fabric of the tent or temporary pavilion. The solid walls - of mud, stone, wood, brick - that came to supplement these temporary barriers arrived only later, Semper argued, to make permanent the achievement of the temporary wall, which was to define community via a symbolic membrane. The social and symbolic is seen as primary, suggesting a wall that is as dynamic as the humans that it is meant to contain. The key place given to decoration in Islamic architecture, where it suggests an infinitely expansive pattern that both defines the structure and exceeds it, may suggest something like this sensibility, while the shoji of the Japanese interior epitomize the dynamic function of the wall-as-partitions. But in Europe the pressures of warfare and growing wealth enshrine monumentality and permanence as the wall's defining traits.
Seen in time-lapse, the history of the world's architectural plans would be the history of changing forms of civilization, as new segmentation of space is demanded by new forms of society. The single-room house or collective hall, with occupants huddled in common space (probably around a central fireplace), gives way to ever more complex configurations of boxes within boxes. Increasing standards of modesty and individualism demand new walls around new bedrooms; new family norms even divide off the nursery. At the same time, more egalitarian sensibilities, as well as the scarcity of space in growing cities, press back, breaking down walls: while the parlor emerges in Victorian society as a new formal space for entertaining, by the 1920s, it is absorbed into the less formal, multi-use living room, a mutation of the Victorian "stairhall."
"All that is solid melts into air," Marx and Engels wrote in 1848, observing the mutations brought on by capitalism.
Almost 70 years later, Franz Kafka writes in "The Great Wall of China": "Human nature, essentially changeable, as unstable as the dust, can endure no restraint; if it binds itself it soon begins to tear madly at its bonds, until it rends everything asunder, the wall, the bonds, and its very self." Kafka's parable about the Great Wall looked back to the most spectacular effort of a fantasized 'Oriental despotism' to suggest an allegory for the anxieties of the modernizing present, with its inscrutable forces reordering space and time. In Kafka's time, the solid architectural wall was melting away under the pressure of modern bureaucracy, which required mutliple walls, whose flimsiness and complexity was just as dubious as the solid walls of old-fashioned despotism.
But even an absence of walls can be an operation of power. The structured interior has given way to the open plan, inspired by another imagined East - the Japanese pavilion glimpsed by Frank Lloyd Wright at the World's Columbian Exhibition of 1893, in Chicago. A simplified simulation, that exhibit was, in fact, more ostentatiously open than any real Japanese house: the partitions were removed to allow easy inspection of the space by the Western viewer.
The demands of Chicago's frontier construction would also yield up the ultra-light gypsum fireproof panel, the precondition to build at the new scales and depths demanded by the 20th century's big buildings. With the advance of technology, the wall, no matter how temporary or flimsy, becomes more and more permeated with wiring and plumbing, insulation and acoustic engineering, even as outwardly it becomes devoid of decoration, bare, even transparent. Folding screens and plastic partitions replace fixed partition walls in rec rooms, conference centers and synagogues to keep pace with the frantic reconfigurations of a society that can't stop moving.
At last it is in the office where the dream of the solid wall as modular accessory emerges and then runs aground.
During the libidinal 1960s the United States' high-tech capitalism yields up the ultimate device of light-weight en-closure: the office cubicle. Like many epoch-making design innovations, this one is conjured up by a progressive vision.
Openness was not a virtue but an economic necessity for the office workers of the early 20th century, who toiled in intellectual spaces configured like cavernous factories. For these clerks and secretaries, openness signalled a lack of individuality; managers were lucky to have their own offices, their own walls. The cubicle claimed dignified private space for employees within the open sea of productivity. Today, forgetting the cubicle's origins as an ennobling device and hating what it has become, the open plan office is back as the fig leaf of progressive corporate culture, though studies show that employees once again miss their privacy and maybe even want a few solid walls back in the picture.
The time-lapse fluctuation of our societal floor plan has accelerated.
Now you can almost watch the walls go up and down in real time.
PAGE 4
WALL
woven wall
defensive wall
brick wall
stone wall
wood wall
walls
roman double wall
mosque
jali
Chinese partion spirit wall
japanese screen wallpaper fireproof wallboard
plasterboard
cubicle wall acoustic wall insulation
open plan
toilet cubicle
wet wall
movable partition
3D printed wall transformable wall
facebook walls
sandstone
walls under the microscope
gypsum (drywall) 
pine wood
willow wood
asbestos
cement (concrete)
fiber-reinforced polymer
brick
3D printed lattice
wall
...the demise of the wall starts with the discovery of flexibility...
partition
1922
1922 Padiglione Centrale, Venice Biennale.
...anyone looking at a wall today looks at a riddle: is it an immutable object - of heft, solidity, weight -or is it a provisional assembly that can be removed or changed without particular effort? The deep door here does not suggest an opening in solid masonry, but on opportunistic interruption of the wall plane to accommodate exit-rules rather than architectural incentive...
2013
ca.1300

Rendering of L'hôpital de Tonnère, from Viollet-le-Duc's Dictionnaire raisonné (1854).
1967
PAGE 14
DEFENSIVE WALL
Of all the shifting manifestations of the wall - bearing wall, partition wall, party wall, feature wall - the defensive wall best captures the element's essential political character as a way of setting a limit between self and other. Defensive walls physically manifest national myth-making and existential anxieties. Far from being a primitive, outmoded expression of nation- and tribe-building, 6,000 miles of new walls are built between 2003 and 2013, the fastest rate in history.
ca. 1691 Qing Dynasty handscroll illustrates garrison movements, troop positions, enemy encampments and natural resources along the Great Wall of China.
6th-8th century Slavic fortress, or "grod," a tightly constructued wooden machanism of separation.
WALL
PAGE 15

1st-4th centuries AD
The Roman Limes, a concept for turning space beyond the walls of the city into a lethal obstacle course -an extended wall...
1961-1989 After decades of development, in its final form the Berlin Wall spans 155 kilometers, resembling a defensive wall from antiquity while introducing a properly modern innovation: monolithic readymade concrete panels allow for instant deployment.
Surface barriers	Border	Initial
and "dragon's teeth’	signal	‘hinterland’
fence	fence
EAST
BERLIN
‘Border marker" barrier wall
Anti-vehicle crash barrier
Control
strip
Access Illuminated Observation road	strip and command
tower
WEST
BERLIN
1:50



PAGE 16
1953-present
Stretching 250 kilometers across the entire breadth of the Korean peninsula, the Korean Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) is fenced on both sides. The no-man's-land in between has become a haven for wildlife, with the Asiatic black bear, leopards, the Eurasian lynx and Goral sheep thriving.
1973 - present Line of Control between India and Pakistan, sometimes called "Asia's Berlin Wall." Stretching 550 kilometers and composed of double row fencing and concertina wire, the Line is a living memorial of the partition of India, one of the bloodiest events of the 20th century, and tension over Kashmir between the two nuclear-armed powers.
2002-present In an
advisory decision, the International Court of Justice in The Hague finds: "The construction of the wall being built by Israel, the occupying Power, in the Occupied Palestinian Territory, including in and around East Jerusalem, and its associated régime, are contrary to international law." Upon completion, Israel's West Bank barrier will be 700 kilometers, four-and-a half times the length of the Berlin Wall.
PAGE 17
us_mexico border wall
George W. Bush's 2006 Secure Fence Act sets in motion the construction of about 1,130km of fencing and barriers along the 3,021 km-long US-Mexico border. The "big, beautiful wall" touted by President Trump during his 2016 election campaign is estimated by the US Department for Homeland Security to cost up to $25 billion. A competition is launched by FedBizOpps.gov for wall designs; 400 contractors and architects submit bids.
2014 A stretch of fencing in the Sonora Desert, which has contributed to an escalation of deaths at the border.
Components of the system: Sensor towers
Nine solar powered towers equipped with radar and day and night cameras are placed five miles
Communication relay towers
These are placed between sensor towers and the command center to extend communication range.
Around 200 seismic sensors are placed along border. An alert is sent to a sensor tower when vibration is detected.
Approximately 50 miles from border, the signal is monitored constantly and dispatches field agents to apprehend possible border breaches.
2017 Components of the "virtual fence" at the US-Mexico border: seismic sensors alerting a command center 50 miles (80 kilometers) away. Budget appropriations of $2.6 billion in 2017 are not for starting construction on the wall; they are for repairing existing stretches of fencing, and for technology to substitute for expensive, ineffective physical walls: aircraft and aviation sensors, surveillance technology and towers, radar and cameras, radios, computers, and weapons.
May 3, 2017 What is a wall? Having promised that "on day one, we will work on an impenetrable, physical, tall, powerful, beautiful southern border wall," four months into his presidency, Trump's press secretary Sean Spicer explains to the White House press corp the border wall's comparatively modest beginnings.
Chris Spiering, Brietbart: In January the president did an interview deriding the "little toy walls on the southern border," and said: "I don't know why they're even wasting their time." Why is the government focusing so much on existing border security measures rather than fighting for the wall that he promised he would build? ... Are those photos of fences or walls?
Spicer: That is called a bollard wall, that is called a levy wall.
Spiering: So that's the wall we were promised?
Spicer: There are various walls that can be built under the legislation that was just passed. It allows us to do that. As we've mentioned -Spiering [pointing]: What is that?
Spicer [pointing]: That is called a levy wall on the left. That is called a bollard wall.
Spiering: So that's not a wall, it's a levy wall?
Spicer: That's what it's actually called. That's the name of it.
Spiering: That's still just fencing.
Spicer:... So to be clear: in several areas along our southern border we have ... areas where someone can literally cut through with a pair of wire cutters or put a little barrier over that a car can drive over the top.... We are able to go in there and instead of having a chain link fence, replace it with that bollard wall. That's what it is.
Jim Acosta, CNN: It's not the wall the president promised.
Spicer: No, hold on, Jim ... Just to be clear... This is the 2017 budget. This is a downpayment on what the president is going to prioritize in the 2018 budget that starts October 1.
Spiering: You're basically just telling supporters, the President's supporters, to be satisfied with this existing tough-guy fencing until he's ready to build the wall.
Spicer: No, what I'm telling anybody is that the President said he was going to build the wall and he's doing it.
PAGE 18 PRISON WALL
From Gothic fantasy to banal evil, prison walls proliferate, now forming pre-cast cells that slide into place to accommodate the record prison population in the US.
1745 Plate XIV, The Gothic Arch, from the "Carceri," Giovanni Battista Piranesi.
2014 South Placer Adult Correctional Facility, Roseville, California, just after construction.
March 2013 "As architects, we are responsible for one of the most expensive parts of the prison system, the construction of new prison buildings. Almost all of us would rather be using our professional skills to design positive social institutions such as universities or playgrounds, but these institutions lack funding because of spending on prisons. If we would rather design schools and community centers, we must stop building prisons..."
—"Prison Design Boycott in support of Alternatives to Incarceration," a petition by the group Architects/Designers/Planners for Social Responsibility asking the American Institute of Architects to forbid members to design execution chambers, super-maximum security prisons, and solitary confinement facilities for juveniles and the mentally ill.
PAGE 19
2013 "Standard Twin Cell" by Fibrebond, one of several companies offering pre-cast concrete prison cells for sale.
"Mass incarceration on a scale almost unexampled in human history is a fundamental fact of our country today - perhaps the fundamental fact, as slavery was the fundamental fact of 1850. In truth, there are more black men in the grip of the criminal-justice system - in prison, on probation, or on parole - than were in slavery then. Over all, there are now more people under 'correctional supervision' in America - more than six million - than were in the Gulag Archipelago under Stalin at its height. That city of the confined and the controlled, Lockup-town, is now the second largest in the United States."
—Adam Gopnik, "The Caging of America," The New Yorker,
January 30, 2012.
2008 Under the stars and stripes, an Oldcastle Precast Correctional Cell Is Installed, an unintended realization of the 1960s Metabolist dream of expandable cellular architecture.
Shower
2012 Prison Architect, by Introversion Software, turns prison-building Into a game. Players select from four wall types in building their dream prison: fence, brick wall, concrete wall, and perimeter wall.
PAGE 20
WOVEN WALL
The ur-wall is not, according to 19th century architectural theorist Gottfried Semper, a mud or stone line of enormous and reassuring heft, but an artful, woven partition. Hanging loosely, perhaps flapping, the woven screen generates-and, crucially, symbolizes -the division and organization of activities within the primitive dwelling. The woven "wall" is an enabler of civilization; the thick structural wall merely a defender of it.
Gottfried Semper, 1803-1879.
Egyptian plaiting, according to Semper: "The art of making covers from cane is very old and has made no essential technical advances since the Old Kingdom of the Pharaohs. Nevertheless, in their aesthetic understanding of the motive, the Egyptians of that time were, as are now the North American Iroquois and many other savage and half-savage tribes, more spontaneous, more fortunate, and more ingenious than we modern Europeans with our admired mechanical omnipotence."
Black Tent, Jordan, from the Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture, Paul Oliver (1996).


PAGE 21
" ..it remains certain that the use of the crude weaving that started with the pen - as a means to make the 'home,' the inner life separated from the outer life, and as the formal creation of the idea of space - undoubtedly preceded the wall, even the most primitive one constructed out of stone or any other material. The structure that served to support, to secure, to carry this spatial enclosure was a requirement that had nothing directly to do with space and the division of space. It was foreign to primitive architectural thinking and was in the beginning not a form-determining element.
The same is true for walls constructed out of unburnt bricks, stone, or any other building materials, all of which in their nature and use have absolutely no relation to the spatial concept. They were used for protection and defence, to secure permanence in the enclosure,
or to serve as foundations and supports for the spatial enclosure above, for carrying stocks and other loads, in short, for reasons foreign to the original idea of spatial enclosure.
In this connection, it is of the greatest importance to note that wherever these secondary motives are not present, woven fabrics almost everywhere and especially in the southern and warm countries carry out their ancient, original function as conspicuous spatial dividers; even where solid walls become necessary they remain only the inner and unseen structure for the true and legitimate representatives of the spatial idea: namely, the more or less artificially woven and seamed-together, textile walls." — Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of Architecture (1851).
Attic-Ionic
concerning the
aestnetics or these interesting products of the textile art to educated haberdashers, saddlers, and above all to hair stylists, the last of whom, in fact, have attained everything possible in the technical perfection of the plait and have thereby controlled the taste of whole centuries."
PAGE 22
WALL
MUD WALL
Even in the age of steel and glass construction, earth, in its various forms, remains the primary building material for majorities of people. At the Nk'Mip Desert Culture Center in British Columbia, mud construction makes a contemporary comeback as an advanced technique to improve climate control...
2030-1640 BC The making of mud brick for Theban Tomb No. 100, at the tomb of Rekhmire. "Unbaked mud brick was the chief building material for domestic structures. The steps in the production are shown: mixing the earth and water, using a wooden mold to form the bricks, and laying out the bricks to dry in the sun." William H. Peck, The Material World of Ancient Egypt (2013), 75.
MUD BRICK MAKING
Shaping bricks with a wooden mould (mithal or miftil) before leaving them in the sun to dry. Bricks are moulded as close to the site as possible.
BUILDING
Layering primary structural walls on top of the foundation. Bricks are placed alternating header and stretcher for a strong bond.
RAW COURSES
Completion of the layering of a wall, still showing each layer of mud brick.
1985 In The Valley of Mud-Brick Architecture architect Salma Samar Damluji catalogues building practices still In use In present-day Yemen. Bricks are cemented with a mortar, comprised of the same mud, straw, and water mixture (libin) as the brick itself. Walls require up to two months to dry following the construction process.
2006 Back to the earth: Nk'Mip Desert Culture Center, British Columbia, Canada, by Hotson Bakker Boniface Haden. SIREWALL - from "Stabilized Insulated Rammed Earth" (SIRE) -turns the earth wall into a high-tech wall.
"It is estimated that between a third and a half of the world's population -approximately three billion people on six continents - lives in buildings constructed of earth. The typologies of earthen architecture, however, extend beyond buildings for living, and include structures for working and worshipping, as well as the countless forms of earthen architecture that are not inhabited by humans, such as agricultural buildings, city walls, and monuments. In India there are estimated to be as many as 80 million dwellings made of earth, and in China the number of people living in earthen homes is estimated to be 100 million. In France 15 percent of rural buildings are made of rammed earth, and the United States is the leading consumer of mud bricks in the industrialized world. This makes the ground we walk on and cultivate our crops in the most widely used building material on the planet-that's right, dirt. This does not include, nor should be confused with, other materials that come from the ground, such as stone, cement, or metals derived from ore. Earth, by this definition, is simply clay, gravel, sand, silt, or other friable soils, in which organic materials sometimes exist. Because of the ubiquitous availability of appropriate soil, buildings constructed of earth can also be found just about everywhere -in almost every terrestrial biome on the planet."
— Ronald Rael, Earth Architecture (2009), 9.
PAGE 24
STONE WALL
Victor Hugo and, before him, Pliny, waxed poetic about stone as a building material - though Hugo's language pays tribute to elaborate masonry as standing for civilization on the march, while Pliny's screed against Roman ostentation now reads as prophetic critique of contemporary building practices. Under globalization, stone architecture, once the symbol of rootedness and permanence, has become a simulacrum: stone is shipped in from far-off lands and clipped to facades as thin cladding at best, triggering a movement for the use of local stone.




1st Century BC/1521 Stonework described by Vitruvius in De Architectura Libri Dece. In the 16th century, Cesariano undertakes the task of translating Vitruvius's notoriously difficult-to-understand Latin into Italian - as well as supplying much-needed illustrations. The imaginary of Roman antiquity, formed by the Renaissance.
510-480 BC Walls of parian marble, normally used for sculpture: Athenian Treasury, Delphi.
"The first monuments were simple masses of rock, 'which the iron had not touched,' as Moses says. Architecture began like all writing. It was first an alphabet. Men planted a stone upright, it was a letter, and each letter was a hieroglyph, and upon each hieroglyph rested a group of ideas, like the capital on the column. This is what the earliest races did everywhere, at the same moment, on the surface of the entire world. We find the 'standing stones' of the Celts in Asian Siberia; in the pampas of America.
Later on, they made words; they placed stone upon stone, they coupled those syllables of granite, and attempted some combinations. The Celtic dolmen and cromlech, the Etruscan tumulus, the Hebrew galgal, are words. Some, especially the tumulus, are proper names. Sometimes even, when men had a great deal of stone, and a vast plain, they wrote a phrase. The immense pile of Karnac is a complete sentence.
At last they made books. Traditions had brought forth symbols, beneath which they disappeared like the trunk of a tree beneath its foliage; all these symbols in which humanity placed faith continued to grow, to multiply,
to intersect, to become more and more complicated; the first monuments no longer sufficed to contain them, they were overflowing in every part; these monuments hardly expressed now the primitive tradition, simple like themselves, naked and prone upon the earth. The symbol felt the need of expansion in the edifice. Then architecture was developed in proportion with human thought; it became a giant with a thousand heads and a thousand arms, and fixed all this floating symbolism in an eternal, visible, palpable form. While Daedalus, who is force, measured; while Orpheus, who is intelligence, sang; - the pillar, which is a letter; the arcade, which is a syllable; the pyramid, which is a word, - all set in movement at once by a law of geometry and by a law of poetry, grouped themselves, combined, amalgamated, descended, ascended, placed themselves side by side on the soil, ranged themselves in stories in the sky, until they had written under the dictation of the general idea of an epoch, those marvellous books which were also marvellous edifices: the Pagoda of Eklinga, the Rhamseion of Egypt, the Temple of Solomon."
—Victor Hugo, The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1831
PAGE 25
1802-1817 Enlightenment architecture theorist
Jean-Baptiste Rondelet explores various forms
of masonry design:
1.	Simple type with regular courses, each stone forming the wall thickness.
2.	Double type formed of stones of equal dimensions, placed two by two In width, and single in length, on the wall thickness.
3.	Triple type formed of stones of equal dimensions, placed three by three in width and single in length, on the wall thickness.
4.	Type consists of alternately double and triple thickness along the wall.
5.	The same as that of Fig. 2. This construction is not different except that this wall is thicker, with the gap between the stones filled with masonry gravel.
6.	Type which was used for lining stone ramparts of the ancient walls of the city of Montepeillier. These linings are made of
a type of sandstone called Pignan stone.
7.	The arrangement of the stones that form the lining of a tower built as part of the tomb of Coecilia Metella, daughter of Metellus Creticus and wife of Crassus, one of the triumvirs.
8.	Irregular type, consisting of stones of all sizes, with joints on all sides.
9.	Type with polygonal shaped cut stones in irregular prisms.
1998 Wine Museum, Vauvert, France, Gilles Perraudin, built with blocks of local Bonifacio limestone.
"Mountains ... were made by Nature for herself to serve as a kind of framework for holding firmly together the inner parts of the earth, and at the same time to break the force of the heavy seas and so to curb her most restless elements with the hardest material of which she is made. We quarry these mountains and haul them away for a mere whim; and yet there was a time when it seemed remarkable even to have succeeded in crossing them. Our forefathers considered the scaling of the Alps by Hannibal and later by the Cimbri to be almost unnatural. Now these selfsame Alps are quarried into marble of a thousand varieties.
And so over the waves of the sea, Natures's wildest element, mountain ranges are transported to and fro... when we see the masses of marble that are being conveyed or hauled, we should each of us reflect, and at the same time think how much more happily people live without them."
— Pliny the Elder, Naturalis Historia
PAGE 26
2012 3D printing of a wood well, demonstrating early Neolithic carpentry skills. The individual timber elements of the original wall date from 5469 to 5098 BC.
"This study demonstrates that the first farmers were also the first carpenters, contradicting the common belief that the invention of metal woodworking tools more than a thousand years later was imperative for complex timber constructions. Settlers of the early Neolithic time were able to build sophisticated corner joints and log constructions, which fulfilled all of the static requirements of massive water well linings. Their technical skills further imply the existence of complex constructions for LBK [Linear Pottery Culture] longhouse architecture."
—Willy Tegel, Rengert Elburg, Dietrich Hakelberg, Harald Stäuble, and Ulf Büntgen, "Early Neolithic Water Wells Reveal the World's Oldest Wood Architecture," PLOS ONE, December 12, 2012.
WOOD WALLS
According to archeological finds, Germany can lay claim to the world's oldest wood architecture, with sophisticated carpentry that can be traced back as far as 7,000 years. Given wood's social and symbolic importance, schemes to get the most out of lumber were an obsession of classical theorists of building.
1856 Eugène Viollet-le-Duc hypothesizes the most economical means of using a log.
1633 Diego Lopez de Arenas publishes a treatise on carpentry, including diagrams demonstrating how to optimize logs of increasing sizes.
1947 An American lumber manual waxes poetic about how advances in saw blades can yield a greater number of boards from the same tree, by minimizing waste: "With an annual output of 4 million b.f. [board feet], there is a saving of 1 million b.f., and with larger logs the saving would be greater still."
— Nelson C. Brown, Lumber: Manufacturing, Conditioning, Grading, Distribution, and Use (1974), 124.
WALL
PAGE 27
WOOD'S SECOND LIFE
Wood today is not the same material as it was generations ago: for one thing, with the loss of old-growth forests, contemporary timber comes from tree farms, resulting in softer material. The result is a situation in which twin pressures bear on the wooden wall. On the one hand, ecological concerns turn wood into a symbol of reconnection with nature. On the other, the meaning of wood is transfigured via technology. New forms of panelling replace conventional wood, while architects dream up new ways to press the limits of wood construction.
2014 Wood plastic composite indoor wall panel, Coowin Group, China. Made of "69% wood powder, 23% PVC, 5% CAC03,
3% others."
2012 Wooden skyscraper: Vancouver architect Michael Green makes the case for the viability of the so-called Mass Timber building - construction using solid, laminated wood panels - as "the first significant challenge to concrete and steel structures since their inception in tall building design more than a century ago." (Michael Green, "The Case for Tall Wood Buildings: How Mass Timber Offers a Safe, Economical, and Environmentally Friendly Alternative for Tall Building Structures," 2012.)
PAGE 28
WALL
BRICK WALLS
The key insight of brick - that the building unit should be sized to be carried by the individual worker - proves a durable one. Even after industrial fabrication and standardization removes variation, the tactile scale of brick walls means that it is "emotionally well-appreciated for housing and usually out of place in airports." (Caren Yglesias, The Innovative Use of Materials in Architecture and Landscape Architecture: History, Theory and Performance, 2014, 59.)
ca. 150 AD Ostia Antica, Rome. The intricate brickwork of a complex of insulae, or apartments.
1962-1974 Brick signals solidity and truth to materials in Louis Kahn's Ayub National Hospital, Bangladesh. Teaching a class at the University of Pennsylvania in 1971, Kahn imagines a conversation with a brick: "You say to a brick, 'What do you want, brick?' And brick says to you,
'I like an arch.' And you say to brick, 'Look, I want one, too, but arches are expensive and I can use a concrete lintel.' And then you say: 'What do you think of that, brick?' Brick says: 'I like an arch.' And it's important, you see, that you honor the material that you use. ... You can only do it if you honor the brick and glorify the brick instead of shortchanging it."
"Whether the White Mason, which is the Hewer of Stone, or the Red Mason, which is the Hewer of Brick, be the most Ancient, I know not: but in Holy Writ, we read of making of Bricks, before we read of Digging or Hewing of Stones; therefore we may suppose the Red Mason (or Bricklayer) to be the most Ancient."
—Joseph Moxon, Mechanick Exercises: Or, The Doctrine of Handy-Works (1703), 237.
2013 Epoka University Student Center Building, Tirana, Albania: the walls of the Epoka University Student Center Building use brick in unusually inventive ways. They are not only used bare-faced throughout but also rotated In different directions to reveal their different faces and even their perforated interior structure. In the walls separating class rooms from the hallways, one type of brick is used in three different orientations: standing, exposing its large face; next to that two bricks of the same type are laid horizontally, one with its small face exposed, the other rotated sideways by 90 degrees so that its internal grid of air cavities becomes visible. In this orientation the size of the brick defines the depth of the wall; the air cavities penetrate all the way through, connect the spaces on either side physically - they allow our gaze to pass, as well as air and sound. The bricks are not laid to form a flush wall, but stick out in a variable pattern to give a sculptural dimension. In other parts of the central hall, you find four or eight larger bricks sticking out of the wall, with their closed face exposed, grouped together to form a surface large enough to be used as supports to hang large plans of architetural projects. In this way, the brick laying techniques always tell a story of the brick and how it makes a wall, but also modulate the morphology of the wall to make it usuable for various kinds of mircro-programs. Designed by Zambak and CoRDA (Center of Research and Design in Architecture, at Epoka University, Tirana, Albania). Andreas Ruby
PAGE 29
9-19th centuries
Dozens of differently-sized bricks are used in the Buddhist temples of Bagan, in present-day Myanmar, presumably calibrated according to their structural and aesthetic function.
21st century With no single international standard, brick sizes vary across nations: the United States has among the smallest bricks in the world, Russia and Sweden the biggest (the cold climate requiring thicker walls?) Meanwhile, in the upper right area of the chart, the bricks of the Bagan temple vary in size enormously, but all are far bigger than today's bricks...
PAGE 30
WALL
POSITION
Terminology (stretcher, sailor, shiner etc.) based on how a brick is laid, and how the exposed face is oriented relative to the face of the finished wall, according to John A. Mulligan, Handbook of Brick Masonry Construction (1942).
stretcher
shiner
rowlook
sailor
COURSE
A continuous, usually horizontal, layer of bricks.
Solider course
A brick laid on its end, with its narrow face towards the outside of the wall.
BOND
Any of various arrangements of bricks or stones in a wall in which they overlap so as to provide strength.
English bond
Brickwork laid with alternating courses, each consisting entirely of headers and stretchers.
Common bond
Brickwork laid with five courses of strechers followed by one course of headers.
Flemish bond
Brickwork laid with each course consisting of alternating headers and stretchers.
Rowlock
A brick laid on its long edge, with its end exposed in the face of the wall.
Stretcher
A brick or masonry unit laid in its most usual position, with the broadest surface of the unit horizontal and the length of the unit parallel to the surface of the wall.
Header
A brick or other masonry unit that is laid across two wythes with its end exposed In the face of the wall.
WALL
PAGE 31
1942 Taxonomy of "closures," the bricks used to fill in the irregular bits of a wall (and add flavor), from the stout corner block to the jaunty cap mould and the enigmatic octagon. (John Aloyslus Mulligan, The Handbook of Brick Masonry Construction, 1942, 190-195.)
PAGE 32
WALL
WALL PLANS
In the architectural ground plan, space is conjured from the tracery of walls as lines. Early dwellings are curvilinear, with no internal walls - the wall simply separates inside from outside. But as the domestication of homo sapiens becomes firmly established and growing settlements/cities (and the mini "states" they give rise to) forcibly enlist remaining hunter-gatherers, nomads and "barbarians" into their new urban-agricultural regime, orthogonal dwellings emerge. Whereas circular forms are more efficient materially (in terms circumference to area) and structurally (an arch in plan), when dense aggregation is required, orthogonality becomes more efficient: 90-degree angles tesselate better. The shift likely occurs though because inheritance chains are established, making it expedient to divide and subdivide internal spaces, more easily done on the basis of the right angle. The wall as internal partition is born. From then on, the increasing complexity of wall systems mirrors the increasing complexity of society...
9500-8000 BC Pre-pottery Neolithic huts, Nahal Oren, Israel.
"In Mesoamerica and the Near East, the emergence of the village seems to have Involved two stages. In the first stage, individuals were distributed through a series of small circular-to-oval structures, accompanied by communal or 'shared' storage features. In the second stage, nuclear families occupied substantial rectangular houses with private storage rooms. ... in the Near East, villages of rectangular, nuclear family houses with private storage rooms replaced encampments of irregularly sized circular huts with shared or 'group' storage. Why did this change take place? I suspect that Prepottery Neolithic societies grew so fast, and settlements became so large, that not every family considered itself closely enough related to its neighbors to be willing to share the risks and rewards of production. Privatization of storage - which can even include the closing off of outdoor work space with a mud wall - is a way of freeing one's family from having to share with less-productive neighbors. And for the rest of the Neolithic period, families who were willing to work harder and store the products privately began to outdistance their neighbors economically."
- Kent Flannery, "The Origins of the Village Re-Visited," American Antiquity, Vol. 67,
No. 3 (Duly 2002).
6500-5500 BC
Prototypical nuclear family house, Matarrah, Iraq. Flannery:
"It could easily accommodate a family of five and had larger rooms for sleeping or for entertaining visitors, plus at least one smaller room for private storage. Indeed, in many parts of the world, nuclear households like this one continued for thousands of years to be the basic units of which villages were composed." Flannery, "Origins of the Village."
ca. 6010-5720 BC Houses C-1 and C-2 at 'Ain Ghazal, modern-day Jordan, one of the first centers of farming incorporating permanent homes, which gradually subdivide more and more...
"[T]here are plenty of recorded instances when houses were remodeled on the death of the male owner. At this time we know that property was partible and all children inherited sections of paternal (really bilateral) estates. It was common for one of the adult heirs to buy the property of his brothers and sisters and so reassemble the dispersed estate. It may be possible that such re-modelings of houses in the early village of 'Ain Ghazal were the result of the changing nature of property ownership and inheritance rules. Indeed, it seems logical that, precisely in early sedentary communities, rules of intergenerational transfer of immovable property were developed and significantly affected the nature of the newly settled families themselves. Kent Flannery once argued (1972) that social changes were reflected in domestic architecture in the transition from round houses, typical of most early villages, to rectilinear forms, which encompassed extended family units and kept discrete certain activity areas. Although this interpretation now seems excessively mechanistic ... the process of social change in early villages might have led to cell-like forms such as those in 'Ain Ghazal.
Indeed, the repeated plasterings that accompanied such subdivisions at 'Ain Ghazal, and which required the burning of enormous quantities of trees to make the lime plaster... seems to have led to the deforestation of the region and so the abandonment of the site. ... the remodeling of houses at 'Ain Ghazal may reflect the earliest example of how inheritance practices of subdividing house property are worked out in many cultures."
- Norman Yoffee, Myths of the Archaic State: Evolution of the Earliest Cities, States, and Civilizations (Cambridge, 2004)
PAGE 33
ca. 650 Royal Palace for Chakravartin Kings, India.	15th-20th century Tulou (earthen structure) fort-village, Fujian, China:
Concentric walls within palace complex act as	built in a plan of concentric circles for defensive purposes with high load
zones for lighter-weight pavilions.	bearing rammed earth walls, up to 1.8 meters thick and, in the interior
of the courtyard, lower buildings.
1200 With spans limited by the weakness of available lumber (mangrove), the Lamu House in Kenya features a series of walled-off narrow bays with increasing privacy as one penetrates deeper into the dwelling - a linear hierarchy foreshadowing the later development of the enfilade In the west. Further separation of spaces for sleeping chambers within each bay is through curtained partitions. The rear wall closes off the most sacred room, and contains plaster niches (zdaki) to counteract the impurities of the adjacent chamber.
1967 Sonsbeek Pavilion, Arnhem, Netherlands. Attempted urbanization of the plan. Aldo Van Eyck comments:
...why do people routinely describe architect's language as "impenetrable"? not only is van eyck's plan one of the most inspiring combinations of diagram and plan, the language is crystal clear...
PAGE 34
COLUMNS AND/AS WALLS
One of the legacies of the Italian Renaissance, with its fetish for the classical, was an obsession with the column. Until the 19th century, the education of architects would remain grounded in tracing columnar orders (first drawn in the 16th century, but ostensibly rooted in Antiquity).
Yet in the work of Leon Battista Alberti and Sebastiano Serlio the priority of column and wall from Greek architecture is already undergoing a process of adaptation.
1537 Triumph of the wall: after millennia playing second fiddle to the column in the classical imagination, Serlio depicts the wall engulfing the column like a creeping plant, taking over both its structural and symbolic role.
WALL
PAGE 35


"By placing the column in his category of ornament Alberti touches on one of the central problems of Renaissance architecture. Thinking in terms of the wall the chief feature of all Renaissance architecture, the column is for him first and foremost decoration.
Of course, Alberti imagined his theory to be in harmony with the spirt of classical architecture. He did not know Greek temples in which the column is the constituent element of the building. Roman imperial architecture, his only guide, may be superficially described as half-way between the Greeks and the Renaissance. It is essentially a wall architecture with all the compromises necessitated by the transformation of the Greek order into decoration, but in many cases it still retains the original functional meaning of the order.
The place assigned by Alberti to the column is implicitly contradicted by a passage in which he defines the column as 'a certain strengthened part of the wall, carried up perpendicularly from the foundation to the top,' and 'a row of columns is indeed nothing else but a wall, open and discontinued in several places.' He, therefore, sees in the column a remnant of a pierced wall, which is as opposed as possible to the conception of classical antiquity, according to which the column always remained a self-contained sculptural unity."
— Rudolf Wittkower, "Alberti's Approach to Antiquity in Architecture," Journal of the Warburg and Courtauld Institutes 4 (1941), 2.
Leon Battista Alberti (1404-1472)
1472-1790 Alberti's Basilica of Sant'Andrea, Mantua, Italy: the wall triumphs, with columns demoted to pilasters.
PAGE 36
WALL
LOST IN THE MOSQUE
An altogether different emphasis on the relationship between wall, decoration, and support reigns in the hypostyle mosque: "Where the classical orders of architecture developed around the column and entablature, their sub-divisions, contour patterns, decoration and distribution, in Arab-lslamic architecture the accent is on the arch and the architectural wall, and especially on their interpenetration in the spandrel wall." (Jo Tonna, "The Poetics of Arab-lslamic Architecture," Muquarnas, Vol. 7, 1990, 187.)
798 AD Great Mosque, Cordoba: in the original iteration, a diaphanous screen of columns separates the two halves of the program: an open courtyard and a hypostyle, wall-free field of columns in the interior.
852 The open courtyard and the field of columns grows equally.
965 Interior overtakes exterior in size.
1236 After further growth of the site (the open field now consisting of 850 columns), the mosque becomes a cathedral, with the open field remaining in tact; chapels are embedded in exterior walls.
1523 Large chancel and choir are added in the center, canceling the open field.
PAGE 37
qibla
A distinct ceremonial usage for a wall within the mosque: the qibla wall ("qibla"= direction) indicates the direction of Mecca for the purposes of prayer. It is signaled by the distinctive ornamented niche, the mihrab.
1415-1422 Mosque of Sultan al-Muayyad, Cairo, with qibla wall highlighted.
1827 Plate from French architect Pascal Coste's Architecture arabe shows the qibla wall of the Mosque of Sultan al-Muayyad.

2007 Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque,
Abu Dhabi, with qibla wall highlighted.
Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque: lavish contemporary qibla wall, a fiberoptic display radiates the names of Allah.
PAGE 38
WALL
DALI
Combining pattern and perforation, the Jali or Jaali of Mughal architecture in India - used as room dividers, as well as windows and railing - dissolve the solid wall while maintaining a veil of privacy. Beneath its obvious aesthetic impact, these screens are also eminently practical, establishing boundaries while also permitting the passage of air, crucial in hot climates.
1646 Jali screen, Taj Mahal, Agra. Interiors composed of tessellated layers.
1425 Mazar Khandan-e-Nizamuddin: stone-carved mausoleum for Nizamuddin Chanderi, Madhya Pradesh, India.
WALL
PAGE 39
"Decoration in Islamic architecture serves several functions, but its main effect - and very likely its main purpose - appears to be the creation of non-tectonic values, the dissolution of all those elements that in other architectural traditions emphasize the structure, the balance and counter-balance of loads and stresses - the actual mechanics of a building. Islamic architecture at its best, and at its most 'Islamic', is truly a negation of architecture as conceived in Europe, that is, of structure; it aims at a visual negation of the reality of weight and the necessity of support. The various means by which the effect of weightlessness is created, the effect of unlimited space, of non-substantiality of walls, pillars, and vaults are all well known. They range from the use of mosaic and painted decoration tiles - especially lustre and painted polychrome - and from moulded and deeply cut stone or plaster to actual openwork and pierced walls, vaults and even supporting pillars. The multitude of decorative treatments of surfaces in Islamic architecture, the use of almost every conceivable technique and the development
of a rich repertory of designs - from geometric abstract shapes to full-scale floral patterns, from minutely executed inscriptions in a full variety of calligraphic styles to the monumental single words that serve as both religious images and decoration - is without parallel in the architecture of the non-Muslim world. Its effect is extraordinary and its function quite unmistakable. It goes hand in hand with the non-directional plan, the tendency to an infinite repetition of individual units (bays, arches, columns, passages, courtyards, doorways, cupolas) and the continuous merging of spaces without any specific direction or any specific centre or focus. And if a definite spatial limit is reached, such as a terminal wall, the surface that should stop the progress of anyone moving through the building will be decorated with patterns that repeat themselves, leading on visually beyond the given limit of the wall surface, vault or dome."
— Ernst J. Grube, "What is Islamic Architecture?" Architecture of the Islamic World: Its History and Social Meaning (1995), 11-12.
Alexandrie	Damanhour
1867 French architect Jules Bourgoin's Les Artes Arabes charts regional differences in patterns for screen decorations observed in Egypt.
Au Caire
Mosque Sultan Hassan
Fontaine Gismah
PAGE 40
CHINA'S PARTITIONS
"GASHAN (Partition Door): All the partitions which can be opened or dismounted can be called 'partition doors' or 'Partitions.' In the Song Dynasty it was called 'Lattice door,' in the Qing dynasty, partition doors used in interior decoration were also called 'gauze partitions.' Also: Partition Window/Sill Window, generally installed in sill walls and universally used in doors and windows throughout the Ming and Qing."
— Ma Weidu, Classical Chinese Windows and Doors (China Architecture and Building Press, 2006), 44.
Horizontal bar Belt panel Horizontal bar
lattice
side stiles
Apron panel
Horizontal bar Belt panel Horizontal bar
■ Horizontal bar - Horizontal bar
- Lattice
■ side stiles
 Horizontal bar  Belt panel  Horizontal bar
1644-1911 Qing period residence: extreme difference between solid exterior walls and lightweight partition screens.
"The interiors of typical Chinese buildings reveal the structural elements, fully exposed, while the need to paint wooden elements to aid lasting qualities gave rise to rich and colorful painting. Interior walls became mere partitions, fitted between structural columns."
—John Pile, A History of Interior Design (Wiley, 2009), 89.
1.	Kang	5.	A small table	with two chairs
2. Bed	6.	Chair
3.	Kang screen 7.	Square table
4.	Step	8.	Long narrow	table
9.	Full-length mirror 13.	Square stool
10.	Washstand	14.	Round stool
11.	Clotheshorse	15.	Cupboard
12.	Small table	16.	Semiround tabk
PAGE 41
s
T
SPIRIT WALLS
Two takes on the Chinese tradition of the spirit wall or screen, a non-structural wall that screens the household
entrance.
To protect from prying eyes:
"Protective screen or spirit walls [yingbi or zhaobi\ are common to courtyard dwellings of many types and are also sometimes built for simpler dwellings. Usually the scale, materials, and ornamentation follow those of the major structure. When placed inside the main gate, a screen wall creates a barrier that masks the interior from the gaze of passing strangers, hiding the contents of the dwelling while serving as a focal point for ornamentation that in scale and color traditionally reveals the rank of the owner."
— Ronald G. Knapp, China's Living Houses: Folk Beliefs, Symbols, and Household Ornamentation, (University of Hawaii, 1999), 68.
To protect from evil spirits:
"In traditional Chinese architecture, immediately inside the entrance gate a wall blocks the passage, forcing people to move either to the left or to the right in order to get around the wall. This 'screen wall' (ying bi qiang) is in fact designed to keep bad spirits out. The Chinese have always believed that dead ancestors continue to have influence on people on earth. When someone dies and the necessary rituals to accompany the soul to the hereafter are not observed, the soul will become a bad spirit or gui. Guy fly everywhere, but their mobility is limited; they cannot fly around a corner. To build a wall inside the open entrance gate thus protects a building from gui flying inside. It keeps the bad spirits out."
—Jeanne Boden, The Wall Behind China's Open Door: Toward Efficient Intercultural Management in China, (Academic & Scientific Publishers, 2008), 17.
Entry to Hall of Crimson Snowflakes, Beijing.
View of a yingbi screen looking out through the main gate of a house in Xian, China. The screen is adorned with the character fu. meanina "aood fortune."
1368-1644 CE
A Ming Dynasty Siheyuan House, Beijing.
PAGE 42
JAPANESE SCREEN
With its emphasis on mutability, Japanese architecture makes use of the screen for flexible spatial division within the domestic setting. "The reality of a room ... was to be found in the vacant space enclosed by the roof and walls, not in the roof and walls themselves. The usefulness of a water pitcher dwelt in the emptiness where water might be put in, not in the form of the pitcher or the material of which it was made. Vacuum is all potent because all containing." (Kakuzo Okakura, The Book of Tea, 1906.)
1681 Sliding: fusama screen, Kyoto; painted by Gaki Kano.
1790-1848 Tale of the heike and a lute, next to a standing screen, Eisen Ikeda.
Meiji Period (1868-1912) Single-panel: tsituate screen, Buke Yashiki residence.
1603 Folding: Byobu screen, Niigata.
PAGE 43
17th century Katsura Imperial Villa: the difference between walls and doors blurs as the "wall" becomes little more than a permeable membrane made up almost exclusively of partitions. Both Bruno Taut and Walter Gropius pay homage to Katsura Imperial Villa, seeing It as a glimpse of proto-modernism nested In Japanese tradition.
Tatami floor mats almost as prominent a "walls" (really partition: In a plan view of Katsura Imperial Villa.
PAGE 44
ROME AND THE DOUBLE WALL
The Great Fire of Rome - one of the earliest recorded urban conflagrations - raged for six days in July of 64 AD, in the first decade of Emperor Nero's reign, laying waste to two-thirds of the city, and changing the plan forever.
"A disaster followed, whether accidental or treacherously contrived by the emperor, is uncertain, as authors have given both accounts, worse, however, and more dreadful than any which have ever happened to this city by the violence of fire. It had its beginning in that part of the circus which adjoins the Palatine and Caelian hills, where, amid the shops containing inflammable wares, the conflagration both broke out and instantly became so fierce and so rapid from the wind that it seized in its grasp the entire length of the circus. For here there were no houses fenced in by solid masonry, or temples surrounded by walls, or any other obstacle to interpose delay. The blaze in its fury ran first through the level portions of the city, then rising to the hills, while it again devastated every place below them, it outstripped all preventive measures; so rapid was the mischief and so completely at its mercy the city, with those narrow winding passages and irregular streets, which characterised old Rome. Added to this were the wailings of terror-stricken women, the feebleness of age, the helpless inexperience of childhood, the crowds who sought to save themselves or others, dragging out the infirm or waiting for them, and by their hurry in the one case, by their delay in the other, aggravating the confusion. Often, while they looked behind them, they were intercepted by flames on their side or in their face. Or if they reached a refuge close at hand, when this too was seized by the fire, they found that, even places, which they had imagined to be remote, were involved in the same calamity. At last, doubting what they should avoid or whither betake themselves, they crowded the streets or flung themselves down in the fields, while some who had lost their all, even their very daily bread, and others out of love for their kinsfolk, whom they had been unable to rescue, perished, though escape was open to them."
—Tacitus, The Annals, 109 AD, translated by Alfred John Church and William Jackson Brodribb (1982).
INSULAE
Before the fire, the residential fabric of Rome is complex: of the structures within the city, roughly 1,700 are private houses compared to 47,000 apartment houses, or "insulae," nestled in the city's labyrinthine streets. Although Roman property ownership is absolute, defined by the land that a building is situated on, the walls around them fall into a grey zone.
No codification exists for the separation of walls between properties, and there is little adherence to property ownership laws, an outcome of the haphazard layout of the insulae that may have accelerated the spread of fire.
WALL
PAGE 45
DOUBLE WALL
The state seizes the fire as an opportunity to reassert control over the chaotic city. By enacting regulations on new construction, the emperor is able to minimize the city's risk of future disaster, but also to clarify issues of adjacency in Roman property law. Prior to the code, ambiguously shared walls separated adjacent buildings. Nero's new post-fire code is the first in history to establish clear divisions between contiguous buildings (the code of Hammurabi, the first law that mentions the act of building, only assigned liability): "aedificia... nec communione parietum, sed propriis quaeque muris ambirentur" ("Buildings should not have common walls and a building should be contained by its [own] walls"). Where adjacent buildings meet, there must now be two layers, divided by the property line. The compartment, defended by a double-plied wall, is born.
1st century AD Caseggiato del Temistocle, Third Taberna: detail of double wall rendered after excavation.
150-165 AD Guild of the Augustales, Ostia, showing double-wall construction between adjacent structures built after the imposition of the Neronlan building code.
PAGE 46
CHICAGO: BIRTH OF THE AMERICAN PARTITION by Nicholas Potts
PREHISTORY
The modern partition began with incarceration. In 1830, scientists Michael Faraday and Abel Bluout analyzed the construction of the walls at London's Millbank Penitentiary (1812-21), a high-security facility for long-term imprisonment, whose architectural failure to isolate prisoners from communicating with one another had become a problem soon after its opening. Brick walls could keep prisoners physically separate, but did a poor job of stopping the transmission of sound. Carrying out research into how to intensify the isolation of prisoners, Faraday and Bluout discovered that a hollow wall insulated prison cells against one another more readily than a monolithic wall built of dense brick.1 But the cost of replacing the prison's solid walls with lighter, insulating separations was seen as onerous and never carried out. The prison was demoted to a transitional facility for short-term incarceration in 1842 and was decommissioned entirely by the end of the century. But it left a mark: the void of airspace became a scientifically proven element of the technological wall.
London had long played a leading role in wall-based urban construction techniques. Following the Great Fire in 1666, King George's Act for the further and better regulation of buildings and party wails, and for the more effectually preventing mischiefs by fire, within the cities of London and Westminster, amounted to the first modern update to Nero's since-forgotten early building code, enacted following Rome's fire in 64 AD. The new London building regulations had a profound effect across Europe on the adoption of masonry as a fireproofing device between contiguous structures, provoking a widespread transition away from timber construction.
1.	Robin Evans, "The Rights of Retreat and the Rites of Exclusion; notes towards definition of the wall," Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1997).


2.	"A City in Ruins: The terrible devastation of Chicago." The New York Times, October 10, 1871.
3.	"Rebuilding the City Begun." The New York Times, October 11, 1871.
1830 Michael Faraday and Abel Bluout, field studies for sound isolation between cells at Millbank Prison, London. Following a sequence of tests, the hollow wall proves more useful than solid constructions for the isolation of mischief.
WALLS
Party	External.	Party	External

1774 From London, which learned its lesson in the 1666 Great Fire, the masonry party wall spreads to the colonies as the dominant method for providing firebreak between buildings. From "An Act for the Better Providing Suitable Quarters for Officers and Soldiers in His Majesty's Service in North America."

PAGE 47

October 28,1871 Fire consumed Chicago's susceptible buildings, sending citizens fleeing over Randolph Street Bridge, sketched by John R. Chapin for Harpers Weekly.
DEVASTATED CHICAGO.
Sectional Diagram, by Miles, Showing the Burned District of the City.
October 11,1871 Chicago's burned districts (in dark grey), mapped by the New York Times.
"MELTED AWAY LIKE WAX"
But it was in the American Midwest, in the wake of another fire, where the modern age of the thin, layered wall took hold. The financial incentives toward fast construction on the American frontier meant that there was little patience for heavy construction, much less regulation. The frontier city was a product of technology, implemented on a gridiron plan and powered by steam engine. The combination of rapid growth (from roughly 30,000 residents in 1850 to
300,000	in 1870) and high density would be a catastrophic catalyst for rethinking how buildings functioned in the modern city. The Great Fire of Chicago took place from October 8-10, 1871, with the flames ultimately giving birth to the wall's ubiquitous replacement: the partition.
The devastating fire arrived at the peak of prosperity for this burgeoning city, a site of fervent land speculation that had capitalized on its location on the Great Lakes to become the hub of the new transcontinental railroad network. The fire destroyed nearly 850 hectares, including the entire central business district, and erased most of the recently materialized city. Contemporary reports of the devastation focus on the material details of the destroyed city: the flames "leaped like a prairie fire over the adjacent squares of cheap frame buildings... its work commenced in earnest after crossing Lasalle-street, where improvements of the best class existed."2
The Great Fire wasn't just confined to balloon-framed wooden buildings (the balloon frame, a lightweight wooden wall framing system, was itself invented in 1830s Chicago). The fire leapt indiscriminately from the continuous wall cavities of balloon-framed tenements to the "fireproof" brick-, marble-, and granite-walled buildings of the central business district, where it was made unstoppable by the fuel of flammable wares languishing in massive mercantile buildings. The fire's intensity overpowered even stone or brick party walls that had been designed to protect individual dwellings. The fire brigade's only tactic was to blow up entire buildings in a desperate attempt to halt the fire's advance. A rainstorm on October 10 finished the job more efficiently.
PAGE 48
4.	"The Fire," The Chicago Daily Tribune, Duly 18, 1874.
5.	John Zukowsky. "Introduction to Internationalism in Chicago Architecture," Chicago Architecture 1872-1922. (Munich: Prestel-Verlag,
1987), 19.
6.	Gerald R. Larson, "The Iron Skeleton Frame: Interactions between Europe and the United States," Chicago Architecture 1872-1922, 47.
Although Chicago wasted no time in putting the pieces together, the laissez-faire fervor that had characterized construction before the fire was cast under a pall. The demands of rebuilding would create a new industry, "Risk Management," which, introducing a layer of deliberation and rationality into the planning and construction of buildings, led to material invention that would in turn catalyze new building projects exceeding the horizontal or vertical limits that preceded the fire.
July 18,1874 Frenzy of activity unleashed by Chicago's second fire. At right, the Board of Underwriters makes their ultimatum that Chicago must be rebuilt differently - even as entrepreneurs use the fire as a sales pitch for safes, boasting, "Not One Failure in the Great Fire!"
The Nixon Building, a five-story tower under construction at the epicenter of the fire, had survived intact, possibly due to its pioneering structure, which sheathed its iron in plaster and concrete. The Nixon's fusion of neo-gothic iron and masonry infill into a multi-layered structural system had already been used by Viollet-le-Duc and was enshrined in London, where an 1855 building ordinance forbade the use of exposed iron in construction, ostensibly for fire resistance. In the Nixon Building, plaster appeared to be the wall's salvation following the destruction of so many "fireproof" iron and stone buildings in the central business district. As at Millbank Prison earlier in the century, the character of the wall as a solid, immutable construction was challenged by its apparent opposite: at Millbank, air trumped the solid wall as sound isolator; in Chicago, liquid plaster bested solid metal as the most effective fireproofing.
Still, as it rebuilt, Chicago was initially slow to enact any reforms that would discourage the rapid infusion of capital into the city. To give a sense of the momentum of construction, one enterprising merchant placed an order for a quarter of a million bricks on October 10 - the last day of the fire - while a new building for Marshall Field's department store was already begun the following week.3 Thus, reconstruction began, at first, in the same abyss of regulation that had preceded the fire.
1871 Notable survivor of the Great fire and model for the future fire-protected structure: the Nixon Building.
PAGE 49
July 14.1874 In a second fire, 24 hectares are destroyed - a far cry from the 850-hectare conflagration three years earlier, but enough to force lawmakers and insurers alike to demand change. A Minnesota state representative declares: "Chicago has paid the penalty of permitting her handsome business blocks to be surrounded with wooden buildings. Wooden buildings will be at a discount in that city hereafter."
fig 2.
1874 Fire blanket: US Patent #203972, by Peter Wight, which brings him into Burnham's office.
"INJURING THE CREDIT OF OUR CITY"
It took the outbreak of a second fire on July 14, 1874, to finally elicit action from the Common Council, and then only after insurance underwriters - acting in their own interest after losing nearly $200,000,000 in claims from the two fires
-	threatened to cancel all existing fire insurance policies
in the city if there weren't reforms to construction practices. In addition to the prohibition of wooden structures and the demolition of "illegal" structures that preceded the act, the surviving Nixon Building became the template upon which these reforms were based, leading to a mandate for plaster sheathing over metal structural elements. Plans for an outright moratorium on iron structural columns (which had failed the test of the fires) led to a flurry of patents for fireproof coatings to structural members to permit the construction of iron-columned buildings and thus protect the interests of the local iron market.
Incentivized by both the iron industry and insurance companies, several local inventors tried replicating the Nixon Building's system. Among these entrepreneurs, Peter Wight was the brains behind a fireproof column covering that was ultimately approved on the eve of the City Council's proposed ban in 1874. Inspired at the last minute by the presence of an insulating terracotta covering over the foundry ovens in which he was planning to test his new invention, Wight swapped the wood coating he had originally designed for terracotta. Once tested, his fireproofing assembly was accepted by insurance regulators and adopted by the City Council, just in time to avert the political catastrophe of the cancellation of all fire insurance policies in the city. Wight would go on to work in the architectural offices of Daniel H. Burnham, whose firm dominated the reconstruction of post-fire Chicago as well as the spectacle of the World's Columbian exposition 19 years later.
But the deployment of masonry as load-bearing structure persisted as the primary method for fulfilling the demands of fire safety in the reconstruction of Chicago, both within buildings themselves and in the party walls separating individual structures along lot lines. But here two demands hit against each other. The financial incentives governing the city's breakneck rebuilding - the maximum return of investment to recoup the considerable costs of construction
-	led naturally to the demand for buildings that were larger, higher, and sturdier than those that had existed pre-fire.
But the available materials had their limits. At 16 stories, Burnham's Monadnock Building of 1893 achieved the extreme of the loadbearing masonry wall - its thick walls made interior spaces claustrophobic, and the mass of its exterior walls sunk the building two feet under their own weight.
To go taller, structures had to go lighter and still be fireproofed. And the city's decision to mandate the protection of the ferrous column would lead to one monumental side effect: the liberation of the wall from gravity.
patent
PAGE 50
MEGALOMANIA
In the wake of Chicago's destruction and its opportunistic, haphazard reconstruction - catalyzed by the demands of insurance underwriters -the city's aspirations to become one of the continent's great cities was stymied by its reputation as a provincial hinterland. Planned as Chicago's coming-out as a global city, the World's Columbian Exposition of 1893 was designed to present a new image of the fresh-faced city on a global stage. It would also help to rewrite the rules of civic architecture in the age of the big building.
Led by Chicago's preeminent post-fire architect, D.H. Burnham, the building committee for the Exposition placated the egos of the architectural taste-makers of the East Coast establishment (Richard Morris Hunt and McKim,
Mead, and White) by giving them carte blanche over their commissions, inciting a nearly megalomaniacal scale of building projects. The exteriors of the Exposition's 'palaces' tended toward academic neoclassicism (due to the influence of Beaux-arts education on the American architectural establishment), concealing the cheap, componentized technology of rapid construction in the frontier behind confections of a gypsum-and-jute representation of Eternal Rome.
In the shadow of warehouses-dressed-as-Roman Baths, an array of international pavilions and spectacles confronted visitors with the exotic and strange.
The act of showcasing other civilizations (Egyptian, Algerian, Japanese, and so on) provided a kind of idea book for the enterprising visitors of the new nation. The Ho-o-Den Japanese pavilion's Heian-period sliding screens and flexible configuration influenced architects struggling to deal with the unprecedented scale of the Giant Building, including a young Frank Lloyd Wright.
But of all the materials and components competing for attention at the Exposition
-	steel trusses, electric lighting, landscape - lowly plaster quietly emerged
as the victor. Realizing the impossibility of building the exposition palaces in real stone, Burnham mandated the use of staff - a mixture of gypsum plaster and jute applied to a timber substructure - as the cladding for all of the buildings designed for the main exposition grounds. Selected for its plasticity and ease of construction, the extent to which plaster was used here as a finish material was unprecedented.
Once again, and as if to prove its original thesis on the proper material for the lightweight wall, fire intervened. A July 12 blaze in the Cold Storage building
-	one of the sole wood-frame buildings at the Expo - created a perfect advertisement for protected structures. That the remaining plaster-clad buildings weren't actually fireproof was of little consequence: the image of a charred wooden building photographed amid a sea of pristine white was a perfect illustration of plaster's utility.
1891 The architectural team of the World's Columbian Exposition meets in the office of D.H. Burnham.

1893 Administration Building, Richard Morris Hunt. The Exposition pavilions are built cheaply of wood framing covered with a plaster and jute material known as staff.
PAGE 51
1892 Wall construction at the Palace of Electricity, courtesy the Art Institute of Chicago. Burnham's specification of staff rather than stone for the walls of Exposition buildings permitted promiscuous amounts of cheaply modeled ornament - and a layer of fire resistance.
Partial collapse of George B. Post's Manufacturers and Liberal Arts Building after a storm reveals the flimsy construction of its walls.
a coating of staff...
PAGE 52	WALL
COMPARTMENTS
Beyond the fair's gates, the fantasy of an accelerated scale of building took root in the city's blocks. Before the Exposition, a cultural inferiority complex led to the competition for an auditorium meant to best the Metropolitan Opera House in New York by 1,200 seats (though without a deep patrician class in the city, a 400-room hotel and office building was added to fund it). Adler and Sullivan's Auditorium building of 1890 moved the party wall indoors, swathing three separately controlled buildings under the same wrapper.
The first merchant to rebuild after the fire, Marshall Field and Company, quietly purchased the remainder of its entire city block during the late 1880s and 1890s. Beginning with a new nine-story steel-frame store on the Northeast corner of the block in 1892, Marshall Field embarked on the construction of six contiguous buildings which, by 1907, would consume its entire block behind a unified 11-story façade. Across the 11 huge floors, a rational grid of sales tables was broken only by the party walls dividing the building into its six autonomous compartments. The architect of this 73-acre retail complex:
D.H. Burnham, majordomo of gypsum.7
The Exposition grounds offered unprecedented challenges - and opportunities - to the professionals assigned to its realization. The spectacle of electrification, seen in the shadow of catastrophe, nearly halted the project on several occasions as underwriters became alarmed; some 200,000 electric bulbs alone lit the Palace of Electricity, and for its duration the exposition used three times the electricity of the entire city of Chicago. William Henry Morrill, engineer at the Palace of Electricity, saw opportunity in the paranoia of insurance regulators about this new industry. The next year, he incorporated Underwriters Laboratories (UL) to "render expert opinion concerning fire hazards and certify electrical devices."
In 1900, Morrill received an invitation to serve on the Board of the National Fire Protection Agency (NFPA), a coalition of insurance corporations who began working together to minimize their own risks via standardized regulations of insurable property.8 By 1903, UL had expanded beyond the testing of electrical devices, certifying its first building component: a tin-clad fire-rated door. A decade later, in 1913, UL tested (and NFPA approved) its first rated wall assembly: a 2x4 wood stud wall covered in gypsum wallboard panels.
SHEETROCK®: THE FIREPROOF WALLBOARD
The game-changing surface material of this first rated wall construction, which would become the ubiquitous Sheetrock, also had its roots in the World's Columbian Exhibition's plaster constructions. Inside the plaster-coated Palaces, thematically organized stalls - Fisheries, Agriculture, the Arts (Fine and Mechanical), Manufacturing, Electricity, Transportation, Horticulture - displayed a mind-blowing cacophony of commerce: canned foods, flowers, elevators, bottled water, livestock, railways... all the possibilities of the mechanized world. In the Mines and Mining building, an entire "miniature mine" presented coal from Pennsylvania, minerals from New Mexico, and green onyx from Michigan. Next to an onyx mantelpiece and specimens of raw copper, the Verde-Antique quarry of Michigan also presented a "good display of gypsum and its products, including the modern wall finish which is known under the name of Alabestine."9
More than any specific exhibit, the sheer quantity of gypsum needed to decorate the facades and rotundas of the grand warehouses of the White City forced the small gypsum mines on Chicago's suburban fringe to dramatically increase the scale and speed of their production, industrialize, and incorporate into a larger entity. The United States Gypsum Corporation (USG), founded in suburban Chicago in 1902, combined 30 regional companies - effectively
Burnham's seamless facade of the Marshall Field and Company Department Store hides the complexity of Its internal parceling; a cluster of six buildings embedded in a supersized container.
Incremental additions to the Marshall Field plot. (The cut at the center is a driveway; the buildings at each end touch again on the second floor, forming a donut.)
1906 Map of Marshall Field by the Sanborn Insurance Company. Consisting of seven contiguous buildings, the department store absorbs fire-separating party walls, which typically separate different properties, into its interior -launching an enduring system of fire area separations.
7.	Erik Larson, The Devil in the White City (Random Flouse, 2004).
8.	Casey Cavanaugh Grant, "The Birth of NFPA," www.nfpa.org/; accessed October 9, 2012.
9.	"Preparing for mining exhibits," The Chicago Daily Tribune, August 29, 1891.
PAGE 53
transforming a craft into an industry, and positioning itself to take advantage of the newfound notoriety 0f a material whose previous uses had been largely decorative. Finding speedy ways to have its products installed as the dominant wall covering in as many new buildings as possible, the company aggressively set about finding new products that responded to the accelerating speed of
construction.
It was Augustine Sackett's 1894 invention of the first successful plasterboard product - Sackett Board - that finally overcame a vexing roadblock in the standardization of the wall: the piecemeal (and laborious) process of nailing narrow wood lath strips to framing as a base for plaster. Slurried plaster panels had been attempted in the early 19th century in England, but the brittle nature of gypsum doomed these attempts. Sackett found a way to laminate kraft paper on to a plaster core, resulting in the first truly portable, and manufacturable, plasterboard panel. Sackett Board, in fact, stood for the inevitable obsolescence of plaster craft, neatly packaged into a half-inch thick, 36 x 36 inch panel.
That the sandwich of gypsum and paper had innate fireproofing qualities was of little consequence to Sackett, who took pains to leave the exact composition of the plaster mixture open in his patent, a move that would prove to be prescient as US Gypsum made the Sackett Board Company its first corporate acquisition in 1909, inserting their own product inside Sackett's sandwich. With a few minor changes (the removal of two interior layers of felt paper, and the wrapping of its edges with protective paper), Sheetrock® was born. Chicago now possessed all the elements of the future life of the partition: the new scale and expediency of the large building, the regulatory agencies that policed it, and the protective product (Sheetrock®) that made it all possible.
May 22,1894 US Patent 520,120. Sackett Board: "manufactured and delivered in condition to be immediately fastened in place by nailing it to the studding of the walls or partitions of a house ... sufficiently stiff and rigid to form a firm wall surface, sufficiently strong to resist the effect of any ordinary blows or concussions ... sufficiently soft to admit of nails being driven through it, and sufficiently tough and tenacious to prevent its cracking when in place on the wall."
1913 Underwriters' Laboratories standardizes the wall with the one-hour rated fire partition: 1. Hard board paneling-mlneral and fiber boards,
2. Wallboard, gypsum, 3. Batts and blankets, 4. Wallboard, gypsum,
5. Nallheads, 6. joints.
PAGE 54
LANGUAGE OF THE WALL
The sculptural flourish of an 18th century parlor wall, and Its precise linguistic accompaniment, is replaced by the stripped-down jargon of the partition...
1756 Diderot and d'Alembert's Encyclopedia glosses the nuances of the panelled wall.
niche
chair rail
_dado
base
moulding
masonry
backup
wall
WALL
PAGE 55
..a terminology in denial ...the terms and words of architecture have not funda-mentally changed but the techniques and methods have, utterly...
plate
wood
stud
cavity
gypsum wallboard (layer 1)
gypsum
wallboard
(layer 2)

paneling
2008 Underwriters Laboratories Inc., Directory. Design #322, Bearing Wall Rating - 2 HR Finish Rating - 66 Min.
PAGE 56
ALL THAT IS SOLID MELTS INTO AIR
Over a century of radical internal transformation, the walls of John Soane's Bank of England multiply, reconfigure, and eventually yield to create ever-larger spaces. The advent of the light-weight interior partition accelerates the process. For an exhibition space like Venice's Central Pavilion, flimsiness is a feature, not a flaw.
1732-1833 BANK OF ENGLAND, LONDON
The bank's plan becomes increasingly complex as the building expands to deal with the demands of the modern state. Various architects, concluding with Sir John Soane, resolve the bank's voracious demand for space by knocking open connections between adjacent building projects: walls built for permanence prove to be transient...
1830 An Imagined View of the Bank of England in Ruins: Joseph Gandy, Soane's draughtsman, depicts the climax of its 45-year expansion as a cut-away ruin. The vision proves somewhat prophetic: 80 years later the structure's interiors are demolished, leaving only the facades.
WALL
PAGE 57
1846-2013 CENTRAL PAVILION, VENICE
Partition changes in the Central Pavilion of the Venice Biennale: following a craze for more intimate compartments in the 1950s (and a tolerance for corridors), in the second half of the 20th century, the plan relentlessly opens up, creating ever-larger galleries for ever-larger art. At the same time though the poché - the space between the temporary partition and the brick load bearing wall - gets ever-fatter...
2013 Accumulation of extensions. Above: Overlay of every configuration of spaces inside the Venice Biennale's Central Pavilion.
PAGE 58 OPENING UP
WALL
At the turn of the century, there is an all-out assault on the interior wall, transporting the architectural ideal from AJ. Downey's cosy Victorian boxes to Frank Lloyd Wright's loose-limbed open plan and Adolf Loos's permeable "Raumplan." The expansion of interior space - and with it, the demise of the wall - is made possible by technology: central heating means rooms are no longer limited by the strength of a fireplace; electricity means you don't have to be so close to windows; new construction materials allow for ever-increasing spans.
The stuffiness of Victorian society yields to more informal domestic configurations, resulting in the need for more flexible spatial arrangement.
1856 Cosey Victorian boxes: “Cottage Residences; or, A Series of Designs for rural cottages and cottage villas, and their gardens and grounds adapted to North America," by AJ. Downing.
"Dwellings of that period were 'cut-up,' advisedly and completely, with the grim determination that should go with any cutting process. The 'interiors' consisted of boxes beside or inside other boxes, called rooms. All boxes inside a complicated boxing. Each domestic 'function' was properly box to box. I could see little sense in this inhibition, this cellular sequestration that implied ancestors familiar with the cells of penal institutions, except for the privacy of bedrooms on the upper floor. They were perhaps all right as 'sleeping boxes.' So I declared the whole lower floor as one room, cutting off the kitchen as a laboratory, putting servants' sleeping and living quarters next to it, semi-detached, on the ground floor, screening various portions in the big room, for certain domestic purposes - like dining or reading, or receiving a formal caller. There were no plans like these in existence at the time."
— Frank Lloyd Wright, "The New House on the Prairie" (ca. 1950).
first floor
ground
floor
1908-10 Roble House, Chicago Frank Lloyd Wright.
.the house deconstructed?.
^ — ! —	1     !•-     A OrnPiOP. IN THE Rvoi im no liiisii Huruip Stvi e
WALL
PAGE 59


1930 Villa Müller, Prague, Adolf Loos: exterior ornament scorned; decorative interior embraced.
1930 As an idea of liberated interior space, Loos's "Raumplan," as exectured in the Villa Müller, is distinct from the "open plan." Instead of typical pancake-like floors, the Raumplan offers stepped architectural sections and adjacent volumes of differing sizes.
"My architecture is not conceived in plans, but in spaces (cubes). I do not design floor plans, facades, sections.
I design spaces. For me, there is no ground floor, first floor etc... For me, there are only contiguous, continual spaces, rooms, anterooms, terraces etc. Storeys merge and spaces relate to each other. Every space requires a different height: the dining room is surely higher than the pantry, thus the ceilings are set at different levels. To join these spaces in such a way that the rise and fall are not only unobservable but also practical, in this I see what is for others the great secret, although it is for me a great matter of course. Coming back to your question, it is just this spatial interaction and spatial austerity that thus far I have best been able to realize in Dr. Muller's house."
—Adolf Loos (1930).
...did flimsier techniques
liberate architecture
and enable 'life' to be
imagined
more fluidly...
PAGE 60
GUTTING THE WHITE HOUSE
Groaning under the demands of modern use and generations of haphazard additions, the White House, built in 1800, is declared structurally unsound in 1948.
The facade is preserved; the insides gutted. The so-called Truman Reconstruction strips back walls to their bare frames in order to embed new plumbing, electrical, and climate systems, to reinforce with steel coumns and concrete, and finally to apply grandiose panneling to preserve a historic veneer.
"Truman Family May Use Blair House for Year: Major Repairs Slated for White House"
Chicago Daily Tribune, 1948.
"Building inspectors have denounced the 132 year old White House as a 'fire trap' and hazard to the safety of the President and his family. According to Public Buildings Commissioner Wililam E. Reynolds, the structure is standing up only by habit. The walls are shaky, the floors creaky, and it moans and groans during the night from the burdens and infirmities of old age. Recently, it was discovered that the brick tiers supporting the main staircase, erected in 1880, consisted merely of stacked bricks without cement.''
Layers of embedded construction: original brick arches above doors, with horizontal brickwork below added at a later date.
1950 North portico of the White House is undermined in order to be reinforced.
Exposed studding dating from 1815-1818.
Bathroom B-14, where a load-bearing brick wall was found to have been weakened by a previously installed water pipe.
Electrical panel and conduits, second floor.
A formerly load-bearing brick wall to be replaced with steel columns.
...the White House as set, since 1948 already...
PAGE 61
POCHE AND POLITICS
-j-^e White House renovation exposes the drama of the wall's hidden interior. Buried histories emerge, and the toll taken by previous adventures beneath the surface becomes clear. as the the mise-en-scene is eviscerated, renewed and re-installed, for a fleeting moment the buried circuitry that makes the walls function as a set for modern political actors is D0Sed, before being encased once more.
DURING	ACTCO

East Room Constructing solid brick chimney (left)...
State Dining Room Only wooden frames of walls remain...
...to be reinforced and replastered (with air vent above door).
...as anchor point for new wall.
...decorative panneling installed.
PAGE 62 SOUND
The design of space for acoustic functioning is hardly a concern limited to the modern period: Vitruvius made recommendations for both theaters and senate houses. But it is not until the industrial era that "architectural acoustics" is born as a discrete discipline in the work of Wallace Clement Sabine in Boston...
1656 Whispering gallery: Gol Gumbaz, the mausoleum of Mohammed Adil Shah, Sultan of Bljapur, In Bljapur, India, by the architect Yaqut of Dabul. Hushed voices can be heard aywhere along the curve, due to the strategic reflection of sound.
speech
...as walls become insubstantia acoustic insulation becomes a science..

vs. hearing
1673 Athanasius Klrcher analyzes the reflection of sound through multiple walls In his treatise Phonurgia Nova.
1895 Fogg Lecture Room, Boston. Designed to emulate classical Greek acoustic specifications as explained later by Vitruvius, the lecture hall of Harvard’s Fogg Art Museum Is deemed unusable shortly after being dedicated. Tasked with fixing the problem, Wallace Clement Sabine gives birth to a new field, "architectural acoustics."
THE PROBLEM OF SOUND DECAY
"In his paper entitled 'Architectural Acoustics,' presented at the annual convention of the American Institute of Architects on 2 November 1898, Sabine opened with a concise summation of the conditions for good hearing. We can only guess how much time he spent in research of reference material, and in carrying out his own investigations to derive three simple yet precise criteria for good hearing, 'the greatest loudness ... proportional loudness of all component notes, and the greatest distinction of successive enunciations,' and the disarmingly simple observation that the only two acoustical variables in a room are shape, including size, and materials, including furnishings.
Preliminary evaluation of the Fogg Lecture room began with an assessment of the length of time that a sound persisted in the unoccupied space after the source had stopped. Sabine's description of the relation of sound decay to intelligibility of speech is profound in its simplicity: 'a word spoken in an ordinary tone of voice was audible for five and a half seconds afterwards... the successive enunciations blended into a loud sound, through which and above which it was necessary to hear and distinguish the orderly progression of the speech.' Many other spaces were studied and compared to the Fogg lecture room, and the effect of an audience on the decay of sound was established in qualitative terms.
This set the stage for quantitative evaluation of the 'sound absorbing power' of various material."
—William 3. Cavannaugh, "Introduction to Architectural Acoustics and Basic Principles," Architectural Acoustics: Principles and Practice (2010), 48.
Wallace Clement Sabine (1868-1919)
WALL
PAGE 63
1946 Leo Beranek and Harvey Sleeper at Harvard's Cruft
Laboratory identify
the optimal geometric wall surface for the complete elimination of sound transmission. The result Is a new kind of room: the "anechoic chamber.
"As co-isolator, the party wall Is responsible for the fact that those insulated against one another often do not achieve adequate acoustic immunity. In a social foam, the island effect that every cell claims for itself is thwarted by the density of the stacked cells. Unwelcome communication is the result. Based on this observation, the more recent architecture of apartment buildings has recognized the task of keeping the stress of the co-existence of 'connected isolation' units as low as possible.
When this is not resolved, apartment buildings often prove themselves to be hotbeds of social pathologies."
—Peter Sloterdijk, "Cell Block, Egospheres, Self-Container: The Apartment as a Co-isolated Existence," Log 10 (2007).
2008 Acoustic panelling system by the brand Topakustik.
I 2007 Oslo Opera
■	House, Snohetta:
■	an example of i contemporary
F acoustic panelling.
PAGE 64
HEAT
The earliest known use of asbestos for insulation is in Finnish log cabins, three millennia ago (David Bozsaky, "The historical development of thermal insulation materials," Periodica Polytechnica (2010), 51). As with sound, industrialization creates new dilemmas: the challenges of thermal retention comes into sharpened focus, both because of the increased thermal output of technological society, and because light-frame construction is less naturally insulated, a fact pointed out by Reyner Banham in his analysis of the American balloon-frame house. The late 1800s sees an explosion of ideas for insulated panels, starting with natural materials like reed, cork, and flax, but evolving in more exotic directions in the quest for thermal control...

			
Period of time	causes of change	Changes	Insulation materials
2.5 mill - 7000BC	nomadic lifestyle	materials for clothing	animal skins, fur, wool
7000BC - 1870AD	settled lifestyle	durable materials vegetable fibres	earth, wood, bricks straw, eelgrass, reed
1870-1950	industrial revolution calculations about heat loss	first natural insulating products	reed, cork, wood wool and flax plates, cellulose insulation
		development of bricklaying elements	ash-filled bricks, hollow bricks, AAC
			first products of artificial insulation materials	asbestos, rock wool, fiberglass, foam glass, dross, expanded clay and perlite
1950 -2000	spread of plastics	spread of artificial materials apperance of plastis foams nearly disappearance of natural materials	polystyrene, polyurethane, polyester, polyethylene, phenolic, formaldehyde and melamin foam
	CO2 emission exhausting fossil fuels climate change global warming	revival of the natural materials experiments with new materials	cellulose insulation, cork, straw bale, wood wool, sheep wool transparent thermal insulation, swichable thermal insulation, nanocellular insulation, vacuum insulation panels
2010 History of Insulation (Bozsaky, "The historical development of thermal insulation materials.")
PAGE 65
2008 Renzo Piano's California Academy of Sciences goes blue for its insulation: San Francisco denim giant Levi Strauss donates 200,000 pairs of old jeans to insulate the building.
2013 While home owners typically try to keep fungus out of their walls, a new form of Insulation material is mushroom-based: New York company Ecovative proposes organic insulation grown from mycelium, the thread-like roots of mushrooms. Nurtured on farm waste, they form a Styrophome-like substance. The scheme wins the 2013 Buckminster Fuller Challenge award. Sealed Air, the makers of bubble-wrap, already sell Ecovative's mushroom-based packaging material.
2013 Tiny House, with Grow-ln-Place mushroom insulation: "Ecovative offers options to build from our ready-made kits or from your own construction plans. Mushroom Insulation binds together after being packed into wall cavities, resulting in air-sealed thermal and acoustic insulation."
2008 The latest in thermal-retentive fashion: batt insulation, made from recycled denim.
PAGE 66
THE TOILET STALL
Because of the contradictory demands on the public toilet as a space at once accessible and private - as well as the need to maintain the possibility of getting at the plumbing without hacking into solid walls - the room incites an upwelling of ingenuity in light-weight partition design.
privacy
private
Sept. 30 . 1924.	1,509,845
S. S. ROBY TOILET PARTITION Filed Jan. 6. 1923
March 29, 1966	P. E. parsons	3,242,619
TOILET COMPARTMENT
Filed May 2, 1962	3 Sheets-Sheet *
r/a.3
r/a.4
Fig. 6
INVENTOR.
P£A£C£ £. PAZSOAtS

1919 High off the ground: C.A. Betz's "Toilet Partition" features stalls with doors that offer only minimal privacy. "The invention is a novel sheet metal construction for toilet partitions or compartments... The invention requires few and simple elements, and makes use largely of common commercial metal forms."
1924 False wall: S.S. Roby's "Toilet Partition" seeks to conceal piping at the rear of the stall. Roby designs "an improved form of metallic toilet compartment having a back partition provided with a removable section to permit access to the piping and vent space in the rear of said compartment."
1966 Column free: P. E. Parsons's "Toilet Compartment" provides a system "whereby the partitions and stiles or pilasters are supported solely by the wall of the room, thus contributing to better sanitary conditions with a minimum amount of cleaning time labor."
minimal minimal of clean
STANDARDS OF PRIVACY
NORTH AMERICA (TYPICAL):
Partial-height partition with partial-height door
NORTH AMERICA (OBSOLETE):
Floor-to-ceiling partition with partial-height door
EUROPE/ASIA:
Individual compartment with full-height door
WALL
PAGE 67
tHe wet wall
In plan, the restroom often includes both the thickest and the thinnest walls in a building.
The thinnest is the toilet partition. The thickest -and one of the most immovable - is the wet wall, an assembly that places two false walls ar0und a void containing the risers, pipes, and controls for the wall-hung toilet.
2010 Floor Plan, Public Restrooms, Saint Louis County Municipal Complex, Carlo Licea.
Added to the false ceiling and the false floor, we are increasingly comfortable with the knowledge that walls are also false-a relatively thin layer behind which various systems are hidden.
The shock of seeing the false wall sliced open is the confrontation with the fact that walls -which we prefer to consider as two dimensional surfaces - must always be made of something, and that something is puny and chaotic...
1934 G.W. Haire's "Plumbing Installation" patent calls for pipes and flushing mechanism to be hidden inside the wall for a clean external finish.
fetonomy
Ivs.
privacy
PAGE 68
SACRED PARTITIONS
The so-called Akron Plan, developed for the First Methodist Congregation in Akron, Ohio in 1867, makes pioneering use of partitioning to create individual Sunday School classrooms while maintaining visual contact with the superintendent's central platform. Bishop John H. Vincent's ideal Sunday School room would thus "provide for togetherness and separateness," and "have a room in which the whole school can be brought together in a moment for simultaneous exercises, and with a minimum of movement be divided into classes for uninterrupted classwork."
1914 Original Akron Plan, main and balcony floor, G. W. Kramer.
"It has been stated that three-fourths of the churches during the last fifty years, making special provisions for their Sunday schools, have used the Akron plan in some form. The essential features of the original plan were a semicircular auditorium with a balcony; the space under the balcony was divided into classrooms, the front of each being open so that all could see the superintendent's platform; a similar series of classrooms in the balcony provided further facilities for privacy. A row of seats made it possible for all in the balcony to see the superintendent also." — Herbert Francis Evans, The Sunday-School Building and Its Equipment (1918), 155.

Contemporary Reform Synagogues offer another spin on sacred partitioning: to deal with the drastic fluctuations between weekly Shabbat and the High Holidays, mobile screens are employed. Social Halls, spaces for meetings and community events, become a part of worship space with the opening of a movable partition.
2006 B'nai Israel Synagogue, HGA Architects.
Marvel Architects.
2010 Brave new world: operable partition, Hilton Garden Inn, Quebec.
1969 "Folding Partitions" by C.W. Edgerton, featuring rollers and spring-action hinges, can be compressed, concertina-style, into a small space when not in use. Rooms can now change in size and leave almost no trace of their transformation.
the irony of flexible space
- and space that can be divided 
- is 
that the
 resulting compartments are typically inefficient
and architecturally implausible, with appalling proportions...
MOVABLE partitions
As architects and building occupants adapt to the indeterminate space of the open plan office, user-controlled artition products such as accordion screens and foldable panels flood the marketplace. The folding partition, tentecj by Modernfold Industries ¡n 1969, redefines schools, conference centers, offices, gymnasia, and other multifunctional rooms.
PAGE 70
TRANSLUCENT CONCRETE
Crystaline transparency is the holy grail of contemporary light-filled interiors, a pursuit that no longer rests with glass: concrete too now attempts to transmit light, via embedded fiber optics. The idea of non-opaque concrete is first mentioned in a 1935 European patent application by one Bernard Long for a "Light transmitting concrete structure." Brands on the market today include LiTraCon, Lucem, and Luccon - the revolution seemingly limited, for now, to office decoration and boutiques.
2011 Lucem, one of several translucent concrete brands. Light-transmitting fibre optics embedded in concrete convert the most opaque, implacable material for walls into a ghostly translucent mass, through which objects appear as silhouettes.

WALL
PRINTED I
3D printing promises a new stage: the wall becomes a customizable, renewable sculptural accessory. Paris-based designers François Brument and Sonia Laugier develop a prototype room divider, 3D printed in blocks that can be assembled on site. The designers boast that it's "like a big Lego that you can build by yourself inside your home" and that "Everything is parametric ... if you change the width of the shower blocks, the shower floor will automatically adjust."
(Quoted in Mason Currey, 'This 3D Printed Room Divider Is Also A Bookshelf, Closet... And Shower," Metropolis, April 2013.)
...will printing fundamentally change architecture from a discipline that enables into a service that follows?...
PAGE 71
2013 Printed Habita t/L'habitat imprimé: DIY walls incorporate built-in bookshelves, a small closet and changing area, even a shower stall.
...will we be able to handle so much self-similarity...
PAGE 72
MAN THEN MACHINE
The present catches up with the past: in the 1950s, Austrian sculptor Erwin Hauer's rippling screens of repeated patterns are a form of parametricism avant la lettre, but are very difficult to produce. In 2004, the artist teams up with former pupil Enrique Rosado to form Erwin Hauer Studios: once mind-bendingly complex to produce and associated with jet-age futurism, Hauer's screens can now be CNC-milled with relative ease.
wall as art art as wall
2010 Erwin Hauer at work. Business partner Enrique Rosado explains their new enterprise: "The big challenge is forcing the software to do what you want to do. Because it doesn't want to do what you want to do. It wants to do what the engineers have decided. And they're not aesthetic - or they don't know what Erwin's aesthetic is." (Quoted in Laura Collins-Hughes, "Sculpting the shape, seeing the light," Boston Globe, November 14, 2010.)
1950 "Design 1," made of cast hydrostone, on display in a Knoll showroom, Mexico City.
WALL
PAGE 73
2006 "Design 201," a 21st-century update of "Design 1," made with CNC milling, installed In a chalet in Zurich.
PAGE 74
WALL
ULTIMATE FLEXIBILITY
Under the intense pressures of limited urban living space - and the enduring desire for infinite flexibility - Hong Kong architect Gary Chang executes a design for an apartment with 24 possible configurations, based on different activities - a contemporary exaggerated version of the movable and openable walls of Rietveld's 1924 Schröder House.
WALL
PAGE 75

2010 Chang demonstrates the use of his sofa bed and moving bathroom wall, a system In which architecture has to be manually shifted before every domestic task.
PAGE 76 WALLPAPER
Embraced by the rising middle classes as an affordable substitute for tapestries and other forms of aristocratic decoration, wallpaper becomes wildly popular in 19th-century Europe. Generally imitative in character and always with a repeating pattern, it later assumes an enduring association with kitsch, though it has been connected with revolutionary aspirations.
William Morris saw in the decorative arts a way to recover a sense of organic beauty lost in Britain's breakneck industrial expansion, with wallpaper a democratic vehicle to attempt this goal. In the 20th century, modernism and its shadow, minimalism, demands bare walls -though technology frantically invents new uses for wallpaper...
18th century Hand-painted Chinese wallpaper, Chippendale House, Leeds. Intricate "export wallpapers" are crafted in China specifically for the British market, feeding the 18th century's rapacious fashion for Chinoiserie.
"Whatever you have in your rooms think first of the walls for they are that which makes your house and home, and if you do not make some sacrifices in their favor you will find your chambers have a kind of makeshift, lodging-house look about them, however rich and handsome your movables may be."
— William Morris, 'The Lesser Arts of Life" (1882).
1929 Bauhaus Wallpaper, tosef Albers. In its Dessau incarnation, the Bauhaus Is tasked with applying its design principles to mass industry in order to justify its existence to government authorities; wallpaper proves to be its most popular product.
1892 Blackthorn wallpaper, William Morris. Machine-printed and mass-produced, the British Arts & Crafts guru's wallpaper relmaglned what it was capable of with his elegant sense of pattern. Though charged with a socialist-infused zeal to democratize the beautiful, Morris's wallpapers proved too expensive for most.
WALL

PAGE 77
2013 WiFi- and phone signal-blocking wallpaper, made by La Centre Technique du Papier and the Grenoble Institute of Technology, Its main application Is to boost the security of online activities like banking; it may also be of use to those unlucky few made ill by radiation from WiFi and cell signals.

2014 Total immersion: Madrid-based Think Big Factory proposes Openarch, a system of wallpaper that transforms the wall surface into a touch screen.
The metaphor of the Facebook wall becomes actual.
PAGE 78
WALL
ARTIST'S WALLS / GALLERY WALLS
Museums and galleries present a special design case: interior walls are rendered especially mutable by the demands of visual art's perpetually transforming scenography, leading to a peculiar kind of subarchitecture nested within the museum's main architecture.
Cameron Zebrun, director of program services at the Walker Art Center in Minneapolis, is responsible for the construction and adaptation of the museum's galleries - originally designed by Edward Larrabee Barnes (1971) and later by Herzog & de Meuron (2006) - for rotating and permanent exhibitions. Here, he answers questions posed by Nicholas Potts.
*2010 Thomas Hirschhorn, Cavemanman, Walker Art Center.
2007 Keith Edmier, Brementowne, Walker Art Center.
NP Do you have an architect on the staff at the Walker who can help you with larger installations or exhibitions?
CZ The curators and the visual arts department design the exhibitions here. My staff helps them with ADA requirements and safety issues for the visitors and the art; we help them with practical matters they may not be aware of while doing an installation. For instance, if the doorways are too small to get the crates in...
NP Due to the temporary nature of the exhibitions, do you get any leeway as far as meeting some of the stringent requirements that architects face when we want to build a wall?
CZ We only approach the city or the fire department if we're building something in the gallery that could create too much distance from the corner of the room to the fire exit, or if we're building an installation that's entirely out of cardboard or packing tape* - that sort of thing. We approach them when there is a question about fire safety. As far as building codes are concerned we never, ever approach the city for our temporary exhibitions. NP Do you find yourself reusing or repurposing materials that you've used in previous exhibitions, or is each one a new build with fresh inventory - sheetrock, framing, etc.? CZ We never recycle sheetrock. But the studs we probably use for three projects, because all the architecture in our galleries is standardized; it's all the same thickness of wall unless an artwork calls for something thicker. We generally don't back our walls
with plywood unless we need to for works of art that that are really heavy, or we're doing something like a salon-style installation, that sort of thing.
We generally recycle plywood, studs, and plates, but never sheetrock.
NP Does the construction for new exhibitions take place in the galleries themselves or do you do some of the fabrication offsite, or in a shop, and bring modules into place to avoid disrupting other exhibitions in the galleries?
CZ With new construction, everything happens in the gallery. Our curatorial staff are now required to look at the existing architecture in the gallery and see what they can use or reuse in their show, in order to minimize the amount of construction. About 10 years ago, everything was a complete teardown, and [there was] new architecture for every show. Now we've been recycling parts of the architecture that existed in the gallery before.
NP Is there a regular schedule for the renewal of the permanent walls, so they don't get totally trashed or worn out?
CZ If there's existing architecture that needs to be reinforced, then we just strip off the sheetrock and add a layer of plywood to the existing studs and put new rock on. Our wall system is really simple here.
NP Can you tell me what that system is built of: how many layers of sheetrock, and the dimension of pieces? CZ It's generally 20-gauge, 2x6 studs, and 5/8" sheetrock, and, when we need it, V2" plywood.
WALL
PAGE 79
1978 Restoration ot the Henry Trippe House period room at the Brooklyn Museum.
1973 Bronx Floor Four Ways, Gordon Matta-Clark: "What fascinated me was the interior central plan. The act of cutting through from one space to another produces a certain complexity involving depth perception. Aspects of stratification probably interest me more than the unexpected views which are generated by the removals - not the surface, but the thin edge, the severed surface that reveals the autobiographical process of its making."
—Gordon Matta-Clark's Building Dissections: An interview with Donald Wall," Arts Magazine (May 1976) 74-79.
2010 Art Basel in Miami Beach. The light-weight mobile wall, by now a disdained symbol of cheapness and transience elsewhere, finds its apotheosis as a surface for the most exalted luxury product: art.
The art fair booth may even usurp the slightly more solid white wall of the gallery.
2008	Artist Michael Asher rebuilds the metal stud walls of all temporary partitions assembled within the galleries of the Santa Monica Museum of Art between 1998 and 2002.
PAGE 80
THE FOURTH WALL
The notion of the fourth wall, referring to the invisible plane separating stage and audience in the theater, was first described by French philosopher Denis Diderot, one of the authors of the Encyclopédie:
"When you write or act, think no more of the audience than if it had never existed. Imagine a huge wall across the front of the stage, separating you from the audience, and behave exactly as if the curtain had never risen."
— Denis Diderot, 1758.
1781 Etienne-Louis Boulée's section of a proposed Opéra Carrousel divides the entire building in half, with the fourth wall as the pivot point.
1650/2008 Operatic realism: sets for Franco Zeffirelli's Tosca at the Metropolitan Opera in New York are both a fantastically faithful recreation of the Sant' Andrea della Valle (above), and an impossible amalgamation of perspectives and details, warping walls and shifting a major column next to the altar to fit the church's most famous features into a single view.
PAGE 81
2009	Setting up for a special Seinfeld reunion episode on Curb Your Enthusiasm. The original set walls are obtained from the Warner Brothers archives and re-assembled.
2010	Artist Inaki Aliste Lizarralde's fantasy floor plan of Derry Seinfeld's apartment, and other sitcom sets, try to crack the architectural puzzle of how virtual spaces would fit together in real space. 90-degree corners are often avoided, so nothing is hidden from the camera, and 45-degree entrances are the norm.
PAGE 82
1927 Curtain wall: compensating for the unwalled Interior, hanging fabric partitions, made with Lilly Reich, for "Die Mode der Dame" (Women's Fashion) exhibition at Cafe'
Samt und Seide, Berlin.
1954 Mies's office while working on Seagram, described by Phyllis Lambert:
"Beyond an enclosed conference room at one end near the entrance and an enclosed model shop at the other end, the office was essentially one large room. A few small, boxlike semiprivate offices were aligned along the outer wall of the building, one cubicle each for Mies and Philip, and one for me, as I had chosen to set up my office with the architects. Lying another structure, the windows of the outer wall ed by iron grating. Philip masked them with oerglass sheets covered with fishnet. On the advice nsultant Richard Kelly, lights installed between s and the window wall gave off a pleasant glow, le oak partitions six or seven feet high forming our wall was the only element of luxury in the lofty hat measured about fifty feet in length by twenty-idth, with ten-foot-high ceilings."
ct that Mies was a stonemason used to explain his exceptional with matter. A wall, a core, n are usually solid in Mies. But ical is it to assume that the craft er begets solidity in the son? You so interpret this background as inning of an aversion to matter in le best in Mies transcends matte #-» *—-— _i— -mptiness are his more repertoire that may be jnal protest. Mies lusted a dialectic of lis European villas, n to the States in 1937 h a new challenge, les of its materiality are ¡ally by the definitive
I, between container articulated by materials! , the second by infinite iieetrock. The Seagram totype of this dialectic ravertine core define between them...
MIES AND THE WALL
Almost any random sampling of Miesian memorabilia yields deeply ambivalent attitudes towards the wall, long before Seagram: steadfastness, total openness, softness, the paper-thin, the luminous...
"I must have a wall behind me."
— Mies, upon setting up his office in Chicago. (Barry Bergdoll, "The Nature of Mies's Space" in Mies in Berlin). For an architect so dedicated to the open space, Mies apparently only feels comfortable backed up by walls, a proclivity sketched by his assistant architect Sergius Ruegenberg.
1942 Two-dimensional walls: Mies's Concert Hall Project for Architectural Forum's feature on the American "town of the future." Mies takes an aircraft assembly plant built by Albert Kahn in Maryland in 1937, the largest ever open-span structure (used for building planes for the war), as the setting for the imposition of substance-less walls + ceiling, seemingly lowered into place temporarily, creating an arena for culture.
PAGE 83
»[Concrete, steel, and glass] are genuine building elements ... "new building art. They Permit a measure
0{ freedom ... that
we will not relinquish any more. Only now can we articulate space freely, open it op and connect it to the landscape." _Mles, 1933.
SEAGRAM: METABOLISM OF A MONUMENT
1	INTERIOR VS. EXTERIOR
Solid on the outside, the Seagram building is designed for constant manipulation on the inside. The enabler of the large multi-tenant building type - of which Seagram is a pioneer - and a solution to the increasingly bespoke workspaces demanded by 20th-century corporations is the partition wall, offering both guaranteed fireproofing and the promise of endless flexibility. This new breed of wall, liberated from its former load bearing burdens, is also a symptom of a new partitioning of architectural practice into core and shell - a division manifest in Seagram between Mies, responsible for the exterior - the monumental, structural, and aesthetic calculations - and Philip Johnson, responsible for key enclaves within the interior, and an overall palette that would be later manipulated by a parade of tenants over the decades.
The role of the partition wall in catalysing Seagram's interior metabolism intensifies after the rewriting of tax codes in the 1960s, giving businesses tax breaks on the cost of replacing interior walls after 10 years, whereas costs associated with maintaining the exterior envelope of their building could only be written off over a period of 40 years.
no walls
Changeable interiors: in the upper left, an open plan; upper right, a semi-partitioned office/ meeting space; down in the lobby: total transparency. Illustrated for Helmut Dacoby's "Special Report on 375 Park Avenue,"
New York Vmes, April 7, 1957.
Peter Smithson spots the internal/external divide of Seagram:
"What faults it has seem to start behind the external skin. One is worried by an arbitrariness in the relationship between the supporting columns and the mullions seen from the outside, and in the inside they are clumsy in the office spaces. The inside spaces are fine when they are simple and one can see the outside, but none of the suites of rooms which have been specially designed seem to have any relationship with the fundamental organization of the building, or to utilize the potential relationship between the outside space and the views. It may be that a Mies building can only really have one sort of internal space."
—Progressive Architecture, June 1959
PAGE 84
WALL
2	INTERIOR PALETTE
For the Duly 1958 issue, Architectural Forum creates a users manual to the Seagram Building, describing in intricate detail the palette of interior design, along with the measures taken to preserve tidiness on the outside. Seagram is "a half-million-square-foot laboratory in which new and special office designs are being tested in actual use."
Rigorous control of the facade extends to shading options.
2. Controlled Venetian blinds were specially designed to stop in only three positions: all the way up, all the way down, and at half mast. The angle of the slats is fixed at 45 degrees to let pedestrians get full impact of lit-up building at night. These controls produce facade patterns that always look neat.
INTERIOR PALETTE:
Seamlessness: doors as tall as walls.
Washable wall panels, with space for wires.
Travertine-clad partition walls modules in the toilets line up with illuminated ceiling modules.
3.	Floor-to-ceiling doors (far left) added nothing to the cost of each opening, made doors look like integral part of paneling, hence gave interiors greater unity. This corridor is part of Seagram’s executive suite.
4.	Floor-to-ceiling partitions (near left) are stock units reworked for Seagram by the architects. Greatly simplified in detail, partitions have reveals at panel joints, recessed wiring chases behind baseboards, specially designed doorknobs and hinges, and continuous tubular rubber stops around door frames. Panels were finished with many different materials, all washable. The system is now standard with its manufacturer.
5.	Floor-to-ceiling travertine slabs (far left) divide washroom on Seagram's special executive floor. Orderly appearance was achieved in part by use of ceiling grid as module for partitions. All fixtures in all washrooms were specially designed, including pipe-connections at lavatories and toilets.
6.	Floor -to - ceiling elevator doors reveal interior of cab lined with panels of stainless steel and bronze me-sh designed for Seagram in a cartridge-belt pattern. These metal panels are removable, easily maintained (because they do not show scratches), reflect light from luminous ceiling above. Elevators are of the electronic brain type, which adjusts to changing loads at different times of day, eliminates need for elevator operators.
73
WALL
PAGE 85
3	ADJUSTMENTS
The stark modernity of the interior palette - wood, travertine, plaster - is immediately augmented in executive encalves, and it only takes 15 years for Seagram's entire offices to undergo a refit, stripping away some of the wood-clad luxury...
"In New York's Seagram Building, a contemporary architectural showplace, the offices of Seagram clerks and lower- and middle-echelon executives are starkly modem. But the hierarchy at the top is housed in offices with Chippendale, Eighteenth-century satlnwood desks and an Irish hunt table, all purchased through antique dealers in London." — "Office Decor," New York Times, May 24, 1959.
1958 Meeting room: wood panneled wall,	White wall, curtain wall,
curtain wall.
1958 Seagram offices: warm wood panelled walls, ab-ex, leather chairs, ash tray.
1974 Seagram offices: white walls, Pop art, red fabric couch, exit sign.
Multiple partitions creating small single occupancy offices; illuminated ceiling replaced with generic celling closer inside.
1980 Meeting of the partition with the exterior wall: must be behind the mulllon. Article 26 Is one of the most finnlcky preservation orders In the lease agreement activated when the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America becomes the owner of the Seagram building: "Article 26... applied to the inside face of the exterior wall:
No changes could be made to the bronze frame, the air distribution enclosure, the Venetian blinds, or the way partitions meet the outside wall: they can only be located on the module line at the back of the mullions and are limited to a width of three and one half inches."
— Phyllis Lambert, Building Seagram (Yale, 2013), 216. While preserving the appearance of the building from the outside, the partition walls within shift constantly...
PAGE 86
WALL
4	FOR RENT
Floors available for rent through the Seagram building's owners, RFR real estate, over the course of 2013. Axos show the variability of wall configurations on the different levels. While the exterior of Seagram must remain frozen in time, the interior is deeply unstable, susceptible to fluctuations in the market and in taste.
27th: density between two large open spaces. 36th: huge open space + smaller offices.	38th: largest open spaces.
22nd: almost wall-less.	25th: a jog in the partition.	26th: large open spaces.
15th: hybrid conditions.	16th: near total open plan.	21st: smallest cells.
WALL
PAGE 87
Palimpsest of floors shown on facing page. Thicker lines indicate the most popular location of walls: a corridor near the elevator bank, a tangle of walls in the projecting area to the west, and smaller cubicles in the middle strip.
FOR RENT: generic spaces of Seagram, with varying wall configurations, the result of recent vacancies,
strip-outs, and fit-outs...
PAGE 88
5	GYPSUM PALACE
1990-2013 Over 467 interior rebuilding projects in the space of 23 years, the partition wall is the most powerful and inexpensive medium of the Seagram building's frantic internal metabolism, compared to the static, unmolested elements of the core and shell. Data on the cost, frequency, and location of interior refits, gleaned from the New York Department of Building's Information System, is applied here to a cost estimating formula (assuming a standard interior partition assembly of 3-5/8" studs covered in one layer of 5/8" gypsum board), in order to project the length of new walls added or reconstructed on every floor of the Seagram building between 1990 and 2013 (the DOB could not share earlier data). The data reveals a flimsy gypsum palace hidden inside a dignified, seemingly eternal container. From the calculations we can conclude:
1.	In accumulated waves of refurbishment*, many floors have changed or added the equivalent of the height of the building itself in new walls.
2.	The total surface area of all new walls far exceeds that of the current facades of the building, enough to build a tower of gypsum containing a larger volume than the real Seagram.
3.	With a thickness of 12mm for each gypsum panel used for the new walls, if you stacked all those panels, the pile would reach higher (169m) than the top of Seagram (156m).
*ln 2005, costs for internal refurbishment projects reach 20 percent of the total construction cost for the entire building.
Color code indicates projects started in same year, to compare new wall length between floors. Colors recur each five years.
WALL
PAGE 89
Magenta: 1990, Orange: 1991, Green: 1992, Cyan: 1993, Violet:
1995,	2000, 2005, 2010
1996,	2001, 2006, 2011
1997,	2002, 2007, 2012
1998,	2003, 2008, 2013 1994, 1999, 2004, 2009
New or replacement wall construction in meters, 1990-2013:
Total 16,925.7	m
Penthouse	3.4	m
38	219.8	m
37	53.0	m
36	236.4	m
35	110.4	m
34	341.8	m
33	263.1	m
32	377.9	m
31	363.6	m
30	372.5	m
29	603.2	m
28	227.0	m
27	86.7	m
----28--------------465.3	m
25	260.2	m
24	322.9	m
23	253.4	m
22	239.8	m
21	711.1m
20	362.1	m
19	744.2	m
18	768.8	m
-----4?-------------420.8	m
-----1«-------------563.0	m
15	274.3	m
14	494.9	m
13	408.1	m
12	388.5	m
11	219.6	m
10	683.6	m
9	614.2	m
8_____________725.0	m
7	278.2	m
6	782.9	m
5	112.0	m
4	906.5	m
3	1013.3	m
2	889.0	m
1	411.1m
0	85.1	m
-1	85.0	m
■..the irony of the Seagram is that, since the building is a crucial part of Manhattan's ■ heritage, it is particularly onerous to change Kits internal configurations, to rearrange Kits partitions. The flimsy is ennobled by the aura of the solid...
PAGE 90
WALL
6	POSTSCRIPT: WALL VS. WEAVING
In 2014, in a Semperian farce, Aby Rosen, the owner of the Seagram building, attempts to remove, possibly forever, Picasso's 1919 tapestry,
Le Tricorne - originally a scenographic backdrop for the Ballets Russes -from the corridor leading to the Four Seasons restaurant.
In Building Seagram (2013), Phyllis Lambert, daughter of Samuel Bronfman, Mies's client for the building, and director of the building project, describes how the tapestry is integral to its environment. Installing it in 1958,
"It seemed a miracle to find a work whose size, muted tonality, and classical repose would fit Mies's building so perfectly," she recalls. At nearly six meters, it is the exact height of the wall, and "marks the summit of the plaza entry sequence: designed to be seen from afar, its magisterial presence is the focal point of the long vista of successive spaces leading from the building to the restaurant entrance, making it wholly and intimately connected to both the Seagram building and the restaurant."
Rosen claims a steam leak, plus dangerous sagging of the travertine-clad walls around the tapestry, as the reason to urgently remove it, so repairs can be carried out, and the tapestry saved from harm.
Le Tricorne (The Three-Cornered Hat) has been hanging there so long, more than 50 years, that it has ossified into a solid but very brittle wall. Removing it could cause it to "crack like a potato chip," according to Rosen's own team of movers.
The New York Times reports on February 3 that Rosen, a collector of contemporary art, had called the tapestry a "schmatte" (Yiddish for rag) and "has told people that he wants to showcase highlights of his vast trove in the space now occupied by Le Tricorne."
The Landmarks Conservancy, the owners of the tapestry, has limited power since wall coverings are exempt from the protected status of the Four Season's interiors - softness is deemed temporary, even expendable, by preservation rules.*
Belmont Freeman, an architect who worked on earlier restoration of the Four Seasons, alerts the Conservancy that there is in fact no travertine cladding behind the tapestry - Philip Johnson apparently deliberately didn't put it there, where it wouldn't be seen and wasn't needed.
A judge rules in favor of the Conservancy, restraining Rosen from removing the tapestry, which remains in place for now, acting like a curtain, covering the nudity of the unclad wall behind it. Both wall and weaving - both forms of decoration in this case - remain, according to the protagonists, on the brink of collapse; only preservation of the status quo can save them both...
•Article 29 of the lease agreement provides that "Under New York law, Le Tricorne ... [is] not [a] fixture appurtenant [attached] to the Seagram Building and, thus, cannot and should not be designated as interior architectural features of the Building."
"The space was designed so ^ precisely for the permanent installation of Le Tricorne that Johnson omitted the travertine finish. Thus, the terrible prospect of a slab of travertine j delaminating from the wall and ripping through the curtain,-as RFR claims, is utterly specious. Likewise, the building : plans indicate no steam pipe or anything else in that wall that could be leaking and thus * requiring invasive repair."
— Belmont Freeman, FAIA "Commentary: Needless Destruction," Architectural Record, February 6, 2014.
A wall in itself: the time-hardened tapestry Le Tricorne, by Picasso, crowns the entry sequence to the Four Seasons but Is now under threat from maintenance and changing tastes: monopolizing the wall, no other artwork can be hung there...
PAGE 91
PAGE 92
OFFICE WITHOUT WALLS: WHITE COLLAR ASSEMBLY LINE
In the so-called "white-collar assembly line" of the first half of the 20th century, clerical offices are configured like the cavernous factories of the Victorian era -mechanical looms replaced by typewriters, but not much difference besides. While managers have private offices, lower-level employees find themselves working in an endless grid of desks, exposed to the microclimate and noise of the vast open plan spaces - a default arrangement, rather than a managerial or spatial planning dogma.
1938 Detroit News: open plan with wood-and-glass partition booths for management.
1950s Eni energy and mining company,
San Donato offices.
1942 War Department, Washington, D.C., card punching section: linear open plan.
PAGE 93
Evocation of the factory, now as white collar workspace: the "great workroom" (overlooked by mezzanine) in Frank Lloyd Wright's Johnson Wax building, 1939, Racine, Wisconsin.
PAGE 94	WALL
LE CORBUSIER AND THE AMERICAN MODULE by Nicholas Potts
The model of the Maison Dom-lno (1914), Le Corbusier's diagram of an ideal building system utilizing concrete slab construction to achieve an open plan, underwent a typological reclassification as it migrated across the Atlantic, growing in scale from single or multi-family dwelling into the large office building. The new free-flowing office interior demanded new sorts of interior walls that fell somewhere between furniture and architecture. In his own (residential) descendants of the Maison Dom-lno, the "immeuble-villa" and the "immeuble-meuble," Le Corbusier played on the related root between French terms for apartment building (immeuble) and piece of furniture (meuble). His designs for furnishings from the late 1920s and early 1930s involved partition-scaled furnishings, notably in the form of a shelving system - the Casier- which was embedded into the 'open' plans of his early administrative buildings.
Le Corbusier was theorizing the ingredients of the modern office. The other major ingredient was the Modulor, a system for standardizing building and furniture design scaled to the human body, based on a golden ratio of 1 to 1.618. In the late 1940s he met with American industrialists to promote his systems. But the US had its own genealogy of standardization, against which the Frenchman's musings looked fanciful. In a November 1958 Architectural Forum article, Lawrence Lessing stated that Le Corbusier's scheme was not "true modular coordination" but rather a system of "esthetic proportioning, selected by the architect" and "not mathematically commensurate in all dimensions (e.g., the sum of a number of smaller components is seldom equal to another larger component)."
A New England engineer, Albert Farwell Bemis, had pre-empted the Modulor with the much more rational and scalable "cubical modular measure" introduced in his 1936 book, The Evolving House, which argued for standardizing all building units to fit a base cube of either three or four inches (7.5-10 cm). Lessing explains:
"Bemis had hit upon a fruitful, abstract, spatial idea, occurring to no one before, by which all building parts and dimensions could be made to fit together in a great variety of ways. If architects would design buildings on a modular reference grid, and if manufacturers would produce all building products in a range of sizes that were multiples of the base module, then construction would consist simply of assembling or dropping materials, components, and equipment in place without fitting operations or waste. By making all walls, floors, and ceilings conform in thickness to the module, interiors would automatically be modular, easy to subdivide and finish off with modular products."
In 1954, a cabinetmaker in Holland, Michigan, was commissioned to fabricate a unified system of desks and partitions for the new United Auto Workers (UAW) headquarters in suburban Detroit.
G.W. Haworth, founder of this lucky cabinetmaking company, saw the potential of these office systems after mobilizing to fulfil the UAW's huge order. In 1964, furniture-maker Herman Miller, Inc., also located in Michigan, released the (initially unsuccessful) prototype for the Action Office System, an adaptable workspace incorporating filing cabinets, a table, and two desks in one unit.
In 1968, the blockbuster Action Office II modified the prototype to allow for the creation of a whole modular, pop-up office, with the addition of portable walls between the individual units. Coupled with changes to the Corporate Tax code in 1968 that enabled companies to write off the cost of furnishings after a mere five years, the durable interior wall in offices no longer made financial sense. The generic name for this new type of furnishing-wall was "systems furniture." Le Corbusier's rational-spiritual systems - the Maison Dom-lno + the Modulor man - were mere diagrams of a system of much larger system already unfolding in the US...
1925 Systems furniture: Le Corbusier's Casier standard.
WALL
PAGE 95
1914 Platform: Le Corbusier's Maison Dom-lno, totem of the modernist free plan, imagined with (equally modernist) partition walls creating temporary enclosures. Like a window that needs to be cancelled by curtains, the openness of the free plan, when it migrates to the US, proves intolerable by itself, and demands the installation of its opposite - walls, however flimsy. The two will proliferate side by side over the course of the 20th century, feeding off each other: one a utopian possibility of ultimate freedom (or noncommitment to any one way of living), the other a pragmatic, provisional, and unavoidable definition of space - temporary forever.
1950 Equation: Le Corbusier's Modulor system, diagram for the systematization of space. "Einstein had the kindness to say this of the 'Modulor': 'It is a scale of proportions which makes the bad difficult and the good easy.' ...
The scientist tells us: 'This weapon shoots straight: in the matter of dimensioning, i.e. of proportions, it makes our task more certain.'" (Le Corbusier, The Modulor: A Harmonious Measure to the Human Scale Universally applicable to Architecture and Mechanics, Volume 1,
1954, 58).
November 1958 Fit-out: Opening page of "Modular Dimensioning" by Lawrence Lessing in Architectural Forum. The three- or four-inch cube as the key to universal harmony.
"The 4-inch cube, adopted as the U.S. basic module for building by the American Standards Association ... [from this] all building dimensions -height, width, depth, thickness of wall, floor, and other components - may be coordinated ... all parts fit without wastage..."
PAGE 96
DIGNITY OF THE CUBICLE
Acknowledging the need for a modicum of privacy, the modular cubicle is launched in the US in the 1950s, designed to ennoble the office worker with something approaching a room of one's own, where she is dignified with an environment conducive both to individuality and concentration. Rather than an alternative to or adversary of the open plan, cubicles facilitate open landscapes for working, in which workers only have to stand up or step away from their desks in or order to interact with others in an open landscape of small, semi-enclosed shelters...
1954 Modern Products, Inc. (later Haworth, Inc.) design a new range of cubciles for the United Auto Workers headquarters, Detroit, offering employees the possibility of personalizing their working environment, even with plants and paintings.

1956 "Time to promote him to a private office": as an antidote to the chaos and interruptions of the open plan, Techniplan Partitions promote the cubicle.
"If you pay him to think, why let unnecessary distractions rob him of ... productivity?"
PAGE 97
1967 Robert Probst, a designer for Herman Miller, creates the Action Office plug-in system, introducing the 45-degree angle to the cubicle for more open, dynamic working configurations. Dust three years later, Propst has a moral-political awakening and comes out against his creation: "One does not have to be an especially perceptive critic," he writes in a letter, "to realize that AON [Action Office llj is definitely not a system which produces an environment gratifying for people In general. But it Is admirable for planners looking for ways of cramming in a maximum number of bodies, for 'employees' (as against individuals), for 'personnel,' corporate zombies, the walking dead, the silent majority. A large market."
1960s In an early rejection of the cubicle, German firm Quickborner designs the Burolandschaft, or "office landscape," a scrambling of the gridded open plans of the pre-war period. Intead of relentless rows of desks, there are skewed arrangements, organic clusters; managers are forced out of their private offices into the wild. The experiment Initially confuses employees, who perceive the arrangement merely as a mess. (Christine M. Piotrowski, Elizabeth A. Rogers,
Designing Commercial Interiors, Wiley, 2007.)
PAGE 98
INTEL'S CUBICLES: FROM CELEBRATION...
The tech giant of the 1980s is lauded for its democratic office design, where each worker, no matter their rank, is provided with an identical cubicle, which is seen not as a symbol of closure and stultification but of democratic openness.
1984 "At Intel, private offices are a thing of the past," boasts an in-house magazine commemorating 15 years of the company.
"Life in a cubicle: Intel's open offices foster accessibility at all levels." Cubicles now include semi - almost saloon-style - doors.
"A SEA OF HALF-WALL PARTITIONS"
"Architecture textbooks and journals in the 1960s and 1970s began to talk about a new 'cybernetic' idea of the office. Starting with the assumption that offices were fundamentally places for the exchange of information, advocates of the cybernetic office aimed to eliminate walls that stop the 'free flow of ideas,' replacing them with cubicle workstations. If the pictures in cubicle advertisements of the time are any indication, cubicles helped ideas flow quite freely indeed. Employees in these ads lack computers, to say nothing of email and the internet, yet they always seem caught in moments of frenzied, often low-tech, information exchange: pointing to each other across the room, handing papers over and around the burnt orange ('aesthetically pleasing and humanly satisfying') partitions, all while talking on the phone and jotting down notes.
As California computer companies grew into large businesses, then, cubicles were their natural office form. It was through these companies that cubicles first entered the public imagination. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, business sections of newspapers and magazines described the radical work arrangements of Silicon Valley with curiosity and often breathless enthusiasm. Intel served as the chief example of the creative and egalitarian cubicle workplace. The company had no time cards, no dress codes, no assigned parking spots, no special cafeterias for executives, and above all, no offices, just a sea of halfwall partitions. The long, low buildings of Intel were fields of shared labor, like the communal farms that had so recently dotted the hills around Intel's campus. CEO Andrew Grove, hip and casual in an open-necked wide-collar shirt and gold chains, was an unpreten-
tious man of the people. He moved among the workers of Intel 'empowering' them to do their jobs, and sat at a cubicle at one side of the vast work floor ready to help. Most incredible of all (and unlike the communal farms) this social experiment was economically viable. In a time when the great industrial giants were falling to Japanese competition, Intel was making money hand over fist. For some observers of American business, the Intel office model seemed like a savior. In The Atlantic, James Fallows asked the question on the minds of so many who dared to hope for the future of American industry, 'Could the tire companies, the machine tool makers, the color TV industry, learn to work this way?"' — David Franz, "The Moral Life of the Cubicle," The New Atlantis, Winter
2008.
PAGE 99
...TO RIDICULE
By the end of the 1990s, the "cubicle farm," once an idealistic design
for egalitarianism and individuality, is made a scapegoat for systemic corporate
problems: stultification of creativity, anonymity, repetition...
1999 In Office Space, directed by Mike fudge, the cubicle is the perfect scénographie backdrop for a tale of small-mindedness, confinement, humiliation, and rebellion...
2007 Talk show host Conan O'Brien visits Intel 20 years after the heyday of the cubicle.
Don Brady, senior markerting manager: "We really try to keep a very similar working environment. Basically everyone at Intel works in cubes."
Conan O'Brien: "It's good, it makes people feel that they're all basically the same, that there is no individuality, there's no hope, there is no sense that life has possibilities."
Conan: "Look at [column] H10 - is that what you'd see in a parking garage?"
Don: "We try to mark the general areas so you may tell a co-worker, I'm over by poll H10." Conan: "Right, which is better than, 'You know those pretty flowers by the window? I'm near those.'"
PAGE 100
WALL
RESURRECTION OF THE OPEN PLAN
The history of office configuration is one of repeated efforts to mitigate the pain of working through the salve of design. Each successive ideology for the optimum, most humane layout of the office promises to solve the problem of the previous generation. For the startups of the late 1990s dotcom boom, a resurrection of the pre-war open plan is meant to abolish the alienation and monotony of the cubicle farm.
In a cultural forgetting of the original intentions of the cubicle - as a design system that offers the ability to concentrate and to personalize workspace but still be connected to colleagues - Intel's endless cubicles become a derided symbol of an 'old' tech ethos of meticulous professionalism vs. the internet mentality of informality, collaboration, and permanent visibility.
2001 Open plan offices of yougov.com, the subject of the documentary Startup.com, a cautionary tale of dotcom euphoria, made just after the bubble burst. The company reaches its peak In April.
THE CREATIVE OFFICE: "HUBS" AND "STREETS"
In the 2013 report "Space Planning and the Future of Office Design," the consultancy Colliers speculates on the trajectory of the post-open-plan office. In a quest to provide both the "fun spaces" and the "private, quiet areas" demanded by contemporary work, the floor plan, pushed and pulled by contradictory demands, contorts itself into complex new shapes:
"Alternatives to the established open-plan design and traditional enclosed offices are becoming more commonplace... One approach ... is to design offices based primarily upon the patterns of work of its occupants and their respective needs for collaboration. Such designs often incorporate social hearts (or hubs) and 'streets' that enable planned and unplanned encounters to take place. These offices also provide spaces that offer different functionality that all workers can access as and when required (e.g., team spaces, reading rooms, computer hubs, formal meeting rooms, and café areas). Financial and space savings can be realized through reducing the provision of strictly 'individual' workspaces, with the emphasis upon providing mixes of space that are appropriate to groups of workers."
— Matthew C. Davis, Desmond 3. Leach, and Chris W. Clegg, "The Physical Environment of the Office: Contemporary and Emerging Issues," International Review of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, 2011, Volume 26.
"They stopped at a cubicle, grey and small and lined with a material like synthetic linen. Mae's heart faltered. It was almost precisely like the cubicle she'd worked at for the last eighteen months. It was the first thing she'd seen at the Circle that hadn't been rethought, that bore any resemblance to the past. The material lining the cubicle walls was - she couldn't believe it, it didn't seem possible - burlap. ... Mae was baffled, and found her mood sinking into the same sort of abyss in which she'd spent the last few years.
Did anyone really work at a utility company anymore? ... Mae felt that she was not only wasting her life [there] but that... the entire company was wasting life, wasting human potential and holding back the turning of the globe. The cubicle at that place, her cubicle, was the distillation of it all. The low walls around her, meant to facilitate concentration on the work at hand, were lined with burlap, as if any other material might distract her, might allude to more exotic ways of spending her days.
And so she'd spent eighteen months in an office where they thought, of all the materials man and nature offered, the one their staff should see, all day and every day, was burlap. A dirty sort of burlap, a less refined form of burlap. A bulk burlap, a poor man's burlap, a budget burlap.
Oh god, she thought, when she left that place she vowed never to see or touch or acknowledge the existence of that material again.
And she did not expect to see it again ... but then here it was, all around her in this new Circle workspace, and looking at it, smelling its musty smell, her eyes welled up. 'Fucking burlap,' she mumbled to herself.
Behind her, she heard a sigh, then a voice: 'Now I'm thinking this wasn't such a good idea.'
Mae turned and found Annie, her hands in fists at her sides, posing like a pouting child. 'Fucking burlap,' Annie said, imitating her pout, then burst out laughing. ...
'I had to actually buy that cubicle from Walmart. And the computer! ... Oh god, you should have seen your face.'"
— Dave Eggers, The Circle (Knopf, 2013).
2008 Intel's update: "Intel led the cubicle revolution... It helped feed our innovation at the time. Today, collaboration is deeper, wider and less constrained by physical limits. I believe it is time to bring our physical environment in synch with our needs for real time person-to-person collaboration." (Paul Otellini, Intel CEO, quoted in Olga Kharif, "Intel's New Office," Bloomberg Businessweek, October 15, 2007.) Intel's new "Living Room" in Flilsboro, Oregon (illustrated above by the editors), features "Starbucks-like common areas" claimed "on a first-come-first-gets-the-space basis," according to Businessweek, which one employee describes cheerfully as "like walking into an airport lounge.
PAGE 101
2013 Dropbox, San Francisco: meeting rooms, shielded only on two sides, named the "Romance Chamber," "The Break Up Room," and "Arrears."
2010 Etsy, Brooklyn: unexpected return of the woven wall, marking the edge of the open plan.
OPEN PLAN + ENCLAVES
In recognition of the distractions and the daunting, constant exposure of the totally open plan office, a later generation of tech companies embraces more variation in its office spaces. The "creative offices" of the 2010s regard themselves with the same optimism as Intel regarded its cubicles a generation earlier, banking on the idea that creativity is stimulated most effectively through informality, collaboration, and transparency (values that dovetail with other aspects of the internet age: job insecurity, surveillance, spectacle). The default layout for working desks is still a loose open plan, but the wall-less condition is punctuated by lounges, play structures, soft landscapes, dens, booths, pavilions, niches, chambers - the walls of which are typically insubstantial, made of string, glass, fabrics. The worker is in a constant flight between the communalism of the open plan desk landscape and the array of apparent refuges on offer... which also end up looking fairly communal.
The so-called creative office provides a space where work interpenetrates leisure to an absolute degree.
Such spaces are almost a parody of the idea of the "social factory" proposed by Italian radicals since the 1970s, looking to expand Marx's critique beyond the conventional factory to the domestic ("the social character of production has been extended to such a point that the entire society now functions as a moment of production," says Antonio Negri in Empire and Beyond, 2008).
2014 Google, Dublin: partition wall a notional divide between the exposure of the open plan desk system, and the enclosure of the diner-style meeting booths.
PAGE 102
WHITE COLLAR FACTORY
A former immigration office on Old Street roundabout in London is gutted in 2014 - revealing encrustations of gypsum, metal framing and wires - in preparation for a new building dubbed the "White Collar Factory," an echo of the 1930s White Collar Assembly Line. The developer aims to pre-emptively create, in the new building, the post-industrial, raw open spaces favored by "creative" industries, with the benefits of cheaper construction costs and better energy performance for the building. Walls are still considered the enemy rather than the incubator of creativity...
2014 .soon to be replaced by a White Collar Factory. The demonstration suite, by developers Derwent and Allford Hall Monaghan Morris architects, on an upper floor of the same building, features predictable open plan configuration and services exposed under the concrete slab above.
Only sign of a partition wall or cubicle: a meeting platform encircled by corrugated transparent plastic.
2014 Partitions and walls of a former immigration office on Old Street roundabout, London, ripped apart as if out of a particular spite...
WALL
PAGE 103
WALL-STALGIA
The wall is at a low ebb: according to the International Management Facility Association, 70 percent of US offices are now open plan - just as more and more studies are showing their ill effects, with unequivocal titles like "Open-plan offices make employees less productive, less happy, and more likely to get sick" (Quartz, May 21, 2013). The motivation for the open plan office is now less about collaboration, inspiration, and transparency, and more about the economical use of office space, and preventing employees from ever feeling too at home at a company. The Economist cites a statistic from the British Council for Offices that the average office worker now uses around 11 square meters, a 35 percent drop since 1997 ("Pressed Suits," April 5, 2014). The irony of the rising tide of despairing criticism of the open office is that today's researchers are experiencing the same insights that birthed the hated cubicle in the first place.
"Psychologically, the repercussions of open offices are relatively straightforward. Physical barriers have been closely linked to psychological privacy, and a sense of privacy boosts job performance. Open offices also remove an element of control, which can lead to feelings of helplessness."
— Maria Konikova, "The Open Office Trap," The New Yorker, January 7, 2014.
January 16, 2014
"[Ojur results categorically contradict the industry-accepted wisdom that open-plan layout enhances communication between colleagues and improves occupants' overall work environmental satisfaction. This study showed that occupants' satisfaction on the interaction issue was actually higher for occupants of private offices with very low dissatisfaction rate. Moreover, the increment of overall workspace satisfaction due to the positive impact of ease of interaction in open-plan office layouts failed to offset the decrements by negative impacts of noise and privacy. This implies that even though occupants are satisfied with interactions in open-plan layout, their overall workspace satisfaction will eventually decrease unless a certain level of privacy and acoustical quality are provided."
—Jungsoo Kim and Richard de Dear, "Workspace satisfaction:
The privacy-communication trade-off in open-plan offices,"
Journal of Environmental Psychology, June 2013.
Dear Sirs and Madams and People who neither identity themselves as sirs nor madams,
We, the 70 percent, have had it with your gum cracking, your hand waving, your loud talking, your loud laughing, your goat curry splashing onto our keyboards and smartphones.
We've had it with your loud good-mornings, your loud good-nights, your louder Hey dudes you gotta check out this sick goal by Messi, your even louder OMG did you catch the mess of a dress JLaw was sporting to the Globes?
We can't take one more of your sneezes, your coughs, your flu germs, your cold germs, your complaints about your head and the weather and your mother and your brother, or your feeble attempts at a surreptitious nose pick and subsequent flick.
We've had it with the footballs, the volleyballs, the tennis balls, the Frisbees, the Rock Star, the having to come into the office at 5 a.m. in order to get any sort of productive work done.
We've had it with your attempts to make eye contact with us while we type, the attempts to engage us with idle morning, midday, and midnight conversation while we work.
We've had it with the amateur film reviews, the nonsensical book reviews, the Breaking Bad spoilers, the Mad Men spoilers, the Downton Abbey spoilers, the Homeland spoilers.
We've had it with the questions about which IG filter is best, which profile picture the cutest.
We don't want to symbolically belong to your team. Or, for that matter, any team with more than 11 players a side. Do you see a number on the back of our blazers? An ad on the front of our sweaters?
Collaboration? Call a meeting. Fewer silos? Call the Farm Bureau.
In short, we, the 70 percent, demand the following:
Our offices back. A door we can close. A wall not made of glass. A place to hang a photograph. To listen to music and news and the odd podcast without earbuds jammed into our skulls. A little privacy. Peace and quiet. Time and space to think. An opportunity to quietly contemplate and quietly create. The ability to make a personal phone call outside the last stall in the women's room. A neighbor who has to first knock rather than stand over us and scream Hey man, you got a minute?
In other words, we want what you want: Increased efficiency. Better ideas. Higher profits.
That is, four walls, two plants, and a tiny window to call our own.
Respectfully yours,
The 70 Percent
Memo-cum-manifesto sent to "career intelligence" website Vault, signed by "The 70 Percent," vents the feeling that the loss of walls has gone too far. (From Derek Loosvelt, "The Revolution Against Open-Office Plans Has Begun," vault, January 16, 2014.)
PAGE 104
WALL
FACEBOOK AND THE APOTHEOSIS OF THE OPEN PLAN
With defiant faith in the virtue of the open plan, despite reports suggesting its detrimental effects on productivity, Facebook commissions Frank Gehry to design a building appropriate to its ideology of a "more open and connected" world, which translates architecturally as the final eradication of the wall.
In the new Menlo Park FIQ, 2,800 workers are collected in one continuous 40,000-square meter open plan space - the size of a midsize office tower. There are no walls or partitions; instead a kind of interior urbanism with clusters of desks in meandering patterns, "streets," and occasional pavilions, nooks, or glass cubes where meetings can be held. It's the antithesis of Intel's 80s cubicle grid, recalling more Quickborner's 1960s rambling Burolandschaft. "The idea is to make the perfect engineering space: one giant room that fits thousands of people, all close enough to collaborate together. It will be the largest open floor plan in the world, but it will also have plenty of private, quiet spaces as well," explains Facebook chief Mark Zuckerberg in a 2012 post on his Facebook wall.
It's around this time that the term "wall" starts to feel restrictive and antiquated even in virtual space, as an architectural metaphor. "Wall" is abandoned in favor of "feed" for the place where your content appears, signalling a preference + for constant flow and flux - and architecture follows suit, with the virtually wall-less HQ now under construction.

PAGE 105
2012 Frank Gehry and Mark Zuckerberg inspect the model for the new, practically wall-less Facebook FIQ, soon to go under construction...
2015	Facebook moves Into the building, and with its unfinished aesthetic it becomes clear that one of the world's most valuable companies is trying hard to maintain a start-up ethos. Zuckerberg comments:
"The building itself is pretty simple and isn't fancy. That's on purpose. We want our space to feel like a work in progress. When you enter our buildings, we want you to feel how much left there is to be done in our mission to connect the world." The few internal walls in the main hangar are of unpainted plywood, glass, or unfinished plaster.
2016	Facebook is criticized for not filtering or flagging fake news in users' feeds during the US election campaign, while data on users is harnassed by analytics companies to pinpoint swayable voters.
2017	"2016 was an interesting year for us," Zuckerberg says. New York Times reporter Farhad Manjoo writes: "I sat in on two meetings in another glass-walled MPK20 conference room in which News Feed's engineers, designers, user-research experts and managers debated several small alterations to how News Feed displays certain kinds
of posts." ("Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?" New York Times, April 25, 2017.)
2013 Facebook's own "Facebook Wall."
The company that defined the digital "wall" as a space of self-expression has a physical, analog wall - a quirky antique - inside its Menlo Park campus (the New York City office, also designed by Gehry, gets is own analog "wall" too).
PAGE 106
FIREPROOF FUTURE
2013 The Future of Gypsum: the market to 2023, as imagined by the consultants Smithers Apex. "Global markets for gypsum are forecast to grow nearly 10 percent annually to reach $3.8 billion over the next 10 years," the executive summary explains. The rest of the report is available for $6,300 for the prospective gypsum investor.
2012 In theory a single continuous structure could be constructed encompassing residences, malls, factories, and prisons... just as long as it has the proper fire partitioning. The diagram draws on regulations in the International Building Code, illustrating the necessary barriers between types of spaces - ranging from no necessary fireproofing to walls that can withstand up to three hours of conflagration. (Adjacency is not permitted, with any kind of fire rating, between correctional facilities and storage and industrail facilities, hence the white squares). Source: Table 6.1.14.4.1 (a) Required Separation of Occupancies (hours), Part 1, NFPA Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition.
WALL
PAGE 107
lASTERBOARD
a «liable sizes from major plasterboard suppliers, various countries. In the US, sizes are I ally driven by ceiling height, particularly in residential construction where the popularity Uf nine-foot (2.7-meter) ceilings in the 1980s leads to larger panels so builders don't have to cut and attach additional panels. The Netherlands is the only country where 60-cm-wide
Pa
pels are available, maybe to get them up those narrow stairs.
1888-94 Sackett Board
0.91m x 0.91m
1928
Rocklath
1.22m x 0.41m
1917
Sheetrock
1.22m x 2.44m
United States Certainteed
1.22m x 2.44m 1.36m	3.77m
United States USG
1.22m x 2.44m 1.36m	3.77m
4.88m
Italy
1.2m
2.0m
3.6m
...probably no less than 75% of what we call architecture is, in fact, insubstantial, provisional arrangements of plasterboard that can change without effort - denying architecture its traditional aura of permanence, twice -it feels less serious, and because it is flimsy it could never be preserved / it would be absurd to preserve...
Netherlands
0.6m x 2.0m 0.9m	2.6m
1.2m	3.6m
4.8m
China
1.2m x 1.22m 1.8m	3.60m
India
1.22m x 1.83m 3.05m
Brazil
1.2m x 1.8m 3.0m
South Africa
1.2m x 2.4m 3.6m
All together now

PAGE 108
INSIDE THE WALL
Even seemingly cheap, impermanent
WALL
PAGE 109
PAGE 110
WALL
WALL
PAGE 111
PAGE 112
WALL
PAGE 113
2012 No man's land: the void between immovable brick and impermanent sheetrock wails inside the Central Pavilion at the Venice Biennale.
PAGE 114 bibliography
Abercrombie, Patrick. Vienna as an Example of Town Planning: Part III. Detailed Description of the Existing Town. The Town Planning Review, Vol. 1, No. 4, January 1911,279-293.
Alberti, Leon Battista. The Architecture of Leon Battista Alberti in Ten Books. London: Edward Owen, 1755. Book I, Chapter II.
Allen, Stan. Field Conditions, Points+Lines: Diagrams + Projects for the City. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999.
Beranek, Leo L., and Harvey P. Sleeper, Jr. The Design and Construction of Anechoic Sound Chambers. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America. Vol. 18,
No. 1, July 1946, 140-150.
Blondel, François. Cours d‘Architecture. Paris: P. Aubouyn et F. Clousier. 1683.
Burkeman, Oliver. "Open-plan offices were devised by Satan in the deepest caverns of hell." The Guardian, 18 November 2013.
"A City in Ruins: The terrible devastation of Chicago." The New York Times. October 10, 1871. P.1.
Crangle, Robert D, Jr. "Gypsum." United States Geological Survey 2010 Minerals Yearbook. Washington, DC: United States Department of the Interior/United States Geological Society, 2010.
Deamer, Peggy. "Structuring Surfaces:
The Legacy of the Whites." Perspecta, Vol. 32, Resurfacing Modernism, 2001, 90-99.
Dietterlin, Wendel. "Architectura und Austheilung der V. Seulen." Das erste Buch, Stuttgart. 1593.
Dowling, Joanna. "Blanketing the Home: The use of thermal insulation in American housing, 1920-1945." APT Bulletin, Vol. 40, No. 1, 2009, 33-39.
Duffy, Francis. The New Office. London: Conran Octopus Ltd., 1997.
Duffy, Frank. Office Landscaping: A New Approach to Office Planning. London: Anbar Publications, 1967-9.
Eco, Umberto, Translated by Anna Cancogni. The Open Work. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1989.
Eggler, Marianne. "Divide and Conquer: Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Lilly Reich's Fabric Partitions in the Tugendat House." Studies in the Decorative Arts. Vol. 16,
No. 2. 66-90.
Evans, Robin. "The Rights of Retreat and the Rites of Exclusion; notes towards definition of the wall." Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays. Cambridge, MIT Press, 1997.
Falzon, Mark-Anthony."Paragons of Lifestyle: gated communities and the politics of space in Bombay." City and Society 16, no 2 (2008): 145-167.
Feversham, Polly, and Leo Schmidt. Die Berliner Mauer heute/The Berlin Wall Today. Berlin: Verlag Bauwesen, 1999.
Flannery, Kent. "The Origins of the Village Re-Visited." American Antiquity, Vol. 67, No. 3. July 2002.
Giedion, Sigfried. Space, Time, and Architecture. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1941.
Grant, Casey Cavanaugh. "The Birth of NFPA." Accessed online at www.nfpa.org/; accessed 9 October 2012.
Hermansen, Gustav. Ostia: aspects of Roman city life. Edmonton, Alberta: University of Alberta Press. 1981.
Jensen, Robert. "Board and Batten Siding and the Balloon Frame: Their incompatibility in the Nineteenth Century." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians,
Vol. 30, No. 1, March 1971, 40-50.
Joseph E. Seagram and Sons Inc., vs.
Tax Commission. "Taxation. Levy and Assessment. Assessment by Income Capitalization Method Inappropriate Where Value So Computed Is Much Lower Than Construction Cost of New Prestige Building." Harvard Law Review, Vol. 77,
No. 6, April, 1964, 1161-1164.
Kerasote, Ted. "Borders without Fences." The New York Times. February 24, 2007. www.nytimes.com/2007/02/24/opinion/ 24kerasote.html?ref=borderfenceusmexico.
Kim, Jungsoo, and Richard de Dear. "Workspace satisfaction: The privacy-communication trade-off in open-plan offices." Journal of Environmental Psychology. 29 July 2013.
Kircher, Athanasius. Neue Hall- und Thon-Kunst. 1684.
Koolhaas, Rem. "Junkspace." October.
Vol. 1. Obsolescence. Spring 2002.
Lambert, Phyllis. Building Seagram. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013.
Lambert, Phyllis, ed. Mies van der Rohe in America. Montreal: The Canadian Center for Architecture, 2001.
Lambert, Phyllis. "'Stimmung' at Seagram: Johnson Counters Mies van der Rohe." Grey Room. No. 20, Summer 2005, 38-59.
Lange, Alexandra. "White Collar Corbusier: From the easier to the cites d'affaires."
Grey Room. No. 9, Autumn 2002, 58-79.
Larson, Erik. The Devil in the White City. New York: Random House, Inc., 2004.
Larson, Gerald R. The Iron Skeleton Frame: Interactions between Europe and the United States. Chicago Architecture 1872-1922. München: Prestel-Verlag, 1987, 47.
Lefebvre, Henri, Donald Nicholson, translator. The Production of Space.
New York: Wiley, 1982.
Leisch, Harald. "Gated communities in Indonesia." Cities 19, no 5 (2002), 341-50.
Lemanski, Charlotte. "Residential Responses to Fear (of Crime Plus) in Two Cape Town Suburbs: Implications for the Post-Apartheid City." Journal of International Development 18 (2006), 787-802.
Levine, Neil. "'The Significance of Facts': Mies's Collages up Close and Personal." Assemblage, No. 37. Dec. 1998, 70-101.
London Court of International Arbitration. www.lcia.org/.
Madroob, Mandela Ibn. "Arbitration court dismisses Berlin's patent claims on Israeli wall." The Electronic Intifada. October 30, 2002. http://electronicintifada.net/content/ arbitration-court-dismisses-berlins-patent-claims-israeli-wall/9341.
Manjoo, Farhad. "Can Facebook Fix Its Own Worst Bug?" New York Times.
April 25, 2017.
McGowan, Maryrose. Specifying Interiors: A Guide to Construction and FF&E for Residential and Commercial Interiors Projects. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2006.
PAGE 115
nLi iier M J- "A map of the great wall of China/' Imago Mundi 13 (1956). 110-5. "Notes On The Conversation Of Comrade N g Khrushchev With Comrade W. Ulbrlcht np 1 August 1961" Wilson Center Digital Archive, August 1, 1961, accessed September 13, 2013, http://digitalarchive.
vdlsoncenter.org/.
Oidham, Greg R. "Effects of Changes ¡n Workspace Partitions and Spatial Density on Employee Reactions: A Quasi-Experiment." Journal of Applied psychology. Vol. 73, No. 2, 1988. 253-258.
Oliver, Paul. Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
payne, Alina, From Ornament to Object: Genealogies of Architectural Modernism. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2012.
Pilgrim, Dianne H. "Inherited from the Past: The American Period Room." American Art Journal. Vol. 10, No. 1, May 1978. 4—23.
Ragette, Friedrich. Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region. American University of Sharjah, 2006.
Rankin, William 1 "The Epistemology of the Suburbs: Knowledge, Production, and Corporate Laboratory Design." Critical Inquiry, Vol. 36, No. 4, Summer 2010. 771-806.
"Rebuilding the City Begun." The New York Times. October 11, 1871.
Rice, Charles. The Emergence of the Interior: Architecture, Modernity,
Domesticity. London: Routledge. 2007.
Rollefson, G. O. "The Origins of the Yarmoukian at 'Ain Ghazal." Paleorient, vol. 19, n°1, 1993.
"Sanitary Ceilings and Walls." Science.
Vol. 13, No. 334, June 25 1889. 497-499.
Sackett, Augustine. Inside Wall-Covering. United States Patent No. 520,123.
May 22, 1894.
Scott, Felicity D. "An Army of Soldiers or a Meadow." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians. Vol. 70, No. 3, September 2011.330-353.
Semper, Gottfried. The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Serlio, Sebastiano. Regole generali di architetura sopra le cinque maniéré de gliedifici, doe, Thoscano, Dorico, lonico, Corinthio, et Composito, con gliessempi dell'antiquita, che, per la magior parte concordano con la dottrina de Vitruvio.
Shankland, Robert. "The Development of Architectural Acoustics: The application of the science of acoustics toarchitectural designs has produced greatly improved halls for both speech and music." American Scientist, Vol. 60, No. 2. March-April 1972, 201-209.
Simpson, Pamela H. "Cheap, Quick, and Easy: The History of Rockfaces Concrete Block Building." Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture. Vol. 3, 1989, 108-118.
"US-Mexico border to be most militarized since Berlin Wall: US senator." PressTV.
June 28, 2013. www.presstv.com/ detail/2013/06/28/311202/usmexico-border-likened-to-berlin-wall/.
Vidler, Anthony. "Another Brick in the Wall." October 136. Spring 2011. 105-132.
Vidler, Anthony. "Losing Face: Notes on
the Modern Museum." Assemblage.
No. 9, June 1989, 40-57.
Vignola, Jacopo Barozzi da. Regola delli cinque ordini d'architettura. Rome. 1562.
Viollet-le-Duc, Eugène Emmanuel. Dictionnaire Raisonné de l'Architecture Française du XI au XVI Siècle. Paris: A Morel, Éditeur. 1868.
Vitruvius Pollio, Marcus, Cesare Cesariano, trans. Di Lucio Vitruvio Pollione de Architectura Libri Dece traducti de latino in Vulgare affigurati: Comentati: & con mirando ordine Insigniti: per il quale facilmente potrai trouare la multitudine de li abstruse & recondite Vocabuli a li soi loci & in epsa tabula con summo studio expositi & enucleate ad Immensa utilitate de ciascuno Studioso & beniuolo di epsa opera. Gotardus da Ponte, 1521.
Yoffee, Norman. Myths of the Archaic State: Evolution of the Earliest Cities, States, and Civilizations. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Young, David and Michiko. The Art of Japanese Architecture. Tokyo: Tuttle Publishing, 2007.
WALL
Zukowsky, John. Introduction to Internationalism in Chicago Architecture. Chicago Architecture 1872-1922. München: Prestel-Verlag, 1987, 19.
Zwerger, Klaus. Wood and Wood Joints: Building Traditions in Europe, Japan, and China, Second Ed. Basel: Birkhauser, 2012.
PAGE 116
image sources and courtesy
P4 SANAA, De Kunstlinie.
P6-7 Glenn Weigel; U.S. Geological Survey Department of the Interior /
USGS; Boletín de la Sociedad Argentina de Botánica; Fraunhofer ISE; Edinburgh University (NERC facility); Rosemarie Becker; Qualitech Innotec; Rapson Group / University of Minnesota, Minneapolis;
© Nanoscribe.
P8 AxD.
P9 Timika and Steven / http://
timikaandstevenromehome.blogspot.
nl/2012/07/drywall-day-42.html.
P10 Venice Biennale Archive.
P11 Federico Martelli.
P12 Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle (1856).
P13 Dolly Film.
P14 Paul Ijsendoorn; M. D. Meijer, "A map of the Great Wall of China," Imago Mundi: The International Journal for the History of Cartography 13 (Routledge: Taylor and Francis Group, 1956); Robert M. Durga.
P14-15D.E. Kaufmann, The Medieval Fortress: Castles, Forts, And Walled Cities Of The Middle Ages, Da Capo Press (2004).
P15 Frederick Taylor, The Berlin Wall: 13 August 1961-9 November 1989, (London: Bloomsbury, 2009); Bauwesen, 1999. Building Publishers Huss-Medien GmbFL
P16 Dohannes Barre; Boudhi Tree;
Marwan Dorge Garib.
P17 Skynews / www.flickr.com/photos/ sky-news/2991993509/in/photostream; AP.
P18 SCALA Archives; H DR.
P19 ArrranWeeviling; Introversion Software; Fibrebond Corporation; Oldcastle Precast, Inc.
P20 Paul Oliver, Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture of the World, (Cambridge University Press, 1997); Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of Architecture and other writings, (Cambridge University Press, 1989).
P 22 Dohn Woodford, Bricks: to build a house (Routledge and Kegan Paul Ltd., 1976); Reading, UK: Garnet Publishing Limited (1992).
P23 Alan Nixon; Aldrich Pears /
www.flickr.com/photos/alrichpears/
8142290651.
P24 Cesare Cesariano, G. da Ponte-Graphic, Di Lucio Vitruvio Pollione de architectura libri dece traducti de latino in vulgare affigurati: commentati...,
Liber Septimus, CVXI (1521).
P25 Dean Rondelet, Traite Theorique et Pratique de L'Art De Batir, (1847); Gilles Perraudin.
P26 Willy Tegel, Rengert Elburg, Dietrich Hakelberg, Harald Stauble and Ulf Buntgen, Early Neolithic Water Wells Reveal the World's Oldest Wood Architecture, PLOS ONE (2012); Nelson C. Brown, Lumber: Manufacturing, Conditioning, Grading, Distribution, and Use (New York: Dohn Wiley & Sons, 1947); Diego Lopez de Arenas, Breve compendio de la carpinteria de lo bianco y tratato de alarifes, (Sevilla: Luis Estupirian, 1633).
P27 Coowing Group; THE CASE FOR Tall Wood BUILDINGS: How Mass Timber Offers a Safe, Economical, and Environmentally Friendly Alternative for Tall Building Structures, prepared by MGAI MICHAEL GREEN ARCHITECTURE, Equilibrium Consulting, LMDG ltd,
BTY Group.
P28 Dean-Pierre Dalbera / www.flickr. com/photos/dalbera/5900777253/in/ pool-ostia_antica; Anwar Hosain,
"Louis Khan in Dacca," Domus 548 (Duly 1975); Andreas Ruby / Zambak + CoRDA.
P29 Hannes Radda: www.flickr.com/ photos/radahann/sets
P30 Reston, Virginia, United States / www.savewright.org/wright_chat/view topic.php?t=6391 &postdays= 0&postorder=asc&start=30&sid= Cd7f18ab6124f0d13e2e106218e6e75a;
© 2013 - Buildipedia.com, LLC.
P31 Dohn A. Mulligan, Handbook of Brick Masonry Construction, McGraw-Hill Book Company (1942).
P32 P. 32 Kent Flannery, "The Origins of the Village Re-Visited," American Antiquity, Vol. 67, No. 3 (Duly 2002); G. O. Rollefson, "The Origins of the Yarmoukian at 'Ain Ghazal," Paleorient, 1993, vol. 19, n°1. pp. 91-100.
P33 Dr. NC Panda, Architecture of the Manasara, (2011); Wang Qijun, Vernacular Dwellings: Ancient Chinese Architecture, (Vienna: Springer-Verlag, 2000); Paul Oliver, Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture of the World (Cambridge University Press, 1997); Francis Strauven, Aldo Van Eyck: The Shape of Relativity (Architectura & Natura, 1998).
P34 Sebastiano Serlio, Regole generali di architetura (1537).
P35 Sachin Prabhu; a-pollaiolo / http:// a-pollaiolo.livejournal.com/73477.html; panovscott; Akhtar Badshah / MIT Libraries, Aga Khan Documentation Center.
P37 Karl Baedeker, Egypt and the Sudan; handbook for travelers (1908); Special Collections, Koninklijke Bibliotheek, The Hague; Enrico Fantin; Awni Arrar / MIT Libraries, Aga Khan Documentation Center; © Aga Khan Award for Architecture / Awni Arrar.
P38 Walter George Whitman Collection, Salem State University Archives and Special Collections; Andrea Kirkby.
P40 Ma Weidu, Classical Chinese Windows and Doors (China Architecture and Building Press, 2006); Dohn Pile,
A History of Interior Design (Wiley, 2009).
P41 Ronald G. Knapp, China's Living Houses: Folk Beliefs, Symbols, and Household Ornamentation, (University of Hawaii, 1999); Paul Oliver, Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture (Cambridge University Press, 1997).
P42 © ASANO Noboruu; Shinya Ichinohe; Desmond King.
P43 Arata Isozaki, Katsura: Imperial Villa (Phaidon Press, 2011).
P44 © Erica Guilane-Nachez; The New York Times, October 11, 1871.
P51 Art Institute of Chicago; Harvard Fine Arts Library, Visual Collections.
P52 University of Illinois at Chicago, College of Architecture and the Arts; Sanborn Map Company.
P53 A. Sackett / US520123.
P56 Trustees of Sir Dohn Soane's Museum.
P57 Venice Biennale Archives.
PAGE 117
59 Richard Weston, Plans, sections f j elevations: key buildings of the anentleth century (Laurence King, 2010).
co http://en.wikiarquitectura.com/ .^dex.php/FileMuelle^salon.jpg.
0 Qhicago Daily Tribune; Abbie Rowe, National Park Service, courtesy Harry 5 Truman Library.
p61 Abbie Rowe / Harry S. Truman Library; Robert Knudsen / White House Photographs Collection.
P62 deepsan/www.flickr.com/photos/ deepsan/2520697068; Fogg Museum / ©2013 President and Fellows of Harvard College.
P63 UAV 713.9013 (Fig. 8) / The Psycho-Acoustic Laboratory / Harvard University ^rchives; Snohetta; 4akustik sound deadening system by Fantoni / photo: Archivio Fantoni.
P64 Periodica Polytechnica; The Caxton Publishing Company.
P65 Levi's®; Gizem Büyüktürkoglu / www.flickr.com/photos/ architectureoflife/5324298962/; Ecovative.
P68 Herbert Francis Evans, "The Sunday-School Building and Its Equipment,"
The Biblical World, Vol. 44, No. 3.
Sep. 1914, p. 155.; HGA Architects; ROGERSPARTNERS, Architects+Urban Designers; Michael Moran;
Paul Warchol Photography, Inc.
P69 accesspas / www.flickr.com/ photos/91785669@N05/8341250020.
P70 UNIFOR S.p.A / Parete SC&A /
Studio Cerri & Associati Photo: Mario Carrieri; Luccon Lichtbeton GmbH.
P71 "Habitat Imprimé - Printed Habitat" by François Brument et Sonia Laugier.
VIA Carte Blanche Award 2013.
P72-73 Matthew Cavanaugh / The Boston Globe; Erwin Hauer Studios; Arnold Wasson-Tucker / Erwin Hauer.
P74 Edge Design Institute.
P75 Bobby Yip / REUTERS.
P76 Habitually Chic; Busch-Reisinger Museum; Loeb Library / Harvard University
P77 Institut Polytechnique de Grenoble;
Ion Cuervas-Mons and Think Big Factory (www.thingbig-factory.com).
P78 Thomas Hirschhorn, Cavemanman, 2002 / Gladstone Gallery, New York;
Keith Edmier / Petzel Gallery; Robert Irwin / Walker Art Center.
P79 Grant Mudford.
P80 The Brooklyn Museum; Grant Mudford; The Metropolitan Opera Archives; Ruby Washington / The New York Times.
P81 Kipp Teague / www.retroweb.com/ backlotsZseinfeld_reunion.html; Ihaki Aliste Lizarralde.
P82 University of Chicago Press /
Marianne Eggler, "Divide and Conquer: Ludwig Mies van der Rohe and Lilly Reich's Fabric Partitions in theTugendat House," Studies in the Decorative Arts, Vol. 16, No.
2., 66-90; Museum of Modern Art, New York SCALA Archives; Mies van der Rohe / Levine, Neil. "The Significance of Facts: Mies's Collages up Close and Personal," Assemblage, No. 37. Dec. 1998, 70-101.
P83 Helmut Jacoby / The New York Times.
P84 Architectural Forum.
P85 Ajay / The New York Times; © Esto; Selldorf Architects; http://tgphipps.tumblr. com/post/30669143586/the-seagram-building-ludwig-mies-van-der-rohe; Architectural Record; Verlag Bauen und Wohnen.
P87 Selldorf Architects; RFR Realty LLC; EnTrust Securities LLC; Mancini Duffy.
P91 © Esto.
P92 Early Office Museum / www.officemuseum.com.
P93 ENI S.p.A; Jonathan Lipman,
Frank Lloyd Wright and the Johnson Wax Buildings (Rizzoli, 1985).
P94 Cassina.
P95 Fondation Le Corbusier; Architectural Forum.
P96 Haworth, Inc.; Studio Globe Wernicke®.
P97 Herman Miller, Inc.; Frank Duffy, Office Landscaping: A New Approach to Office Planning, Anbar Publications (1967-9); Heinrich Heidersberger / Artur Images; © Heinrich Heidersberger, #1016/12 Osram, Munich 1966, artur images, institut heidersberger.
P98 © Intel Corporation.
P99 Mike Judge, Office Space, Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation, Cubicle Inc. (1999); Conan O'Brien, "Late Night with Conan O'Brien" Broadway Video, Conaco, NBC Studios, NBC Universal Television, Universal Media Studios, 5/07/07.
P100 Jehane Noujaim and Chris Hegedus, Startup.com, Artisan Entertainment (2001); Josh Bancroft.
P101 Bruce Damonte; © Custom Spaces; Ramsay de Give / The Wall Street Journal; © GEM Group.
P102-103 Gehry Partners, LLP /
Facebook, Inc.
P108-112 Underwriters Laboratories Inc., Fire Resistance Directory: UNDERWRITER LABORATORIES INC. (1999).
2018 Illuminated celling as calming device in new Boeing 787.
contributors 
manfredo di robilant c-lab (inaba/clouette)
ceiling
...ceilings - traditionally the planes on which iconography was projected; thin, and contiguous with the underside of the floor above - became exponentially thicker over the last 100 years... ceilings acquired three-dimensionality, consisting of a large inaccessible section to accommodate 'services': HVAC, plumbing, wiring, surveillance devices... modernism's look-no-hands' approach - the miracle of the flexible, minimal, open plan, with little evidence of how interior conditions were sustained - was achieved by a deus ex machina hidden behind the ceiling's neutral, modular surface... maligned in the 21st century for their falseness and superficial sterility, ceilings nevertheless convey a suppressed, unconscious iconography -of comfort, control, convenience, even humanity... but a desire to strip away the disguises of modernism has led to a new dogma: removing protective paneling to expose the concrete slab of the real ceiling and the entrails of the building clinging to it... BIM and sustainability engineering allows these cumbersome systems to begin to shrink, potentially enabling the ceiling to become itself again...
served
space
served
space
served
space
served
space
1	1889 Chicago Auditorium Theater,
Louis Sullivan. Service ;pace (i.e. ceiling): 7.7 percent : of building.
2010 San Antonio Military Medical Center. Service space: 50 percent of building.
PAGE 4
UNDERSIDE
SEALING
1428 ceil Verb, meaning to cover with a lining of woodwork, sometimes of plaster, etc. (the interior roof or walls, to wainscot).
is there any other object 'here each side has a different name? We think of them as opposites - floor and ceiling - but in fact they
are a single element. Has its complex nomenclature made this
"layer between floors" elusive in terms of grasping its definition and its potentials?
Above and below an imaginary / theoretical line that indicates the separation between floors - initially it is typically the structure -completely separate histories, traditions, technologies and narratives have developed - in totally independent evolutions of a single entity.
Initially the essence of their differences has been that the floor is used, the ceiling is seen from a distance. The floor stages life, the ceiling covers it. One is robust, the other initially utilitarian. Both quickly became decorative and ornamental, the first abstract, the second typically figurative.
At regular intervals, discrepancies are made from ideological Alleingang' / delamination, countered by companies crafting an ideological honesty / integrity that tries to transform it back into a single entity. But in the 19th century, new technologies appear for exploring potentials in the cavity created inadvertently by separating floor from ceiling.
The cavity gradually fills with new systems that transport electricity,
air, heat and other recent innovations - together labelled services -spreading artificial comfort everywhere through the building.
The false floor and the false ceiling now form thin substitutes /
decoys, mere membranes that cover complex volumes that can be	3
read as highly engineered architectural quasi-entities that invisibly	If
support the Potemkin architecture that is our daily entitlement.
SANDWICH
CEILING
Ceilings - traditionally iconographic, thin, and contiguous with the underside of the floor above - have become exponentially thicker over the last 100 years. Ceilings acquired three dimensionality, consisting of a large inaccessible section used as a storage space for ventilation, air conditioning, plumbing, electrics and data cables, surveillance devices...
The false ceiling is the sectional equivalent of poché - the cavity usually considered only in plan, in relation to walls.
When those walls disappeared with the advent of the free plan, the false ceiling took on the grunt labor, accommodating the mechanical mess required to acclimatize and control vast new open spaces. This hidden space inside the ceiling -the "sandwich" - has been declared off-limits to architecture, and to the imagination of the users of buildings, since the middle of the 20th century. Applied engineering rules in the grey zone between floor and ceiling. Abstract rather than iconographic, the modular surface of false ceilings is supposed to be meaningless but harbors ideology as powerful as the most elaborate church ceiling - a modern ideal of smoothness, comfort, control, convenience, equality, even humanity. In the 21st century, a desire to erase the encrustations of modernity has led to a new dogma: the true ceiling, with protective paneling removed in the interests of full disclosure, exposing the concrete slab and the entrails of the building's service systems as part of an industrial aesthetic. In some ceilings, thanks to BIM and sustainability engineering, these cumbersome systems begin to shrink, to integrate, to be designed, enabling the ceiling to become expressive again...
PAGE 6
underside
A solid ceiling; the revelation of the structure of the floor or roof
above. The primary function of the ceiling as pure underside is structural, with no decoration or additional services.
a brief summary of three ceiling types...
1709 Andrea Francesco Nicoletti, cut through a palazzo in Rome.
PAGE 7
1755 The primitive hut, depicted on the frontispiece for the second edition °f Laugier's Essay on Architecture.
PAGE 8
floors is also prevented.

soaling
The ceiling as a separate, applied surface, often contiguous with the underside but of a different material; can be slightly separated from it, with a narrow, inaccessible cavity The primary use of the sealing is for symbolism.
PAGE 9
In the middle of the 16th century, the Salone dei Cinquecento in Palazzo Vecchio, Florence, became the stage for Cosimo I de' Medici's rule. To implement the celebratory and propagandistic function of the room, Cosimo commissioned Giorgio Vasari to decorate the ceiling panels that hide the monumental timber structure of the roof above. The glorified history of Florence was the subject. Started in 1555 with a sketch by Vasari himself, the decoration was completed in 1572. An intellectual before an artist, Vasari used the ceiling like the pages of a book, writing in each part of the ceiling the subject to be painted, rather than making sketches.
sandwich

A multi-layered hollow celling, consisting of the structure of the floor above, a large cavity accommodating service apparatus
(pipes, ducts etc.) and hanging ceiling
panels; difficult to access, its essence hidden from view, and subject to rapid growth in the 20th century. Its primary characteristic is utilitarianism.
2011 Cut through a New York office building, from an advertisement in the subway for eco-efficient building.
panels for access
speaker
power
supply air
security
emergency light

return air 


PAGE 11
2014 Multifunctionalism: architect's model shop ceiling, Rotterdam
PAGE 12
part 1: underside
Can be raw and unadorned, or highly decorative; this type of ceiling has no additional material apart from the structure and/or insulation of the floor or roof above.
8th—6th century BC Çataljöyük (modern reconstruction), outside present-day Konya, Turkey: the most basic concept of ceiling as underside of the floor above, with structural members exposed and unadorned.
PAGE 13
1420 Temple of Heaven, Beijing: decorated beams and slats forming the roof above; no filling, no continuous surface, just an underside.
PAGE 14 DOME
The power of the underside in revealed and adorned structure...
126 AD Unlike many earlier and later monumental domes, which are achieved through hidden structural gymnastics, the dome of Rome's Pantheon is made of solid cast concrete, curved and with a coffered pattern. A perfect hemisphere, the dome creates an artificial sky, lit by an always-open oculus at the top. It is both ceiling and roof, the archetypal solid underside.


PAGE 15
VAULT
Symbol
meets utility in decorative structural systems..
1496-1502, CELL & STELLAR St. Mary's Church, Gdansk, combines ribs and cellular vaults.
1248-1880 QUADRIPARTITE Rayonnant vault of Cologne Cathedral, the most common vault of French influenced Gothic cathedrals.
1501-1539, FAN Bath Abbey, England: ribs prefabricated on curved plates, then installed as modules.
1344-1929 NET St. Vitrus Cathedral, Prague, inspired by the French, features double ribs forming diamonds in the central spine.
1501-1572 STELLAR Church of Santa Maria, near Lisbon, combines straight and curved structural ribs.
do's and don'ts of
vaulting
A proper intersection of two ribs does not have seams running through the center of the joint.
Ribs become unstable when the seam in the cross section is too close to the apse.
To achieve a proper intersection of a net vault, despite the oblique geometry, rib cross sections should follow center lines.
Ribbed vault structures are based on pressures and counter-pressures. Irregular vaulting patterns result in less balanced forces at intersections. Flatter ribs of similar lengths are more stable.
Intersections of net vaults should occur so that cross sections meet at right angles: tops and bottoms of ribs should always align.
A proper rib crossing has continuous material through the apse.
A: stable construction angle, can handle structural load R.
B: constructed at too shallow (oblique) of an angle, has danger of failure. C: ribs too steep (angle I3 with the horizontal), has a danger of failure.
D: two of three ribs align in the same plane, which is also perpendicular to the plane shown, unstable.
PAGE 16
GAUSTAVINO'S SELF-SUPPORTING CEILINGS
Rafael Guastavino Moreno (1842-1908), from Catalonia, draws on his native local tradition of thin-shelled construction techniques. In 1881 he emigrates to the US with his son Rafael Guastavino Exposito and they begin to work together with renowned architects, applying their patented self-supporting "Guastavino tile" arch system. Their tiles line the vaults of some of the most iconic public spaces in early 20th century America.
filled in with concrete.
1890 Boston Public Library in Copley Square by McKim, Mead and White A breach in one of Gaustavino's ceilings, caused by a falling boulder reveals solid construction - a seamlessness between the underside and the level above.
Fire Wrecks the Oyster Bar, Tiled Oasis at Grand Central
By ROBERT D. McFADDEN
The fabled Oyster Bar and Restaurant at Grand Central Terminal, where generations of harried commuters, world travelers, shoppers and midtown workers mingled under vaulted tile ceilings for seafood with a dash of bustling New York, was all but destroyed in a roaring subterranean fire early yesterday.
Fire officials said the flames turned the restaurant on the lower level of the terminal into an inferno, melting down kitchen equipment and furnishings, bringing down hundreds of ceiling tiles and blackening the sprawling dining room, the wood-paneled saloon and a room with long serpentine marble counters where patrons for decades had sat elbow-to-elbow on stools for quick lunches.
But the proprietors of the establishment, which dates back to the opening of Grand Central in 1913, said that there did not appear to be major structural damage to ceilings or walls, and they said that they intended to restore the restaurant and
1913 Fire-proof tile put to the test:
1914 Exalted underside: The Henry Hornbostel-designed Bridgemarket, under the Queensboro bridge in New York, uses terra-cotta ceiling tile with tongue-and-groove design for self-supporting vaults.
ca. 1913 Oyster Bar, Grand Central Terminal in New York, before the fire; afterwards, Gaustavino's solid ceiling remains largely intact.
PAGE 17
1914, Rumford Sound Absorbing Tile, invented by Gaustavino with Wallace C. Sabine
Guastavino Dr. collaborates with Wallace Sabine, founder of the field of architectural acoustics, to develop a sound absorbing tile to be used in the Guastavino vault.
1916 Elaboration: "Intercommunicating channels extending and opening through the face" to muffle sound.
rumford tile's provides a gothic revival church with modern acoustics, and the underside becomes a seal
Guastavino Company guide to a dome: a thick lamination of various materials (fir tile, rough tile, concrete, hollow tile "used only in very cold climates") that makes up the roof and the ceiling, and acts as structure.
1914 St. Thomas' Church, New York: Guastavino ceiling vaults with Rumford acoustic tile between stone ribs.

Sound absorbí» able. it. several :
block.* rc 3LCTIOH-THR.U- COLD*CLI-DA5E-OF-DOME* MATE.* J ! ON-C-C-bETWEEN*	//
¡THL-WINDOW3*	////,
Scale &>r-0" * /S/fjim/
contrast«!} colors
ÓECTIOI-THBU OUT^fc-DOML ON* D-D'* Scale 5'-l:0'*
-C*«IZ/ file laid
/lile.bricLor > concrete step*
DETAIL* 5ECTION*THRU* A* 3IH-(3LE.-DOML-Of-TILE..COM -5TRUCTED-WITH-A- SOFFIT* COUB.SL*OF*SOUND*AD -SOBDI«q*TILE*LAID*m*OB.-NAMEHTAL-PATTER.N-AKD-IH COLOBS-ASMAYDE-SELECTED* •Scale- E- i-O**
Con.hn.UOU9 tcLSICni band, fljfe £ aide riyeted food ter 5iie c^baed depenar OL load 4span, of /
•DETAIL-3ECTIOH-THB.U-DOUDLL'TILL’DOML* •C0I5TB.UCTED-WITH-LOWEIL-CXL-CEILIIIG * -DOML*OF*DETAIL- OR.* MTT EUX-AS-MAY-DE •DE5IJLlD-4*fACED*WITII- SOU MD* ADSORB-•IHCj-TILL*	Scale. J'-l-O'«
PAGE 18
HENNEBIQUE'S
REVOLUTIONARY CONSTRUCTION SYSTEM
Melding concrete {betón) column and beam into a continuous material, the bricklayer and self-taught engineer François Hennebique (1842-1921) makes large spaces for industry and gives modernism the tools to re-imagine architecture.
1898 Super-strong and fireproof: Hennebique's patent for "Constructions of joists, girders, and the like:" "The use of strengthened beton in buildings has within recent years greatly developed. It has been thought possible by mixing beton and iron or steel to replace the purely metallic elements of building construction by parts equally incombustible but lighter and more simply and rapidly made. In any case the mixture of cement or hydraulic lime, which resists perfectly compression with iron or steel, which more particularly resists tension and flexion, has not hitherto been capable of being carried out in a judicious and rational manner."
1900 Starting in France: 26,000 square feet for La Cite spinning mill, Mulhous. Exterior uprights also in Armored Concrete, allowing extra large windows. Ceiling is unadorned by decoration and unencumbered by systems.
Hennebique's method compared to other reinforced
beam construction techniques:
a. Pope, 1811; b) William Wilkinson, 1854;
c.	Hennebique, 1897 patent;
d,	e, f. modern reinforced concrete; g. modern prestressed concrete.
ca. 1905 Spreading to America: 50,000 square feet, built in 50 days, for a "stable" for the United States Express Company, Jersey City, built by architect Ernest Flagg, using the Hennebique method. Perfectly smooth underside of slab with beams forming squares.
PAGE 19
Beton Arme: reinforced concrete
ij nnebique publishes a journal, which runs for 40 years, on his system. Hennebique vigorously defends his patents • civil courts, taking one case to Paul Cottancin, published in Le Beton Arme in 1901. The Cottancin system uses mesh in . er than individual bars, allowing extremely slender reinforced concrete members; Cottancin reportedly does not trust the bond between concrete and steel. Cottancin, a main competitor to Hennebique, lost the lawsuit to nullify l-|ennebique's patent.
Patent for the various types of Cottancin's mesh.
PAGE 20
SLAB FRANCHISE
Hennebique, together with his brother, disseminate their reinforced concrete through a network of 42 representatives around the world. Europe and South America are the most receptive markets, with the US still preferring steel and iron for its skyscrapers and wooden balloon frames for its houses. In Italy, the Turin based engineer Porcheddu is the main proponent of the system, opening offices in Milan, Rome, and Genoa - a city which, in the first decade of 20th century, offers a microcosm of early concrete construction.
1906 -1907 Heft and grace: upper class rental apartment block for the shipping entrepreneur A. Accame, Genoa.
1906-1907 Palazzlna Figarl: curved concrete beams take on sculptural qualities.
1906-1907 Concrete underside of Palazzlne Figarl facing the Ligurian sea holds a medieval-nostalgic belvedere.
PAGE 21
1902 Naked: Docks for the storage of wine in the port of Genoa.
1902 Dressed: Caffe Concerto in Genoa, the underside of the slab finely decorated.
PAGE 22
SPREAD OF THE SLAB
1895-1909 Diagram by Porcheddu showing the number of his buildings realized in Italy using the Hennebique reinforced concrete system, increasing steadily from 12 in 1895, to 1,308 in 1909.
Another lyrical diagram showing the increasing number of buildings put up by Porcheddu in Italy.
1906-1931 An index of the Hennebique system in Ligury, the region surrounding Genoa, broken down by project type - hospitals, theaters, churches, etc.
PAGE 23
1914 After the event: 16 years after Hennebique's invention of reinforced concrete, Le Corbusier's first manifesto, the Maison Dom-lno, reduces the ceiling-floor to a perfectly flat slab, free even of beams and ribs. For Austrian scholar Hans Sedlmayr, in his 1947 book Verlust der Mitte (Loss of the Center), the Dom-lno style unadorned ceiling/floor slab is to blame for a symbolic crisis within architecture.
1942 After an air raid, the concrete horizontal structure of the Lingotto Fiat factory in Turin, designed by Giacomo Mattè-Trucco in 1923 with Porcheddu-engineered Hennebique concrete, shows its resistance...
PAGE 24
CEILING: A PLACE FOR MACHINERY
From the beginning of the industrial revolution into the 20th century, the raw underside of the ceiling plays a critical role as a framework for factory infrastructure.
1907 Cotton looms powered by belts and pulleys hanging from ceiling ironwork.
ca. 1835 Drive line shaft pierces the curved vaulted celling slabs of Lumbhole Mill, Kettleshulme, England; the crucial turning wheels almost touch the ceiling on every level.
1835 Pulleys and belts suspended from Ironwork celling In a Manchester cotton mill.
PAGE 25
LIGHTING up the basement
"If the amount of basement room in the City alone now wasted for want of sufficient daylight were to be calculated, and if an estimate of its rental value, when properly lighted ere made, the total would probably reach seven figures, while the additional health and comfort obtainable from these improvements must prove a boon to those whose work is necessarily conducted 'below,' and those who occupy office in a Basement."
_77je Citizen, London, September 26, 1879.
Frederick Hamilton &
Co's patented Prismoidal lenses, embedded in the floor/ceiling slab, Intensify and diffuse light from above.
1879 A basement on Leadenhail street, London, illuminated by Hamilton's prismoidal light, featured in the Furniture Gazette.
PAGE 26
URBAN UNDERSIDE
The underside mode of the ceiling announces arrival in the city through massive canopies of various materials that convert the outside to the inside...
1571 Addition of an outdoor ceiling creates ceremonial street for entry of Charles IX into Paris.
PAGE 27
CEILING BATTLES ROOF IN BERLIN'S NEW TRAIN STATIONS
Whard Lucae, a German architect (and in 1873 director of the Berlin Academy of Architecture) states hat Berlin's new train stations are "dealing less with a ceiling than with a roof. A roof is still far from being ceiling ■ the ceiling should appear as a whole; an ever more perfect ceiling, the more it appears as a hole." (Richard Lucae, "Über die ästhetische Ausbildung der Eisen-Konstruktionen, besonders in ihrer Anwendung bei Räumen von bedeutender Spannweite," Deutsche Bauzeitung 4, 1870, 12.)
juy Bj/tmmmmíSii H¿
1866 Gorlitzer Bahnhof, Berlin, August Orth Flury,	1867 Niederschlesisch-Markischer Bahnhof, Berlin,
Aita, and Christopher Baumberger.	by Eduard Römer and Johann Wilhelm Schwedler.

PAGE 28
1966 Ceilingscape: Konrad Wachsmann, German pioneer of the space frame while in exile in the US, draws on his experience designing aircraft hangars for the Americans during the war to propose a city hall in California. If realized, the building would have embodied an extreme of architectural fundamentalism: absolutely no elements of architecture except for a roof (and, seen from below: a form of ceiling-as-underside); with no facades and no columns, the structure is kept up by high tension steel cables anchored in embankments on either side.
'Like the carpet, the ceiling represents the concept of a horizontal surface that initially excluded the secondary concepts of right and left, front and back. Here one can also imagine the horizontal spatial enclosure as concentrated around the centerpoint, which is both the beginning and the end of all stylistic relations that -by means of subdivisions, lines, and patterns - represent the absolute concept of a horizontal plane on the ceiling." —Gottfried Semper, Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts; or, Practical Aesthetics (1860-62).
PAGE 30
EXPOSED CEILING
Migrating from the raw ceilings of factories to high modernist luxury homes, the unadorned, usually metallic underside of the floor above takes root in one half of the American consciousness, such as it is, of ceilings. The dogma of structural honesty in modern architecture, and the metaphor of the structure as a skeleton, with visible bones, finds its perfect ally in the exposed ceiling. At the same time, the dropped ceiling - usually called "false" in Europe - takes command in offices.
Roof/ceiling: sectional view of the Eames house reveals trussed open web joists and Ferro-board decking, exposed and used for clamp lights and ornaments.
1943 Mies van der Rohe's Minerals and Metals Building, Chicago, exposes (appropriately) metallic underside and girders. The building is shown at the 15th Anniversary Exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art, curated by Philip Johnson, impressing the visiting Californians Charles and Ray Eames.
1950 Exposed ceiling of Eames Case Study House #8, in the Pacific Palisades, California, photographed by Julius Shulman for Life magazine, which comments: "Interior view shows living room's 17-foot-high ceiling, unadorned steel-truss construction, to which Eames clamps lamps for varied lighting effects. He puts up the pilings from an old pier outside the door because he liked their looks.
He similarly suspended a Chinese owl kite and toy French horn from the ceiling."
1962 Flat with grooves: Case Study House #21 in Carmel Valley, California by Pierre Koenig.
1962 Corrugated: one of Donald Wexler's steel houses in Palm Springs.
PAGE 31
smooth
CEILING
1949 In the Glass House at New Canaan, Philip Johnson, never a fan of "honesty" in architecture, plasters the ceiling, concealing the structure with a smooth finish.
no insulation, recesses, or mounted lights. The floor registers ventilate the bathroom.
1951 At Farnsworth House, Mies goes back to plaster - a sealing - after experimenting elsewhere with exposed structure, preferring perfect smoothness for domestic ceilings, free of lights or ventilation.
Behi surfe the F roof

PLASTIC ELASTIGUM T X T STEEL GUARD ANGLE ROOFING FELT WITH LEAD FLASHING T FOAM GLASS IMBEDDED IN ASPHALT FACIA CUT FROM 5" WIDE FLANGE
—	LIGHTWEIGHT CONCRETE FILL
—	PRECAST CONCRETE CHANNEL SLAB
—	6" X3JST STRUCTURAL STEEL ANGLE AT 12‘ ON CENTER
15" STRUCTURAL STEEL GIRDER
—	T CORK BOARD
—	8’x 3" BENT STEEL PLATE y* STEEL BAR
PLUG WELD
x 7/e" SCREW AT 1T ON CENTER Ifc-xH" STEEL BAR CEILING ASSEMBLAGE HANGER 1 Vi' STEEL CHANNEL PLASTER HANGER
—	METAL LATH AND PLASTER CEILING
PAGE 32
part 2: sealing
An extra surface attached below the structural underside of the floor or roof above, often liberated from structural duties. The word "ceiling" has etymological connections with the practice of sealing a room, specifically the underside of the floor or roof above...
1428 ceil
verb, meaning to cover with a lining of woodwork, sometimes of plaster, etc. (the interior roof or walls, to wainscot).
1598 "Betweene the roofe and the seeling, the three Senators ... hid themselves."
The annales of Cornelius Tacitus, "The description of Germanie."
1798 "Plasterers' work is of two kinds, namely, ceiling, which is plastering upon laths; and rendering."
— Charles Hutton, A course of mathematics, in two volumes, II, 90.
4th century Possibly the most ancient example of a sealing, the ceiling of Trier is discovered when Germany is in ruins, in 1945. Possibly part of the palace of emperor Constantine, it is evident that the ceiling is originally intended as a surface for iconography, but it also served a practical function, hiding the horizontal structure above it.
PAGE
"]ust as flower-covered meadows and the neutral tones of the ground represent a natural analogy for the carpet, so the starry canopy of the heavens wjth its azure blue has since ancient times - as long as humanity has embroidered, woven, painted, and built - been the model for those concerned with preparing upper horizontal terminations of a room. In this regard, too, ceilings and carpet differ fundamentally. — Gottfried Semper, Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts; or, Practical /[esthetics (1860-62; Texts & Documents, 2004), 146-147.
1685 Andrea Pozzo, a set-designer and painter, depicts the Glory of St Ignatius Loyola and the Missionary Work of the Jesuit Order, on the ceiling of St. Ignatius church, Rome. The trompe I'oeil one-point perspective imagines a continuation of the nave opening up to the heavens. In the painted sky framed by the extended architecture, St. Ignatius can be seen entering the afterlife.
PAGE 34
1504 "At the end of the Quattrocento, the Scuole Grandi in Venice decides to decorate their great assembly halls -and largest rooms - with opulent ceilings with wood inlay. The Scuola Grande di San Marco is an example. The profusion of gold - emblem of the Scuola's power, also financial - is the strongest message conveyed by the ceiling of its Albergo, surrounded by exquisitely carved geometric patterns made by intaglio artists Pietro and Biaglo da Faenza. This type of ceiling clearly precedes a later form where the ornamental geometric pattern leaves empty space for wooden compartimenti, host to a more eloquent and contemporary medium: painting."
—Giulia Foscari, Elements of Venice (Lars Muller, 2014).
PAGE 35
r
rLY "DROP" CEILINGS, IMITATING DOME & VAULT
¿60 AD Byzantine ggptistery, Ravenna: en .earsaftentsongmal
instruction with
a pitched roof and a
Loosed ceiling (or even f,lat sealing), Bishop
Meonius installs a dome-
shaped symbolic ceiling
Jferneath, formed by argilla tubes attached to the cornices of the newly thickened inner
walls. Dome on the
inside; pitched roof on
the outside.
Original height of wall (cross hatch); newer wall built on top (horizontal hatch) with tubular connections to the dome.
interlinked structural members.
11,11 century Palatine Chapel, Palermo, Sicily, appears to have a structural vault...
1931 A new drawing shows the ceiling in fact suspended from the structure above, creating a void.
Hollow argilla tube construction, later covered with a mosaic.
PAGE 36
ISLAMIC SEALING
The complex geometry of Islamic vaulted sealings, with patterns called muqarnas, often hides the true structure of the building's roof.
15th—16th century
Construction lines used to develop a muqarnas pattern in the Timurid Topkapi Scroll.

Geometry for the vaults of the Topkapi mosque, Istanbul, drawn in ten steps to generate complex forms.
Modern computational algorithms, such as the Game of Life, replicate similar logic to those patterns used by Islamic architecture.
PAGE 37
■ rhitect Owen Hones and colleague Hules Goury - a former assistant to Gottfried Semper -1834 it Granada to study the Alhambra, the 11th century citadel, constructed with its current footprint traVe *°rish king Mohammed ben Al-Ahman. Hones and Goury record In unprecedented detail the by ^o0 t 0f the complex, including the ceilings of the great halls, focusing largely on the pendentlves orname construction details that facilitate the transition of the octagonal dome to the rectangular
"Sprint of room _ >n	Bark.
"DETAILS OF THE GREAT ARCHES. HALL OF THE BARK."
"The ceiling of the Hall of the Bark, a wagonheaded dome of wood, of most elaborate patterns, as may be seen in the general section of the Court of the Fishpond, and the Hall of the Ambassadors, receives its support at each end from pendentives, abutting against the great arches. These pendentives are of a very curious mathematical construction. They are composed of numerous prisms of plaster, united by their contiguous lateral surfaces, consisting of seven different forms, proceeding from three primary figures on plan: they are, the right angled triangle (A), the rectangle (B), and the Isosceles triangle (C). In these (a a, a b, a c) are equal; (b a) is equal to (b b), and the verticle angle of the isosceles triangle (C) is 45°. The figure (B) has one form, in section; the figure (A) three; and figure (C) three ; the third (C 3) being a rhomboid, formed by the double isosceles triangle. The curves (x x x) of the several pieces are similar, by which It will be seen that a piece may be combined with any one of the others by either of its sides; thus rendering them susceptible of combinations as various as the melodies which may be produced from the seven notes of the musical scale."
Plans, elevations, sections, and details of the Alhambra, from drawings taken on the spot in 1834 by Jules Goury, and in 1834 and 1837 by Owen Jones (1842).
"(The Hall of the Two Sisters) muqarnas ceiling, a tour de force of the geometer's art, is composed of over 5,000 prismatic pieces. Seven basic prism shapes, all in stucco, have been used. The function of the muqarnas here is to mediate between the octagonal drum of the ceiling and the rectangular shape of the chamber below.
The celling seems to float over the hall without receiving support from the walls; the overall effect is of a celestial explosion."
—Robert Irwin, The Alhambra (Wonders of the World), (2011).
PAGE 38
Ornamental sealings of Islam are strictly linked to the buildings to which they belong...
The domed sealing is integral to the identity and tectonic mass of Islamic architecture.
- Marrakesch. - Moschea della Koutoubtyyah.


12»h century Sealed dome in the mosque of Koutoubia, Marrakesh.
though other sealings can migrate between buildings and epochs
kjjit out of wood, the sealing, as a non-structural addition, can be removed and ^located from one building to another, from authentic original to orientalist nostalgia...
1994 Medieval
ceiling from Islamic Spain, auction at Christie's, London.
A medieval vaulted ceiling from Islamic Spain, circa 14th Century 14 ft. (427 cm.) wide. Estimate on request
PAGE 40
BRUNELLESCHI'S DOME
Filippo Brunelleschi (1377-1446), trained as a goldsmith, works on the Santa Maria Del Fiore cathedral in Florence for 27 years of his life. An advanced array of planning and construction techniques for bricklaying combined with supportive wood structures and new hoisting techniques, also design by Brunelleschi, enables the free standing structure to not collapse under its own weight. It remains the largest brick dome ever built. Although the dome itself is finished in 1436, at the time of Brunelleschi's death 10 years later, construction work on the lantern had only just started. It meant that the dome's ceiling had all this time only been whitewashed and hadn't received Brunelleschi's desired gold covering - using the ceiling perhaps as a way to celebrate his victory over the Florence's architectural class who had resisted his design for decades...
1568-1579 The dome is completed in I436; Giorgio Vasari begins his fresco The Last Judgment in 1568, only to be completed by Federico Zuccari in 1579. After the death of Vasari and his commissioning patron Cosimo I, Federico Zuccari from Urbino takes over the 4,000m2 fresco, of which one third is finished at that point. Zuccari decides to dramatically depart from Vasari's drawing, changing both the design and application methods.
He uses a less durable but faster 'dry' application painting method and substitutes the more subtle tones of Vasari - who drew inspiration from early renaissance frescos - to a more popular and "spectacular" layout drawn from his experience as a stage designer.
Circulation inside the void behind the dome's sealing. A pre-Miesian exercise in architectural honesty, Brunelleschi instructed the dome builders to keep the herring-bone pattern in the brickwork exposed to visitors climbing the stairs to the lantern.
ca. 1875-1895 Souvenir view of Santa Maria Dei Fiore, purchased by George Washington Blackwell during his European tour.
SeCtional view reveals
the si*6 0fthrV
heUen sealing
(surface for the	resco)
A structure in the
Erne's poché-big Lugh for a circulation
epnath up to the lantern.
Void between roof structure and vaulted ceiling added below it.
1730s Vaulted ceiling beneath pitched roof: an early instance of the false ceiling, at the Pallazzlna dl caccia of Stupinigi, Turin, by architect Filippo luvarra.
1790s Stupinigl's central hall, with its plastered and painted vaulted ceiling in a painting by Giovanni Battista Bagnasacchi.
PAGE 42
THE PALATIAL "FALSE" CEILING
The Palazzina di caccia (hunting residence) of Stupinigi, Turin, is built in the 1730s by Sicilian architect Filippo luvarra for the Duke of Savoy Vittorio Amedeo II in the woods south of the city. In the late 1930s, the building is designated a shining example of "late Baroque" by Richard Pommer. But in the abundant scholarly literature on the building, it is scarcely noted how the main hall is covered by a curved vault made of timber, hanging from the structure of the pitched roof. The lower surface is plastered, and treated to give the illusion of a masonry structure...
PAGE 43
"The crowd of dancers, among whom he [the Prince] could count so many near to him in blood if not in heart, began to seem unreal, made up of the material from which are woven lapsed memories, more elusive even than the stuff of disturbing dreams. From the ceiling the gods, reclining on gilded couches, gazed down smiling and inexorable as a summer sky. They thought themselves eternal; but a bomb manufactured in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, was to prove the contrary in 1943."
— Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, The Leopard (1958).


1740s Dance hall, Palazzo Valguarnera Gangi, Palermo, designed by Andrea Glgante with heavily adorned ceiling and decorated vaulting framework -and later the set for the climactic scene in Luchino Visconti's 1963 adaption of The Leopard, starring Burt Lancaster and Claudia Cardinale.

249
PAGE 44
NOSTALGIA FOR THE TENT
Masonry structure imitating fabric and fabric evoking tents.
1699 Ceiling as tent: Palazzo Albrizzi, Venice, decorated by Carpoforo Mazzetti, whose ceiling alludes to something "lighter" than structure...
1752 Tent ceiling at a party in Palazzo Farnese, Rome, used during special events to shift the center of the room around chandeliers.
PAGE 45
1820 Tent made permanent: Woolwich Rotunda, London, originally a large bell tent put up In St. Dames' Park six years previous, for a ball to celebrate victory over Napoleon. The Tent is so loved that it's moved to Woolwich Common, where architect Dohn Nash hits upon a way to make it more durable, encircling the circumference with a 24-sided brick wall, adding a masonry column for stability, and a layer of heavy lead sheeting to replace the canvas roof. The tent is thus transformed into an artillery museum.
f h^S ^U.r^'s^ themed room, with hanging 3bric ceiling, inside the Gothic revivalist sstello d'Albertis, Genoa.
PAGE 46
THE DOMESTIC SEALING
George Washington Snow popularized the balloon frame house in the US starting in the 1820s; this transition toward building walls as timber structural members enveloped in surfaces required effective panelization - a perfect, modular sealing of the walls, floor, and ceiling...

1877 Ten men put up a balloon frame house Omaha Reservation, Nebraska.
1928 The Jester-Sackett system suggests ensconcing the entire room, from walls to ceiling, in uniform, fire- and noise-proof plasterboard paneling. The room is sealed. Originally for industrial buildings, the plasterboard ceiling proves effective in buildings with wood structures too.
1945 Seamless ceiling of Sheetrock: after cladding the interior of a balloon frame house in Sheetrock panels, joints in the ceiling can be made invisible through Perf-A-Tape and cement that is "buttered into the joint-channel formed by Sheetrock recessed edges."
1955	"With parquetry, rugs, tile - the floor is part of your decorative scheme. The ceiling was once decorative, too. Then, the old materials became too expensive." Ad for Homasote's Big Sheets in Popular Science.
Mrs. Kane's Boarding House, 1871. The proprietor signs her son Charles's custody over to Mr. Thatcher (Citizen Kane, Orson Welles, 1941). The interior is a perfect sealing, with panneling above indistinguishable from that on the walls.
1913 Removing the sealing flushes rats out from their previously cosy homes in ceiling/ floor cavities, as suggested in Public Health Reports, the official journal of the US Public Health Service.
PAGE 47
ke to discover that he had undergone "He iimorphosis and become Gregor Samsa. a ,a flat on his back on the bed, looking at H8	|t took time for his eyes to adjust to
the ce ¡I jfig ceiling seemed to be a common, the Hav ceiling of the sort one might find anywhere everY ¡t kiac| been painted white, or possibly a pale 0nce' years of dust and dirt, however, c"^aiven it the color of spoiled milk. It had no had 9 t no defining characteristic. No argument, °rna essage. It fulfilled its structural role but n° ^nd to nothing further... In any case, he had aTarn how to move his body. He couldn't lie !hire staring up at the ceiling forever."
"Camsa in Love," Haruki Murakami,
~jheNew Yorker, October 28, 2013.
1939 Fire-safe American home, with gypsum ceiling panels, illustrated by the United States Gypsum Company.
A suspended ceiling is a good-looking coverup
ft {8 not difficult to install a suspended celling: (1) Select a new ceiling height and add one Inch to allow for the width of the perimeter angle strip. Draw a line around the room to mark the height. (2) NaH the top edge of the anale strip along the line. (3) Hang the suspension wires at 4-toot intervals across the ceiling. (4) After installing the mam tee oars, insert me cross ends into the main tee slot and bend the locking tables. (Q Starting at the perimeter of the room, lay the panels into the grid.
1981 "It is not difficult to install a suspended ceiling," says the Chicago Tribune in a how-to guide on May 3, 1981.
PAGE 48
west meets east
Wright, Schindler, Neutra and the Japanese path to the false ceiling By Arthur Liu
"I have preferred tradition because Japan has already done, in her own perfect way, what now lies for study before us."
— Frank Lloyd Wright, "Modern Architecture, Being the Khan Lectures" (1931).
In 1905, Frank Lloyd Wright visits Japan with his wife Catherine Lee "Kitty" Tobin. Thirty-seven years old, it is his first time abroad. The adventure is organized so that Wright can purchase wood block prints, an interest that could only seldom be enjoyed from afar. Wright's architectural access point to Japan has been Edward Morse's Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings (1886), the first Western, manual-like book on Japanese domestic architecture. Significantly for Wright, Morse notes the Japanese ceiling: "It is rare to see a ceiling differing from the conventional form, consisting of light, thin, square strips as ceiling-beams, upon which rest crosswise thin planks of wood with their edges overlapping ... this form is as universal in Japan as is the ordinary white plaster-ceiling with us."
While in Japan, Wright longs for his new mistress, Mamah Cheney. Wright will leave his wife of 20 years, who bore him six children, for Mamah in 1909, and the American architecture and social worlds turn their back on him.
Redux 1: Refuge
In 1914, Mamah, her two children, and five others are murdered at Taliesin, the Wright home and studio in Chicago, by the house servant. Wright pursues the commission for the Imperial Hotel in Tokyo and secures it in late 1916; he will live there, in a form of exile, intermittently from 1917 to 1922, immersing himself in the art of his new home, working undisturbed in his penthouse studio-bedroom surrounded by Japanese artifacts, or visiting architectural sites around the country.
Starting from his first visit in 1905, and with each successive trip during the hotel commission, Wright experiences first hand what he considers the perfection of Japanese architecture. Where Edward Morse's book on Japanese architecture and his many wood block prints could only suggest designs based on images, it becomes clear to Wright that the depth of Japanese architecture is far more profound.
He will later regard it as the origin from which the new architecture will spring.
Exchange
Poured concrete dominates construction of Wright's hotel in Tokyo. The importation of this foreign building technique
254
1931, Wright comments: "The modern process of standardization, as we now face it on every side sterilized by it, prostrate to it, was in Japan known and practiced with artistic perfection by freedom of choice many centuries ago ... any Japanese dwelling was an effective study in sublimated mathematics."
1886 Modular tatami floor, panelized ceiling: illustration in Edward Morse's Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings, the only western guide to Japanese architecture, lapped up by Wright.
1905 Inspired by Morse's book of 1886, Wright
implants a ceiling with Japanese echoes in the Darwin Martin House, and leaves to see Japan for himself.
1904-06 Wright also completes the design for the Larkin Building before heading for Japan. Like the Martin House, the Larkin Building shows signs of his Japanophilic ceiling, testing his hand on the potential of other modular forms.
PAGE 49
MZ'nnuet (with ceiling beams providing focal point) h Utagawa Toyohara (ca. 1771) to Chicago
collector Clarence Buckingham.
1915 Taliesin II: Panellzed ceiling composed of thin wood strips with plaster infill.
1923 Imperial Hotel, Tokyo, by Frank Lloyd Wright.
over the work of four apprentices: Tsuchiura Kameki, Werner Moser, Tsuchiura Nobu, and oearest camera, Richard Neutra (32). In the stone wa l behind them is a vault containing Wright's collection of Japanese prints.
is finally celebrated when, in late 1923, the Imperial Hotel is one of the few buildings still standing in Tokyo after the Great Kanto earthquake. For Wright, now back in the US at Taliesin II in Wisconsin, it is an affirmation of his architectural legacy.
Redux 2: FLW Inc.
Taliesin II, built in 1915, is mostly destroyed by fire in early 1925. Only the workroom where Wright keeps drawings of his projects survives. Fresh from his refuge in Japan, he is given the opportunity to remake the image of his home and studio once again. Former clients purchase stock in FLW Inc. to help fund the maestro's project. Wright re-emerges as an architectural and social dynamo.
New order
When Wright returns to the US he is the Japanese implant -bringing back, in addition to a mountain of Japanese wood block prints, a hybrid form of Wrightian-American architecture spliced with Japanese motifs. Hidden behind the more obvious Japan-esque architectural features readily apparent in Wright's work are his peculiar ceilings, which prove to be more influential in the West than what he left in Tokyo is to the Japanese. Where once they only visually mimicked the 'images' of Japanese ceilings, they now relentlessly embrace panelization. Wright declares in Modem Architecture: Being the Kahn Lecture for 1930:
"as culture expands, we soon, too soon, deny outright the original sources of our inspiration as a suspected reproach to our own superiority. This you may quite generally find in the modern art world. At this moment in our development Japan particularly is thus the 'great insulted' ... ignorance of origins is no virtue."
Two years later Wright forms the Taliesin Fellowship, with chapters in Arizona and Wisconsin. Wright's influence will spread among an ever growing following of young architectural fellows, and ceilings will never be the same again.
1937 Wright's Taliesin West, in the Arizona desert, with panelized illuminated ceiling. The house is also the home of the Taliesin Fellowship, the training ground for Wright's disciples. Neutra says of his first time at Taliesin: ''[I] felt as though I were in a Japanese temple district, whatever I thought that might look like. Taliesin was completely removed from anything I had known before and here there did live a man who fitted it."
PAGE 50
Two Paths
Richard Neutra, an Austrian, is a relatively late disciple of Wright, joining his studio in 1923, after experiencing the First World War and subsequent rebuilding effort in Europe. Neutra spends only nine months under Wright's tutelage, but it's enough. He moves to Los Angeles to work with fellow Austrian expat and Wright graduate Rudolph Schindler (who runs Wright's office while his boss is in ]apan), and he becomes infatuated with Japanese architecture, finally visiting the country in 1930. Neutra is a mix of European exile, fan of Japanese perfectionism in systematized construction, and American relentlessness, exploiting the promise of industrialized building and self promotion.
The International Style exhibition opens at MOMA in 1932. The US is represented by Wright and Neutra, who is proclaimed the leading modern architect of the west coast, and second only to Wright in his international reputation. Fueled by this affirmation, Neutra pushes his préfabrication agenda in lectures around the globe, and publishes 12 books by 1970. In 1954, Neutra writes Survival Through Design and dedicates it to Wright. The title is intended to be taken literally. Neutra writes: "Across the Pacific, on the islands of Japan, an entire nation has been living in minutely standardized dwellings for a thousand years. It is a kind of mass standardization of housing far beyond anything ever attempted or conceived in the industrialized age." And, touchingly: "[Japanese] Detailing and finishing were as simple and normalized as they were superbly neat.
I	had been striving for all that, and I was no longer alone."
Wright's architecture does not carry the spirit of the 'modern' for Neutra. It remains bespoke and visually heavy. It is thick. Neutra believes in the lightness of space, the blurred distinction between interior and exterior, and the destruction of the 'box' relied on by European Modernists. Facilitated by steel, glass and panelized construction, Neutra invents what will become the modern ceiling, fusing the European modernist obsession with thin planar surfaces, the American appetite for technology, and the modular Japanese surface as first interpreted by Wright. Walls disintegrate; ceiling and floor-the horizontal plane-begin to dominate.
1925 Austrian emigres and former students and colleagues of Wright, Richard Neutra (left) and Rudolph Schindler (right) at Schindler's home and studio, the Kings Road House in Los Angeles.
iszb pretaoricatea Mouse, construction Detail at Ceiling & Roof. "From the very beginning of my professional work, in all modesty, I wanted to feel somewhat like a foreman and creator of prototypes." (Neutra, The Individual Counts -Building must lastingly Serve Him, 1970)

1932 Neutra's home and studio, the VDL Research House, is the first iteration of the modern panelized ceiling. Later, Neutra writes: "Whatever we design today, the immense number of careful technical details we conceive-all of it has its true contemporary significance only if it does not aim at uniqueness but at an applicability for repetitive production, for production en serie." (Neutra, L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui, 1946).
HUB



PAGE 51
1955 Neutra's hybrid resurfaces in the Kronish House, Los Angeles. A Japanese moment - the dropped anelized ceiling above the bar - in an otherwise European-tinged smooth white ceiling.
1963 Maslon House: a deep and continuous mirror at the top of the wall makes the illuminated ceiling appear to cut further into the adjoining room. The wall in service of the celling.
Infinite test
In 1932, Neutra builds his home and studio, the VDL (Van der Leeuw) Research House in LA. The diversity of ceilings within betrays his struggle in creating the modern ceiling. Most are seamless white planes, except on the second floor, above the stair, where the ceiling is composed of modular rectangular panels, strikingly similar to the traditional Japanese ceilings admired by Wright and seen by Neutra a few years earlier. It appears like the island of Japan surrounded by an ocean of Europe. Far from simply an efficient means of construction, like the Japanese house, this panelized ceiling is also infused with a lighting element. Two years after visiting Japan, and in his own home, Neutra invents a hybrid ceiling of Sino-Ameri-Euro extremes.
Neutra's struggles resurface in 1955 at the humble one-storey Kronish House in LA. The ceiling here is relentlessly Euro-Modern - a Mies-like, floating white plane, punctuated with slightly protruding lights. But above the bar hangs a suspended surface, square in pattern, concealing spotlights. Like VDL, it is a hybrid: a translucent screen appearing as a floating, grided plane of light, a discreet 'Japanese' moment in a greater 'European' purity of the ceiling plane.
The final manifestation of Neutra's hybrid ceiling occurs in the Los Angeles Hall of Records in 1961. The ceiling is dominated by the illuminated and grided surface, already famously used in the Seagram building three years earlier. The hidden influence of Japan, through Wright and his protégés, is the leaven in the recipe of the modern ceiling, helping it spread around the world: its modularity, continuity, smoothness, thinness - almost to the point of being like paper or fabric more than architecture - in fact distinctly like the Japanese wood block print: serialized, repeatable, 'printed,' and transportable.
1961 Neutra's Los Angeles Hall of Records, ominated by illuminated modular ceiling.
Contemporary version: proportion of lit panels to opaque panels significantly reduced. Location unknown.
PAGE 52
House of Commons
part 3: sandwich
1834 "Parliament on Fire." Witness report: "Indeed the whole might be imagined to resemble Milton's Pandemonium; the solid walls, presenting numerous architectural apertures, appeared to glow red hot with the fervent heat."
1836 Charles Barry's competition-winning plan for rebuilding is praised for its cost-saving clarity. Barry is a master of the plan; the technical services of the building, for which the ceilings will play a crucial role, are left to Scottsman David Boswell Reid, aka "the ventilator."
House of Lords
RIVER FRONT
IOO
.. ------------- . ,,, .
PAGE 53
Comfort descends from above
The engineered ceilings of London's Palace of Westminster, 1834-1854 By Manfredo di Robilant
FIRE
An enormous crowd rushed to witness the burning of the English parliament on the night of October 16, 1834. Some famous paintings, many less famous drawings, and countless firsthand reports all worked to imprint the event deep in the collective memory of early Victorian society. Images and testimony alike lingered on the way the flames were reflected in the waters of the Thames.
A romantic sensibility and the fact the river was not yet considered a "cloaca maxima,"1 dangerous to the public health, contributed to the event's aesthetic allure. The spectacle was alternately described as sublime, and a living hell:
"I am just returned from the terrific burning of the Houses of Parliament. Mary and I went in a cab, and drove over the bridge. From the bridge it was sublime."2
"Indeed the whole might be imagined to resemble Milton's Pandemonium; the solid walls, presenting numerous architectural apertures, appeared to glow red hot with the fervent heat."3
Aside from the grandeur, the public's pressing concern was the possible destruction of the documents that recorded the parliament's centuries of activities, so important in a common law system. Once it became clear that many of these papers were safe, the fire was classified in the public mind as a picturesque accident rather than a wound in the collective memory.4 Romantic fascination was in fact limited to the night of the fire, and the day-after's ruins inspired little pathos or melancholy. Despite the scale of the disaster, significant portions of the 400-year-old buildings were still standing.
COMPETITION
The architect Robert Smirke, who had previously worked on minor modifications of the palatial complex, was almost immediately retained to plan repairs. This choice was soon criticized by politicians as arbitrary and by architects as unfair.5 A call for proposals was published in Duly 1835, specifying that the new palace should be an interpretation of Gothic or Elizabethan - meaning British architecture of the 14th, 15th, and early 16th centuries. This choice of styles was a reflection of the belief that architecture was a critical component in the British Empire's identity,6 and of the belief that architecture was still largely a matter of symbolism. In a building project where modern requirements of utility and comfort would start to take precedence for the first time, the imposition of a Gothic or Elizabethan style was initially more important, meant to evoke trusted epochs considered crucial to the foundation of England:
"[In Great Britain] by 1840 not only was it almost unthinkable to build a church in any style other than Gothic or Romanesque, but even such unmedieval things as stoves, shop-fronts and domestic furniture were given Gothic form."7
Competing architects had a deadline of November to submit their designs for a completely new building that would host the House of the Lords as well as the House of Commons and all the connected functions. Ninety-seven architects entered the competition, which was based on anonymous submissions, making it one of the first attempts at making the architectural process - at least the selection - objective. The Commission announced the winner on February 29,
PAGE 54
1836: Charles Barry, a well-established 40-year-old architect with offices not far from the burned parliament. Barry chose the Gothic style, but it was his clear, efficient plan, which promised to limit costs, that may have been more important in convincing the commission. The plan was Barry's focus, to the extent that he asked the Gothic expert draughtsman Augustus Welby Pugin to detail the decoration8- usually expressed in elevation. Despite acknowledging the pragmatic qualities of Barry's project, the project's Committee of Acoustics and Ventilation asked a different expert, this one in ventilation, to support Barry.9 The man was David Boswell Reid, who was conducting experiments on the relationship between public health and air flows within architecture at the University of Edinburgh.
TRINITY
The Palace of Westminster was thus entrusted to the interaction of three main characters: Barry, Pugin, Reid. Critics and historians later consolidated an interpretation of these characters' roles based on their respective idiosyncrasies,10 but what made their interaction so charged was the unequal status accorded to their different tasks.
Barry's career was canonic at every stage. He started practicing aged 15 in a London architectural firm, exhibited drawings at the Royal Academy in his late teens (his first probably being a sketch of the interior of the old Westminster Hall11), and in his early 20s went on a three-year Grand Tour of Italy, Greece, the Middle East and Egypt. Relying on connections with wealthy ex-pats in Rome, after coming back to London he cultivated an elite social circle that brought him commissions of increasing importance. His interpretation of his role as an architect was that of an organizer rather than an aesthete: as such he flitted indifferently from Gothic to Renaissance styles, depending upon the circumstances.
Pugin's career was less canonic. Seventeen years younger than Barry, a convert to Catholicism at age 22, he was trained as a draughtsman by his father, Auguste, who was making a name for himself with the publication of volumes on English medieval buildings.12 Pugin developed a messianic belief in the healing social significance of the Gothic. In the same year that Barry won the competition for the Palace of Westminster, Pugin published Contrasts: or, A parallel between the Noble Edifices of the Middle Ages, and corresponding Buildings of the Present Day; shewing the Present Decay of Taste, a manifesto for a return to ethical and political practices of the Catholic Middle Ages in architecture in order to alleviate the injustices of industrial society. He considered mere revivalism of styles a sop:
"Christian art was the natural result of the progress of Catholic feeling and devotion; and its decay was consequent on that of the faith itself; and all revived classic buildings, whether erected in Catholic or Protestant countries, are evidences of a lamentable departure from true Catholic principles and feelings."13
Pugin's invocation of the Gothic would, in his eyes, be authentic. He used architecture as a Medieval cleric used sacred images: to call the laymen back to morality.14 Throughout his career, Pugin was rarely responsible for the design of an entire building. His preoccupation with the Gothic meant that he focused on the virtuoso control of details rather than on the organization of the plan.
In the face of the enormous scale of the works for the Palace of Westminster, Pugin's obsession with details would lead inevitably to frustration: "The execution of work is attended with nothing but misery vexation and trouble both to Employers and Builders and it is quite a relief to my mind when any job is satisfactorily completed.''15
Reid's career, too, was not canonic. Ten years younger than Barry and Scottish-born, he was trained as a doctor before turning to chemistry at the University of Edinburgh, where he used his scientific knowledge to buttress the reformists' efforts to improve the condition of the poor. Reid identified purity of air as the most important component of a healthy residence:
1795-1860 Sir Charles Barry, organizer more than aesthete.
1812-1852 Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, Catholic gothic designer.
1805-1863 Dr. David Boswell Reid, nonarchitect, systems engineer.
PAGE 55
"Mental anxiety may, perhaps, be considered the most powerful enemy to the duration of human life, and, next to it, defective nutriment, whether in quantity or quality. But after these, no other cause, at least in modern times, appears to have inflicted so great an amount of evil upon the human race as defective Ventilation."16
In 1834, shortly before the fire at the Palace of Westminster, a group from the British Association for the Advancement of Science visited Reid's laboratory in Edinburgh, where he was experimenting with ventilation and acoustics;17 members of both Houses were in the group, and after the fire Reid was retained as a technical consultant on the Westminster project. Known as "The Ventilator," Reid played a crucial role in the building, even though he had no formal training in engineering or architecture. Reid thus had to contend with the steady professionalism of Barry and the virtuoso skills of Pugin. In 1844, he completed a sort of scientific autobiography, Illustrations of the Theory and Practice of Ventilation - 400 pages of detailed convective science, including a section on the Palace of Westminster. But even a century later, the very seriousness of Reid's endeavor only reinforced the caricature of "the Ventilator," which historians like Maurice Hastings invoked to exile him from the field of architecture:
"The most astonishing obstacle produced by the Government to the completion of the Palace, was the appointment, in 1840, of Dr. D. B. Reid, 'the Ventilator'. This gentleman considered himself to be an expert in ventilation, and had a system of his own."18
TECHNOLOGY
The new Palace of Westminster was not a building where default technological solutions were employed, nor was it a "first time(s)"19 building, but rather an anticipatory building,20 where a system of air treatment that included some principles of what was to become known as air conditioning was installed, and where lighting and acoustics were, for the first time, fundamental technological issues. These services also became spatial issues: one third of the volume of the new Palace of Westminster was given over to services - air ducts, shafts, hidden cavities, pipes, ventilation towers, etc.21 Accommodating these was deemed from the beginning to be a task beyond the competency of traditional architecture, hence the appointment of Reid.
Construction of the Palace of Westminster took place in the 1840s, when hygiene and safety started to become a concern in architecture, and not only in infrastructures such as sewers and public lighting systems. As the capital of the most industrialized nation in the world, London was an epicenter for public health and pollution problems, which affected also merely aesthetic features: stucco facades of "Italianate" fashion had, since the 1840s, to be coated with transparent oil as protection from carbon particles.22
Since Charles Barry's winning entry was a bearer of the triumphant Neo-Gothic, issues related to architecture as a matter of style went mostly undebated,23 and when they entered debate it was mostly due to cost. Public opinion was sensitive to overrunning budgets in state funded buildings - the dramatic expenses demanded by the new Buckingham Palace in the 1830s offering a stark warning.24 The real stake in the Palace of Westminster was the role that architecture should play alongside the growing amount of utilitarian systems that had to be hosted in the building. The Palace of Westminster had two foci, the House of Lords and the House of Commons. And it was the ceilings of these rooms that were the battleground for a truly modern confrontation between utilitarian demands and symbolic aspirations.
PAGE 56
Symbols not systems: House of Lords' gold-panel ceiling, decorated with ensigns of 18 kings; no punctures in the ceiling for climate control or ventilation, which the Lords are in any case reticent about requesting.
PAGE 57
1847: THE NEW LORDS CEILING: RESISTANCE TO COMFORT
Pugin and Reid collaborated smoothly on the House of Lords, commonly considered Pugin's masterpiece, due to the simple fact that Reid was only called to check the ventilation of the room long after it was completed:
"The House of Peers [Lords] was ventilated several years after the House of Commons, and the ventilation was arranged essentially in the same manner; but the principles applied at the House of Commons not being carried out to the same extent, a very great difference may be noticed between them, whenever the circumstances are trying, so as to call for full, efficient, and diffusive ventilation."25
Reid's major achievement in controlling the atmosphere of the House of Lords was the ability to shut off the air intake of the entire room, or to augment it rapidly (of course, when all doors were closed). Reid's works though did not affect the appearance of the room, which was praised immediately after its completion in 1847 as a perfect response to the competition brief, an expression of the aristocratic tradition of Britain, and a successful evocation of Gothic, with its lavish display of golden surfaces, elaborate details, and magnificent sculptures. The symbolic as well as ritual center of the room was the golden throne for Queen Victoria on the west wall, and the ¡conographic apparatus around it. The walls hosted frescoes representing Justice, Religion, Chivalry and the statues of the heroes who attended the Magna Carta signing. The windows had stained glass featuring English and Scottish kings. The ceiling's grandiosity was due more to its exceptional height26than its iconography, which was limited to 18 ensigns of kings, or to its shape, since the surface was horizontal. The Lord's ceiling, in Barry's vision and in Pugin's execution, was a sealing- a traditional, decorated layer hiding the underside of the attic above, with no space or punctures for comfort-providing systems. The only exceptions were the gas light fixtures that Reid was asked to install in 1844, and whose design Barry (not Pugin) took control of.
Reid's scientific approach and pursuit of comfort in fact met with tacit hostility in the House of Lords, whose members were reticent in describing their own needs in mundane terms of hot and cold, and even more so in requesting changes in the atmosphere. Reid noted:
"... our great difficulty is, that members of that house do not tell us so frequently as is desirable, when they find too little air coming in, or too much. ... We have the power of shutting off entirely all ingress of air, or of increasing gradually to any extent, till we arrive at the highest power we can command; but is rarely that communications are made to us."27
The tradition of self-control, a pre-modern component of the aristocratic ethos, was possibly opposed to the ideals of comfort emerging in response to a newly industrializing age. Talking about comfort would have meant to admit some weakness, something that might be problematic for members of a class whose aspirations were still influenced by old fashioned Regency 'hard living': hunting, duelling, gambling.28 Moreover, comfort entered the House of Lords in a time when many of the Lords were concerned over the erosion of their house's power after the 1832 reforms.29 If the birth of the idea of comfort in 18th century France was prompted by the aristocracy's taste for luxury,30 it seems that in England comfort emerged, however reluctantly, with the decline of aristocratic power.
PAGE 58
1841-47 Temporary House of Commons: a test bed for the ventilation system that Reid will later employ In the permanent House.
Simplified vault structure, with angled sides, provides decent acoustics for an increasingly vociferous House.
PAGE 59
1841 -1847 TEMPORARY COMMONS CEILING:
A FIRST FALSE CEILING
While their new House was under construction, the Commoners met from 1838 to 1850 in a temporary venue: the former House of Lords of the old complex, hastily repaired after the fire. In stark contrast to the Lords, complaints about the atmosphere of the room were explicit and frequent: "The temperature was rising, we shall be suffocated immediately"; "I am shivering with cold, I can bear this house no longer."38 Due to the temporary nature of this room, Barry and Pugin did not concern themselves with it,39 liberating Reid to install a fully functioning prototype of the system that would eventually be installed in the permanent new House of Commons. His first concern was to purify the air that entered the room, in a time when London was suffering extreme pollution. In his Illustrations of the Theory and Practice of Ventilation, Reid carefully described his work on this temporary room: air flow was controlled by a single valve, "so that the movement could at any time be arrested at a moment's notice," Reid explained; a pneumatic machine regulated the air's speed, and mixing chambers regulated its temperature, which was increased by a "hot apparatus."40 His drawings of the temporary hall were mostly sections41 (while a "layout architect" such as Barry would focus on plans). Fresh air entered the room from thousands of micro-holes in the floor, after passing through a filter and being heated or cooled by an apparatus. To avoid air drafts the floor was covered with a horsehair carpet. The ceiling consisted of a central horizontal surface with inclined sections on the sides: a kind of flattened vault, a traditional form manipulated for good acoustics and the efficient circulation of air. Reid chose this profile to maximize the utilitarian tasks the ceiling could carry out: reflecting sound, conveying natural light from the clerestory windows and at the same time blocking drafts from them, hosting gas lamps and at the same time keeping away from the room "the products of combustion from the candles,"42 functioning as an air extractor thanks to the openings in its surface and to the duct in the space above dispersed the vitiated air.43 Eventually, the void between this lowered ceiling and the existing one was a space devoted to managing air and light: the 'sandwich' principle of the ceiling.
PAGE 60
February 25,1847 Charles Barry's drawings for the first iteration of the new House of Commons: no cavity for systems, just a thin "sealing" attached to the underside of the attic above.
Air circulation equipment instead stored under the stepped floor.
PAGE 61
1842-1850: THE COMMONS CEILING, v.1: SEALING
Notwithstanding the similarity of its layout to the Lords - a rectangular hall with seats facing each other on the longer sides, and galleries for the public above - decoration in the new House of Commons was much simpler, with Pugin remaining for the most part a spectator: as an artist-craftsman he had few opportunities to exercise his virtuoso capacity on a relatively simple design.31 Utilitarian expectations of comfort were strong among the Commoners, who had already nicknamed their pre-fire accommodation as the "Black Hole of Calcutta" because of its polluted air, bad illumination, and extreme temperatures.32
With Pugin largely absent, the real conflict in the Commons was between Barry, the architect, and Reid, the systems man. Reid's appointment as a consultant made crystal clear how the supervising commissioners thought Barry's traditional architectural knowledge was inadequate to solve problems linked to light, air, and sound. In the early phases of the design work, Barry substantially dismissed Reid's work; he knew Reid's only relevant previous work was the ventilation, heating and acoustics of a small experimental room in Edinburgh - but he scarcely studied it:
"I had no other description from Hamilton of the Pavilion at Edinburgh than the few scattered pencil notes on the drawings which I sent to you. With the drawings of the Class Room he sent to me Dr Reid's Paper which was read some time since to the Philosophical Society at Edinburgh relative to his theory of acoustics and which is practically exemplified in that Room."33
The conflict over the Commons was prompted by the fact that Reid's scientific solutions for ventilation would deeply impact Barry's architecture: his plan called for the heating and cooling of fresh air under the floor, the circulation of this air through the room, and to expel it from the ceiling. To enable this flow of air, Reid needed very high vertical conduct, which Barry managed to camouflage inside a Gothic styled pinnacle adjacent to the Commons. Reid's ambition was to create a highly responsive ventilation system with a single valve - like he would install in the Lords. Preparation of the air took place under the floor of the Commons, forcing Barry to find space: ducts under the floor are visible in the sectional drawing of the room, signed by him on February 25, 1847. However, to ensure circulation of fresh air in the galleries, to facilitate the expulsion of hot air, to prevent cold air entering the room from the higher windows, and eventually to have good acoustics, Reid later claimed control of the ceiling.
Barry initially refused to let Reid get his hands on the ceiling, and in 1845 he convinced the Commission to fire him (Reid was later reimbursed for his lost stipends).34 For Barry, the main consideration for the Commons ceiling was not its functional performance but its height, which would create Gothic proportions for the hall, with natural light descending from big arched windows. The ceiling was, for Barry, only a proportion-making element, and these proportions themselves were symbolically charged since they represented the continuity of the British parliamentary tradition: Barry thought they evoked the dimensions of the former House of Commons, an adaptation of the Gothic chorus hall of the 14th century Royal Chapel of Saint Stephen. (Barry overlooked the fact that even this old ceiling had been a "false" one, designed by Christopher Wren in 1680, which cut off the top of the tall Gothic windows).35 Barry, however, had to reckon with the fact that by the 1830s the issues involved in the design of a parliamentary hall had to transcend spatial symbolism. Whereas in the case of the aristocratic House of Lords comfort was suppressed (at least as a matter of discussion), the subject was widely debated in the House of Commons, where the dominant social standing of the members was not aristocratic.
Barry managed to complete his new Commons hall by 1850.36 In contrast to the regal gold of the House of the Lords, relatively unadorned oak panels dominated the palette, including the ceiling, which was a flat surface at a height of 14.8 meters, fixed to the structure of the roof and articulated only through wooden paneling in 12 main squares, each subdivided into 16 smaller panels. Barry's sectional drawing of 1847, made immediately before construction started in the Lords, shows very little or no space between the two layers of the ceiling. Neither in the large hollow attic nor in the small space above the ceiling/sealing did Barry draw any ventilation systems.37 Relying on the evidence of drawings, it can be inferred that Barry, initially at least, managed to embed Reid's systems into the room without effecting its proportions. The first Commoners ceiling was still a traditional affair, redolent of the Lords ceiling, not yet accommodating the modern needs of ventilation, good acoustics and lighting (delivered by traditional chandeliers).

1852 Only two years after completion, Barry is forced to design a new, lowered ceiling for the House of Commons to improve acoustics and provide space for new lighting and ventilation systems. The new ceiling is almost identical to the one Reid designed earlier for the temporary hall.
PAGE 63
1940 Destroyed by Luftwaffe bombing.
1854 COMMONS CEILING, v.2: 'SANDWICH'
The Gothic proportions in the Commons, so treasured by Barry, were not so relevant to the members of parliament, an increasingly vociferous body44 who soon complained about the poor acoustics generated by Barry's lofty design.45 Dust two years after the completion, Barry was forced to design and install a new, lower ceiling to improve acoustics, and to create space - inside the hidden space of the 'sandwich' - for accommodating Reid's air managing apparatus, as well as the fittings for its 64 Argand burners for the lighting, which were themselves probably the first air-handling light fixtures.46 Reid's final victory in his dispute with Barry was the fact that, long after he was fired, the new lowered ceiling for the Commons was almost identical to the one he had installed around a decade before in the temporary Commons, shaped with inclined surfaces on either side, with a flat central portion. The increasing territory assigned to the ceiling violated more than Barry's Gothic proportions: the top of his high arched Gothic windows were cut off by the lowered ceiling, and had to be modified into squat rectangles.
Barry's architectural conception of the Commons ceiling was overwhelmed by an emerging science, engineering physics, and by an embryonic profession, systems engineering. The new, lowered, ceiling became a merely utilitarian surface, an instrument for controlling air, sound, and light. If the difference between the Lords ceiling and the first Commons ceiling was a matter of decoration but not of shape, now the need for comfort made all the difference. The resulting new section of the House of Commons featured a ratio of nearly 50 percent between the spaces potentially hosting technical services and the hall below.47 The UK's burgeoning democracy - squeezing more and more representatives of the people into the House of Commons - and its increasing demands for comfort, triggered the first false ceiling of the modern era, a hidden hollow area for the accommodation of technological systems. The disappointed Barry is reported to have entered the hall again only if strictly necessary.48
The ceiling of the House of Commons marked a key shift, altering the boundaries of the architectural discipline in a way that would only be recognized in decades to come. Afterwards, no ceiling of a politically representative room could be designed primarily to express a symbolic program. Utility became the key consideration. Eventually, it would become dominant. When it was destroyed by a Luftwaffe bombing in 1940, the House of Commons' false ceiling became a ruin - a paradoxical destiny for an element that was now an immovable fixture of modern architecture.
1.	Michelle Elizabeth Allen, Cleansing the City: Sanitary Geographies in Victorian London (Ohio University Press, 2008), 66.
7. H.M. Colvin "The Origins of the Gothic Revival," Quaderni dell'Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, no. 241 (1978), 3.
2.	Benjamin Haydon's journal, in: Caroline Shenton, The Day Parliament Burned Down (Oxford University Press, 2012), 112.
3.	"The Gentleman's Magazine," November 1834, in: Shenton, The Day Parliament, 158.
4.	Shenton, The Day Parliament, 261.
5.	Colin Amery and Gavin Stamp, "New Palace of Westminster," in: Victorian buildings of London, 1837-1887, Colin Amery and Gavin Stamp (London: The Architectural Press, 1982), 18. 6
6.	Eric Hobsbwam, "Introduction: Inventing Traditions," in Inventing Traditions in Nineteenth-Century Europe, ed. Eric Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger (Cambridge University Press, 1983), 1.
8.	Barry and Pugin's collaboration went through two phases: firstly, late 1835, when Pugin collaborated to produce the drawings for
the competition (see: Augustus Welby Pugin, "Pocket diaries", note of October 2, 1835, in Alexandra Wedgwood, A.W.N. Pugin and the Pugin Family (London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1985), 33; the second phase started in 1838, when Barry asked Pugin to design all the details for the interiors and supervise their execution.
9.	David Boswell Reid, Illustrations of the Theory and Practice of Ventilation (London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longmans, 1844), 270.
House of Commons' new drop ceiling, at 12.5 meters.
PAGE 64
1852 Parliamentary dropped ceiling: symbolism alone is no longer adequate for the large halls of public spaces.
PAGE 65
Hrnnflicts between Barry and Pugin escalated, 10- their descendants, into a dispute over
_*was the main author of the new Palace of tf*10 ¡nster. After Pugin and Barry died, two
respective sons published books defending BP own father's role. The quarrel around HE was then inherited by later publications, an art-history oriented approach to
authorship
uncing an ari-rusiury uriemeo appruacn io t roblem On the other hand, the concurrent flict between Barry and Reid has been
Eirtionally described as the consequence of arrogance. The anti-Reid position is ELnplified by Maurice Hastings, Parliament f*e g. the Chambers of the House of Commons Hu^n: The Architectural Press, 1950), 160-161. n lv recently, Reid's role has been investigated HL autonomous one, see: Sturrock and Lawson Smith "The Grandfather of Air-Conditioning," 2981-2998.
20.	Neil Sturrock and Peter Lawson-Smith argue that Reid was probably, de facto, the first air conditioning engineer and that probably his
St. George's Hall in Liverpool, completed in 1851, was the first air conditioned building.
See: Sturrock and Lawson, "The Grandfather," 2996. Despite their sympathetic narration of Reid, the authors do not state that he introduced proper air conditioning in the Palace of Westminster (pages 2985, 2986, 2987). The American Willis Haviland Carrier is usually acknowledged as the originator of air conditioning, for instance in Margaret Ingels, Willis Haviland Carrier: Father of Air Conditioning, (Garden City NY: Country Life Press, 1952), 110; Ingels nevertheless acknowledges Reid for his work in the House of Commons.
21.	Hastings, Parliament House, 160-161.
! 1 Shenton, The Day Parliament, 95.
12i Specimens of Gothic Architecture was ublished in 1821; it "marked a new phase of the Gothic Revival and a permanent change in the Pugins' domestic life," see: Rosemary Hill, God's Architect: Pugin and the Building of Romantic Britain (London: Allen Lane, 2007), 51. The first volume of Examples of Gothic Architecture was published in 1828; most of the leading members of the architectural profession, as well as painter John Constable, were among the subscribers, see: Hill, God's Architect, 79.
13.	Augustus Welby Pugin, Contrasts: or, Parallel between the Noble Edifices of the Middle Ages, and corresponding Buildings of the Present Day; shewing the Present Decay of Taste, 2nd ed. (Edinburgh: John Grant, 1898), 7.
14.	For a remarkable polemic on Pugin's role in the construction of the "moral mission" of modern architecture see: David Watkin, Morality and Architecture: The Development of a Theme in Architectural History and Theory from the Gothic Revival to the Modern Movement (Oxford: Clarendon, 1977), 17-23.
15.	A.W.N. Pugin, "Letter to Rev & Dear Sir,"
RIBA Archive, Box 1, Folder 1 (Acc. 2) Ref PuAW /1/1.
16.	Boswell Reid, "Preface," in Illustrations, x.
22.	James Stevens Curl, Victorian Architecture: Its Practical Aspects (Newton Abbot: David and Charles, 1973), 91.
23.	Hastings, Parliament House, 155.
24.	Shenton, The Day Parliament, 47.
25.	Boswell Reid, Illustrations, 287-290.
26.	The average height of the ceilings in the palace was limited, creating an Immediately perceivable hierarchy in favor of the few, high, ceremonial rooms; noted in: M. Aldrich, Gothic Revival (London: Phaidon, 1994), 162.
27.	David Boswell Reid, Illustrations 292-293.
28.	V. G. Kernan, The Duel in Europe History: Honour and the Reign of Aristocracy (Oxford University Press, 1988), 205. In Great Britain's aristocracy, dueling continued to play a role, at least ideally, despite the fact that it was prohibited to civilians by an Act of 1819 and to the military in 1844, ibidem, 204, 217. The approach to dueling by the Lords can possibly be used, more than hunting and gambling, as a test bed of their "passive resistance" to the decline of their own class habits: in 1840 Lord Cardigan was acquitted by a jury of the House of Lords for having wounded in a duel an officer of his regiment whom he provoked, ibidem, 217-218.
17.	Boswell Reid, "Preface," in Illustrations, x.
18.	Hastings, Parliament House, 160.
19.	Reyner Banham discussed whether the history of architecture should focus on the first time new technologies are introduced in buildings, or on the time when a technology becomes default in common practice, embedded in the habitual needs of people who use the building. The target of Banham was Sighted Giedion's 1948 book Mechanization takes Command, where the Swiss historian and theorist used patent office records ?s a source. Banham, by contrast, stated that his interest was in application rather than in invention; in mosts rather than firsts. See: Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environ-196n,^'Ca^° ^n'vers'4Y Chicago Press,
29.	J. V. Beckett, The Aristocracy in England 1660-1914 (Oxford and New York: Basil Blackwell, 1986), 417.
30.	The relaxation of the body's posture allowed by new furniture and the occasional informality of Louix XIV's court have been identified as antecedents of the spread of comfort in 18th century aristocratic homes in France; see: J. Dejean, The Age of Comfort: when Paris discovered Casual - and the Modern Home began (New York: Bloomsbury, 2009).
31.	Pugin's intervention was possibly limited to the seats: see Paul Atterbury (ed.), A.W.N. Pugin, Master of Gothic Revival (New Haven and London, 1995), 322-323, ills. 83 and 83a.
32.	Philip Salmon, "The House of Commons, 1801-1911," in A Short History of Parliament, ed. Clyve Jones (Woodbridge: The Boydell Press, 2009), 249. Shenton, The Day Parliament, 16.
33.	Barry "Letter to T.A. Donaldson ESQ." Tuesday, RIBA Archive, marked LC/1/2/10.
34.	Sturrock and Lawson-Smith, "The Grandfather of Air-Conditioning," 2986.
35.	See Hastings, Parliament House, 108-109, 180. The space above Wren's false ceiling of St. Stephen's was tall enough for people to occupy, often in secret: women, not allowed inside to watch the proceedings of the chamber, would peer down through the small gap where the chain of the chandelier hung; see sketch
on 133.
36.	"New Palace at Westminster - House of Commons - Sections, 5th contract, no. 621," RIBA archive, see illustration at left.
37.	Boswell Reid, Illustrations, 294.
38.	Boswell Reid, Illustrations, 294.
39.	In "The Grandfather of Air-Conditioning" (2983), Sturrock and Lawson-Smith say that the design architect for this temporary room was Lord Sudeley, chairman of the commission who selected Barry as the winner of the competition.
40.	Boswell Reid, Illustrations, 276.
41.	These images might be not of Reid's own hand, if it is true that he was refusing to produce drawings as a task of his appointment for the new Houses of Parliament: see Sturrock and Lawson Smith, "The Grandfather of Air-Conditioning," 2986. In any case, the published images can be considered to have been under Reid's control.
42.	Boswell Reid, Illustrations, 300.
43.	Robert Bruegmann, "Central Heating and Forced Ventilation: Origins and Effects on Architectural Design," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, vol. 37, no. 3 (1978),
151. Bruegmann praises this ceiling as possibly Reid's best achievement.
44.	Members of Parliament delivering speeches in the Chamber were 231 (35 percent of the Members of Parliament) in 1841; the figure rose to 300 (46 percent of Members) in 1861, see: Salmon, "The House of Commons," 257.
45.	Hill, God's Architect, 455.
46.	According to Sturrock and Lawson-Smith, "The Grandfather of Air-Conditioning," 2986.
47.	Hastings, Parliament House, 160-161.
48.	Hastings, Parliament House, 168.
PAGE 66
theatrical ceilings
THE SPECTACLE ABOVE
The ceiling of the theater must balance two imperatives: good acoustics, and sufficient space above the stage for scenery, actors, and staff. Vitruvius (born ca. 80-70 BC, died after ca. 15 BC) describes acoustic aspirations: "The consonant are those in which it is supported from below, increases as it goes up, and reaches the ears in words which are distinct and clear in tone. Hence, if there has been careful attention in the selection of the site, the effect of the voice will, through this precaution, be perfectly suited to the purposes of a theatre." Initially, most theatres are outdoors, where it is necessary to select a site with innate acoustic properties.
1749 Artificial thunder: a system of levers, pulleys, and zig-zag paths down which balls are rolled (left) generates a sound like thunder during performances at the Dresden Opera.
1776 Clouds and winged chariots can be slung from machinery in the ceiling at Drottingholm Theater, Stockholm.
1486 Large enough to conceal an angel from view, the mobile pageant ceiling delighted Medieval English audiences with elaborate religious performances where mechanical pulleys hidden in the ceiling lifted actors and lowered props from above.
1801 Boulee's artificial cloud machine.

PAGE 67
mlLEYS AND COUNTERWEIGHTS: MACHINERY BEHIND THE CURTAIN
^gceiling section above the stage develops into a combination of catwalks, ■ vs cables, and machinery. The ceiling becomes the space for holding Papery, painted sets, moving from one side of the stage to the other, holding S°rtains, and counterbalancing objects that must be lifted during productions, ^contrast, the spaces above auditoriums typically hold mechanical systems J"^ventilating and lighting the audience.
1836 Theater Royal, Leicester, England: catwalks and scene painter's bridge above the stage. The theater is designed by W. Parsons, "the County Architect," and built by W. & C. Herbert.
aint rooms, counterweight tracks (left and center' I ?ur!ain openings located in the ceiling of ndon s Covent Garden theater.
PAGE 68
PALAIS GARNIER
Charles Garnier's Opera, 1874, is the culmination of the ceiling styles and theater systems developed through the 19th century. In full section, an imaginary ceiling line added here runs along the "same" floor through vastly different heights and conditions across the building: the ceiling above the stage is taller than that of the main auditorium -to accommodate scenography fitting for the largest opera in the world.
PAGE 69
PAGE 70
1887 Electric bulbs are installed in Palais Gamier above and around the stage, replacing older gas fittings (inset image).
System of pulleys above, below, and to the left and right required to support the production of fantasy on stage.
Pulley system for hoisting the main light over Palais Garnler's auditorium; above is the machine room serving the auditorium.
Small army required ; to maintain the (i auditorium's mega k chandelier.
PAGE 71
Stage system under construction; ceiling occupied by scaffolding, ropes, and the beginning of paneling.
The opera's stage - the space the guests actually observe - has less that half the height of the systems that support it, above and below.

PAGE 72
1890 Adler and Sullivan design the Chicago Theater auditorium, completed 16 years after the Garnier, and much more modest in scope. Still the ceiling shape above the stage is nearly identical, and the ceiling shape of the auditorium follows the raked seating, guiding views toward the stage.
1926 Walter Gropius's unbuilt Total Theatre, designed for director Erwin Piscator and planned for Kreuzberg, Berlin. The stage could be "deep," set back in the standard modern way, proscenium, jutting out into the audience, or arena style, in the middle of the auditorium, where the stage could be elevated and/or rotated according to the needs of the director. "The aim of this Total Theater is to draw the spectator into the drama," Gropius later explained. "All technical means have to be subordinated to this aim and should never become an end in themselves." Extra apparatus suspended from the egg-shaped auditorium ceiling would project on 12 screens encircling the auditorium. "I have not only envisaged the possibility of film projection upon the whole cyclorama of my three-fold stage by means of movable projectors," wrote Gropius, "but I can also set the entire audience inside a film, as It were, by projecting on walls and ceiling."
Curving structural girders left visible inside the ceiling.
PAGE 73
1957-1973 Inside vs. outside: the iconic, fan-like roof of lorn Utzon's Sydney Opera House bears little relation to the building's Interior: above the stage, a prismatic celling space Is largely maintained, for hoisting scenery (with just one curve, out of audience sight lines, following the shape of the roof); the auditorium must also Ignore the shape of the roof in order to provide optimum acoustics.
1993 Steven Holl's design for the Palazzo del Cinema, meant to be built at the Venice Lido, aimed to intersperse and partially stack three auditoriums on top of each other. The system of prismatic backstage and sloping or curved auditorium ceiling line must still be maintained.
PAGE 74
DISAPPEARING BED
A fantasy stalking the US Patent Office for 50 years: the bed that "disappears" during daytime, lifted up, manually with pulleys or electrically, into a ceiling cavity. Unspoken in any of these dreams is the obvious question: whether the bed could be hoisted into the ceiling, accidentally or otherwise, with people still in it.
"A disappearing bed for use in apartment houses or dwellings where it is desired to economize space."
"My object is to make a bed which will disappear into the ceiling."
PAGE 75
1956	Samuel S. and Emmaline E. M. Mason, "Power and Control Device for a Bed Assembly." Fifty-three years on from Rountree, the dream of a bed that can be stored in the ceiling lives on; now such a contraption can be electrically powered. The New York Times reports on the patent under the headline "Bed That Vanishes Into Ceiling, Flying Saucer Receive Patents":
"A rectangular well is cut into the ceiling to hold the bed. When it is up out of the way, the bed is hidden by a panel that looks like the rest of the ceiling." (January 14, 1956).
1956 "Bed to Hide in Ceiling," Popular Science, November 1956.
PAGE 76
HOSPITAL CEILINGS
I860 Harewood Army Hospital, Washington D.C. Underneath a raw concrete slab celling, fabric hoods hang above each patient's bed to remove / shield vitiated air - a low-tech, personal false celling.
ca.1900 Robert Boyle's ventilation system for a hospital for Infectious disease, proposing a slightly lowered ceiling vault beneath pitched roof. "[V]entl-lation may be successfully achieved with the simplest means by an Intelligent comprehension of the laws which govern the movements of air and the utilisation of the powerful natural forces which are unceasingly In operation."
ID// New York Hospital: "false", or thickened ceiling, floor and walls accommodate mechanical forced air ventilation.

PAGE 77
1959 Cantonal Hospital, Winterhur, Switzerland: the ceiling grows almost as large than the space it services below. The system extracts air at multiple (hiah and low) locations in the operating room to rninimize risk of explosion from anaesthetic gases.
The double-slab ceiling: the San Antonio Military Medical Center uses two concrete slabs per floor, one is the underside of the floor above, the other a robust alternative to the Jypically thin panels of the dropped ceiling.
The floor-to-floor height of SAMMC is 19.5 eet [5.95 meters], with a nine-foot [2.75 meter] ay-in ceiling below the seven-foot [2.1 meters] interstitial building space. Without this space, u'ure MEP maintenance or renovation projects Would require disruptions to patient care as ffigers would have to access the plenum tough the ceilings of clinical areas." Healthcare Building Ideas, Winter 2010, 18-21.)
PAGE 78
a century of inflation...
1884 Civil and Military Hospital, Montpellier, by Casimir Tollet.

PAGE 79




.... ...
1977 Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center, Brooklyn, by Kallman and McKinnell with Russo and Sonder.
PAGE 80
THE WALKABLE CEILING
With the demands for uninterrupted service space and total control over interior environmental conditions, certain hospital ceiling surpass a critical threshold, overtaking 50 percent of the floor-to-floor height and creating an interstitial mini-floor of its own, tall enough for an army of engineers to work to ensure the system never fails.
EXHAUST	EXHAUST
I	I
CHIllep ujArtu, i H&r WM
PAGE 81
2006 The Department of Veteran's affairs promotes the walkable ceiling space as a prototype for its new hospitals.
6PKINKLE.K HEAP
- HA, HV { Oi HO P6DU
HN < £kl TP
287

WPU6T To inter top,
UlATtP PIPING MEPI^AL £y^6£.i> isFRlHKLE-P MAIN
PLUMBING,
PAGE 82
1965 The laboratories of Louis Kahn's Salk Institute, in La folia, California, feature one of the thickest false ceilings. Kahn explains: "This space is just as tall as the space where experiments are made. These rooms have large pipes that feed downwards or upwards. You walk in to service these areas. They are just as important as the biological laboratories." (conversation with Peter Blake, 20 Duly 1971, in What Will Be Has Always Been, 130.)
architecture discovers the ceil inti void - kahn's plíafbnié cave
PAGE 84
BANHAM AND THE FALSE CEILING
In 1969, the "suspended ceiling" finds a conceptual advocate in Reyner Banham, who identifies it as key to the regime of the Well-tempered Environment. He defines the suspended ceiling as a surface composed of acoustic tiling, air-conditioning, and fluorescent lighting that hides services and at moments allows them to "admit environmental power over its entire area." Banham describes possibly the first suspended ceiling, made of obscured glass, and goes on to note an inherent contradiction in the emergence of the panelized ceiling within the overall aesthetic of the International Style, which otherwise demanded a stripping back, a revelation of how architecture performs, rather than its concealment...
1969 The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment by Reyner Banham (cover of the 1984 2nd Edition).
acoustical
air-conc
fluorescent lighting = suspended ceiling
1909 "A Combination Ventilating, Heating and Cooling Plant in a Bank Building," by A.M. Feldman, American Society of Mechanical Engineers (VEW p.v. 6, No. 12), referenced by Banham.
10.	Concealed power
The calculations of George Bailey on the economics of the slab skyscraper, cited in the previous chapter, bring together three environmental aids—acoustic tiling, air-conditioning, and fluorescent lighting—that were to add up into one of the key inventions of recent architecture (though no architect invented it): the suspended ceiling. One should add immediately that ceilings have been suspended almost as long as there has been architecture, but whereas the traditional reason for suspending a ceiling was to close the top of a room volume, the sense in which the word is employed nowadays in trade literature and office-conversation, implies opening up the top of the room volume to admit environmental power over its entire area. Paradoxically, this opening-up is commonly considered as an act of concealment; the ceiling, in spite of its general perforation, is seen as a way of concealing the fact that the upper part of the room volume is occupied by ducts, conduits and service adits generally.
The earliest documented use of this type of concealment that has come to hand, is A. M. Feldman’s ventilation installation1 in the Kuhn and Loeb bank in 1906, mentioned in chapter 4. The problem was to cool the banking hall (the building still stands, at the junction of William and Pine Streets, near Wall Street, but none of the installation appears to have survived) which was on the comer of the block, with exposure to both streets. The only available surface on which the plant could reasonably be mounted was the flat roof of an extension at the back of the block. Between this and the banking hall was the manager’s office, lit through a glass roof. Ductwork taken through the upper part of this room would be conspicuously seen in back-lit silhouette, quite apart from any other environmental disadvantages that might accrue,
PAGE 85
Kuhn and Loeb Bank, New York, 1906, ventilation installation by A. M. Feldman; plan showing overhead duct-work.
and Feldman dealt with the problem by suspending a ceiling of obscured glass at the level of the internal cornice, thus retaining at least some of the room’s natural lighting but concealing the ductwork.
Even though the installation did not service the room in which this ceiling was suspended, the intention of concealment was much the same as that animating most later suspenders of ceilings. The fact that these concealments take place normally within the formal rules of an aesthetic (the International Style) conspicuously given to honest exhibition of structures and services (see chapters 7 and 8) passim) will suggest that the story of the emergence of the suspended ceiling as we know it now must be somewhat confused, both in its narrative sequence and in the intentions of those involved. Though this is true to some extent, and represents the
1932 The PSFS building in Philadelphia, by William Lescaze and George Howe, is the first to use registers in the ceiling for distributing air, and features custom ceiling mounted devices for lighting too, satisfying Banham's definition of the suspended ceiling.
PAGE 86
SEC»
1970	The ceiling scheme byTalion, Scott and Partners for a tobacco factory in Dundalk, Ireland, lavishes as much digital detail on HVAC and plumbing systems as on the architecture.
PAGE 87



PAGE 88
THICKENING CEILINGS
In the mid-20th century, the dropped ceiling takes over an increasing percentage of the floor-to-floor height in New York's office towers, accommodating lighting, air conditioning, heating, pneumatic mail, and telephone lines. Occupiable space is sacrificed for service space to facilitate the deep plan, where not every occupant obtains or needs immediate access to windows for light and ventilation.
c<
1952 Lever House
Floor-to-floor height: 12'-4" (376 cm) Floor-to-ceiling: 9'-0" (274 cm)
Ceiling: 27 percent of building section
1961 Chase Manhattan Bank
Floor-to-floor height: 12'7" (384 cm) Floor-to-ceiling: 8'10" (269 cm)
Ceiling: 29.8 percent of building section

PAGE 89
1973	US Steel (1 Liberty Plaza) Floor-to-floor height: 12'6" (381 cm) Floor-to-ceiling: 8'6" (259 cm)
Ceiling: 32 percent of building section
1974	Sears Tower
Floor-to-floor height: 12'10" (391 cm) Floor-to-ceiling: 8'8" (264 cm)
Ceiling: 32 percent of building section
PAGE 90
Standing points
Perspectives on the false ceiling By Manfredo di Robilant
In 1961 the Armstrong corporation, headquartered in Lancaster, Pennsylvania, and among the biggest producers of dropped ceilings, launches an advertising campaign based on pure renderings. The subjects are recent buildings where Armstrong ceilings have been installed, with some exceptions of imagined showcase buildings. Draftsmen are Helmut Dacoby and Ara Derderian. Jacoby, German born, Is embedded in the elite of east coast Modern architecture, having rendered projects by Gropius, Mies, and Johnson. In 1960 he Is a visiting professor at Yale, the same school from which Ara Derderian graduated in 1958, drawings from his final project being awarded by the American League of Architecture. Three selected renders from the campaign offer themselves as an involuntary manifesto of the sandwich ceiling.
THE OFFICIAL LIFE OF BUILDINGS
This rendering of the Tucson city hall, designed by local firm Friedman & Jobusch, is from the perspective of a visitor who apparently just entered the building, and whose attention may well be drawn to the ceiling before reaching the front desk. The visitor's view is encapsulated by typical definitions of the ceiling: the upper boundary of an interior. The layman visitor does not care about preoccupations for architects: whether the ceiling is or is not part of the structure of the building, whether it is "true" or "false," suspended from beams or resting on walls and columns. The ceiling is just there. Armstrong's ad copy says it provides comfortable temperatures and fire safety, while offering a visually clean surface, generic, unnoticeable. In fact the surface of the ceiling panels contains thousands of tiny perforations that allow conditioned air to flow from the plenum to the hall, thus eliminating the need for air diffusers. The only visible devices on the ceiling are the lamps.
Light comes from above with the spontaneity of a natural condition, keeping the visitor unaware of walking under a magic veil.
THE DREAMED LIFE OF BUILDINGS
This perspective section of a school in Minnesota, by local firm Hammel, Green and Abrahamson, reveals the condition of the ceiling as a theological truth: complex, all-solving and impossible to pragmatically test. In this abstract, typically architectural vision, the independence of ceiling from structure Is evident: the ceiling is not resting on the walls; it is just an appendix of the trusses.
In the judging eyes of architect-theologians it appears that the ceiling is "false," assuming that a "true" ceiling is part of the structure of a building. To compensate for this lie, little blue arrows of fresh air descend on the heads of the studious kids like the small flames of a (comfortable) Pentecost. Cultivating abstraction, this rendering envisions the ceiling as a utilitarian and omniscient behind-the-scenes system, and speaks loudly of the modernist illusion that a healthy architecture could produce superior new generations of humans.
THE SECRET LIFE OF BUILDINGS
This imagined ceiling pornographically celebrates the complexity of technological systems that are hosted/concealed in the plenum above a ceiling. The revealed cavity shows how inadequate are the definitions of ceiling that are based merely on a view from below. Here a secret world Is anatomized. Intruding from a removed tile, a maintenance worker Is In fact actor and spectator. With the piety of someone who knows a terrible secret, he is probably not interested in judging whether the celling is "false" or "true", a cynicism he leaves to architects. On the other hand he well knows that the ceiling is suspended from the I-beams and has the function of concealing a complex world made of pipes, tubes, valves. He is indeed aware of putting hands on the secret sources of comfort and safety.
PAGE 92

some architects looked down on the ceiling from above,

1941 Gerrit Rietveld, Utrecht, with a model of the "core house" - modular form of workers housing he'd been working on since 1929.
PAGE 93
to play the role of doctors,	or of voyeurs
1964 b. load Wheelers project for a hospital room.
PAGE 94
REFLECTED CEILING PLAN
The decorative and structural complexity of the classical ceiling requires a new, super-human perspective: the Reflected Ceiling Plan. By the mid-20th century, the RCP no longer shows detail on a ceiling's surface, but is necessary for planning the location of lights, ducts, air diffusers, pipes, and later smoke detectors, sprinklers, CCTV cameras, etc.
1834 US Capitol, Washington D.C., by Andrew Dackson Davis: a classical reflected ceiling plan revealing intricacies of ceiling structure and decoration.
1968Neue
Nationalgalerie, Berlin, Mies van der Rohe: modernist version of the RCP, just before they become a tool for exploring technical services hidden in the ceiling.
PAGE 95
1951 Architecture cedes control of the ceiling: a new character, "The Man With The Facts," an expert in electrics, enters the stage courtesy of Westinghouse to assist the architect bewildered by the complexity of the world of electrics (and HVAC and plumbing...) inside the false ceiling. The ad appears in the March 1951 issue of Progressive Architecture.
PAGE 96
SCHOOL CEILINGS
US government programs for new schools at the beginning of the 1950s prompt a wave of experimentation. In a handbook published in 1954 by Architectural Record, the ceiling plays a critical role, considered not only as a comfort-provider (and thus as a storage space for utility systems), it is also considered for its natural ventilation properties and psychological effects. The grid of the drop ceiling though is ever-present - the future has to be imagined under a Cartesian plan.
139. The feeling of confinement which generally characterizes the typical classroom . . .
1954 Government recommendation for light gaps at the top of walls (the non-identical twin of the shadow gap at the bottom of museum walls?) in school classrooms: a row of glass panels between wall and ceiling to "allow the classroom space to penetrate other spaces."
can be eliminated by the use o! glass to separate the walls and roof planes, which allows the classroom space to penetrate other spaces. This technique recognizes the fluid quality ot space.
"Comparative Analysis of Unilateral and Bilateral Classrooms" seems to show that higher ceilings and two openings in a classroom = superior ventilation.
PAGE 97
Among the dozens of case studies the Architectural Record handbook offers is John Lyon Reid's system for a fully flexible school, proposed for Hillside High School in San Mateo, California. Accordion partitions would take the place of fixed walls; they would be moved and reshaped according to changing needs. The system would rely on a grid of skylights on the roof (and lightwells penetrating the false ceiling), meaning natural light would always be available even if the newly partitioned space is deep inside the building, without access to a window (each lightwell is also equipped with artificial lighting). The ceiling thus takes on the work of the window. It also takes responsibility for heating and ventilation: a thermostat on each column controls temperature in the adjacent bay.
CASE STUDY 66
problem: How close can we come to ultimate flexibility in practice?
approach: The school building committee, in formulating the educational program for this new secondary school, wanted the school faculty to have the power to shape its school plant to meet any changes ,n educational program that might develop. The demand was for accordion partitions.” Teaching spaces might need to be altered to almost any dimension, proportion or relationship. The first observation was that the usual reliance on exterior walls and windows for jjght and ventilation would impose almost unworkable limitations, 'ghe roof, which often functions only to provide weather protection, ■gfced to offer an opportunity to provide as well a means of both Hjpighting and ventilating. If the roof could be so used, then parti-ns could be moved almost w ithout limit in any direction.
^HglpN: A diffusing panel of glass block was selected as a source ght, since it provides a light source as non-directional as ^ea Th'^k niax'mum diffusion, and one having a minimum roof *s brought into the teaching area through a small ), the architect wanted to keep this light well and the roof
light panel small so as not to interfere with partition locations.The well was needed because of the depth of utility space between roof and ceiling required by air ducts (A.C.D.). Each light well is circled with sources of both artificial light and ventilation; as many such sources as possible were wanted so that small rooms at any location would have light and ventilation. A constant ceiling height in all areas was also wanted so that uniform partition panels would provide the means of dividing the floor area into varied arrangements. Commercially available partition units were used and are attached to floor, ceiling and adjacent units. The roof structure is supported on columns located on a grid of 28 ft. in both directions. A thermostat is placed on each column to control temperature in the adjacent bay. Any room larger than one square bay will have several controls to provide adjustment; rooms smaller than one bay must share the same temperature with the other room or rooms in the same bay. This ventilation, not being dependent on windows and the wind, is a minimum distraction to the teacher who does not have to operate windows, and it is positive at all times.
Credits: This school is the Hillsdale High School, San Mateo, California. John Lyon Reid was the Architect. The Superintendent was Thomas F
Reynolds
PAGE 98
FUNCTIONS OF THE FALSE CEILING
The new tasks assigned to the ceiling in the 20th century originate from two fears, one ancient and one recent: fire and noise. New aspirations also contribute to the success of the ceiling-as-sandwich: the need for pure warm or cool air, uniform and neutral light, and the ability to record activities going on underneath the ceiling...
PAGE 100
1.	fire prevention
METAL FIREPROOF SEALING
As a rash of fires in the late 19th century triggers new requirements for fireproofing, the ceiling becomes a critical line of defense. Albert Northrop develops the first successful metal sheet system, fixed to timber furring strips. Advertised as fireproofing devices, the decorative aspect of the tin ceiling - beautiful indeed - is considered secondary. Other systems supplant the metal ceiling in the 1930s, but the early 1980s see a revival purely for aesthetics.
1885 Albert Northrop patents the first successful metal celling system, Installed on metal furring strips.
1900 Trade catalogues promote the simplicity of decorative metal panels as a fireproof seal, offering styles and sizes to suit any celling. Decorative cornices and wall panels wrap the Interior surface In a fireproof metal seal.
1928 Fireproof steel ceiling, after a fire In Davenport, Iowa. "Please note the effect on the plaster side walls," the add for Canton Art Metal Company says, "where the fire has exposed the lath, the metal ceiling remaining Intact, confining the fire to lower floor, and saving the building from destruction."
PAGE 101
reproofing and education
c oroof'mg of Buildings is published • 1909, cataloguing a host of methods )nr making safer ceiling. Exam ques-nS explore a variety of strategies...
fireproofing of buildings
examination questions
/i) Describe the method of supporting a reinforced-con-grcte floor on a brick party wall.
I-;	Sketch and describe a concrete roof reinforced by
CpaoiW
(S) Explain briefly how wood is made fireProof-
(4)	Describe the Herculean flat arch.
(8) Sketch the cross-section of the bar used in the Columbian system.
. Why is it bad practice to carry pipes inside the fire--foot easing ot columns?
What is meant by the side method and aid method tn
flat-tile t»"struc,ion?
(5)	Descrit» the Metropolitan system.
Ryll) Describe the hollow Roehhnc partition.
BtlO) Describe the Gustavino arch and dome construction.
Flo. 11
"a method of supporting a reinforced-concrete floor on the party wall of a building. As will be noticed, the floor is made just the thickness of two bricks and mortar joints, and sets into the wall. Instead of fitting the concrete slab into the wall, however, the brickwork may be corbelled out so as to provide a bearing. As shown in the Illustration, the plaster is applied directly to the brickwork, but the wall can be furred and lathed If desired."
"A system of fireproof-roof construction that grows more Important from year to year is expanded-metal concrete construction. Although rods can be used instead of expanded metal, as has been explained in floor work, yet either expanded metal or wire lath seems best adapted for the purpose."
"Herculean Flat Arches ... an Improved type of end construction In which no skewbacks are required, while the arch rests on supporting walls at the ends. There Is no kick to this arch as there Is to the ordinary terra-cotta arch, and, in laying, the joints in the consecutive courses are broken. The T irons a, are thoroughly embedded in cement mortar, and, being thus encased in a covering of terracotta and cement 2 inches thick, they are protected from all possible damage by fire."
roof, and dome construction. They are particularly
light, economical, and scientific in their design, and form the Gaustavino construction ... named after Its Inventor, a Spanish architect. Spanish tile arches consist essentially of three layers of tile,
1 Inch thick, which are thoroughly embedded In cement and laid up in the form of a segmental arch, as shown In Fig. 2."
an arch - not as a beam. The first step In this method of construction is to spring an arch of wire cloth between the beams ... stiffening the cloth at short intervals by steel rods ... On this base is laid the arched concrete filling ... which, on becoming hard, transmits the loads directly to the beams. The ceiling Is held by a similar netting of wire..."
a, bent as shown, that rests on the steel floorbeams and provides a means of supporting the concrete and the floor load. This sheet steel is usually galvanized to protect it from corrosion ... Where a flat ceiling is desired, it is suspended by the usual means and the plaster is supported on woven-wire lath."
PAGE 102
SYSTEM FAILURE
Ceiling failures in fires in New York and San Francisco reveal the infancy of fireproofing technology. The lack of sufficient fireproofing is clear in buildings where ceilings were burned through, resulting in structural damage to the floors above.
1896 C.F.T. Kandeler | "Fireproof floor and’ ^ ceiling construction " US Patent - an early i fireproof suspended * ceiling. "For suspend« the ceiling-strips I a provide the bars E, preferably in the form of angle irons, one adjacent to each joist»
1900 Failed ceiling system installed at the Parker Building, New York City, with underfloor/ceiling terracotta arches.
The building is destroyed by fire in 1908. Sectional drawing notes use of "weak cinder concrete."
1908 Only eight years old and declared fireproof, New York's Parker building becomes a complete loss when fatigued cast-iron columns and poorly fireproofed ceilings initiate the collapse of massive floor sections, spreading the conflagration upward.
1908 When subjected to extreme heat, the terracotta arches supporting the floors expand, releasing the plaster underlay that protects the vital lower flanges of the structural girders.
"If anyone who reads this statement may happen to be engaged in an office or loft, where he can look up and see the bottom flanges of the floor beams and girders exposed to view at the springing of the floor arches, he may set it down at once that he is in a building which is not in any strict sense fireproof..."
— "The Lessons of the Parker Building Fire," , Scientific American, February 1, 1908, 74.
PAGE 103
■P*»
"Where suspended ceilings were used and moderate heating prevailed the ceiling proved a great protection to the concrete floors. Under severe heat the added protection was of little value." Report of E. V. Johnson Vice President National Fire Proofing Co.
"Johnson Building ... concrete beams were protected with a metal lath ceiling, but notwithstanding this additional protection the floors of the building were completely wrecked."
"Monadnock building, basement ... there was sufficient inflammable material to burn off the suspended ceiling and cause the collapse of four concrete beams."
1909 Fireproof floor...
1909 Fireproof ceiling + floor, recommended by the National Fire Proofing Co.
PAGE 104
SPRINKLERS
Inventors Parnelee and Grinnell team up to create a viable ceiling-mounted sprinkler system to protect building occupants from the alarming number of fires breaking out...
1875 H.S. Parnalee, "Fire Extinguisher" aka Cap sprinkler: the first functioning automatic sprinkler. The cap is released at temperatures rise above 120 degrees, releasing water from a perforated distributor. Parnelee soon begins a partnership with Grinnell...
1885 Ten years after Parnelee and Gunnell's invention of the sprinkler, it becomes commonplace on ceilings everywhere, with 300,000 devices sold in the US.
1880 Grinnel's "Automatic Fire Extinguisher aka sprinkler system
Fio. a.
Fig. i.
Grinnrll’s Sprinkler Open.	Gat shell’s Sprinkler Closed
PAGE 105
Hfoacianda machine: in the early 20th century, Grinnell proclaims the ^Ktiveness, economy, and necessity of its sprinkler system, knowing
O' k	+ I o r\ci\tkotV foot hcirAminn inrlioruonoohlci
they
Ve invented a device that's fast becoming indispensable.
compelled to purchase a fire-sprinkler system. Insurance premiums are reduced by 85 percent upon installation, and the system pays for itself in three years.
1918 Patriotism: the sprinkler will keep America's industries safe from fire and help win the war... "those infallible destroyers of fire, which in thirty-five years have won thousands and thousands of battles against their red enemy."
1919 Civic duty: Grinnell appeals to hospital boards to avoid fires rather than respond to them.
2008 When and where a sprinkler system is required, stipulated by the New York City Building Code.
General Requirements - All Occupancy Groups Area > 1500 sf per floor without exterior egress; below grade floor more than 75ft underground.
Height > 55ft and occupancy >30 Refuse areas Construction sites Specific Occupancy Groups Group A-1: area > 12,000 sf or occupancy > 300 Group A-2: area > 5,000 sf or occupancy > 300 Group A-3: area > 12,000 sf or occupancy > 300 Group A-4: area > 12,000 sf or occupancy > 300 Group A-5: enclosed areas > 1,000 sf Group E: area > 20,000 sf
Group F-1: area > 75,000 sf or > 3 stories or wood working in > 2500 sf Group H: All Group I: All
Group M: area > 7500 sf or > 3 stories or high-piled storage areas Group S-1: area > 500 sf
Group S-2: area > 5000 sf or parking under other occupancy groups.
SPRINKLERS: FRIEND OF THE ARCHITECT & THE DEVELOPER
By the 21st century, it is nearly impossible to build a building without a sprinkler system, forcing the ceiling to bear another burden. But building codes and sprinkler companies no longer claim that sprinklers suppress or prevent fire. The sprinkler is part of a greater ambition -"life-safety." Sprinklers are installed in order to contain and control fires, providing enough time for occupants to evacuate and for firefighters to arrive. Similarly, building assemblies - the methods and materials used to construct walls, floors, ceiling, etc. - are fire-rated typically between one and four hours for the same reason. Where the most sprinklers are required is the result of historical events: primarily spaces with occupancy type A (assembly) - theaters etc. - which have been most commonly the victim of large, tragic fires. The use of sprinklers gives architects more freedom: with a system is in place, the
Beyond Requirements - Sprinkler Benefits 1 hour fire-rating reduction in building assemblies where sprinklers are installed.
Maximum Egress Travel Distances:
TRAVEL DISTANCE
OCCUPANCY	NON-SPRINKLERED		SPRINKLERED	
	PRIMARY	SECONDARY	PRIMARY	SECONDARY
H A-2, A-3, A-4	100	150	150	250
A-5	200	300	200	300
Sources:
City Building Code, Chapter 9, ire Protection Systems, 2008 ew York City Building Code, Chapter 10, Means otEg^ss, MOB
maximum travel distance to an exit increases between 15 and 30 meters, making a deeper plan possible. In addition, the fire resistance of materials can be reduced by 1 hour, reducing construction costs.
		
	SYSTEM	SYSTEM (Teen
		
E.F-l.I-l. M. R. S-1	-UÛ	200*
B	200	300s
F-2. S-2.U	700	
H-l		Z¿‘
		100s
		150s
		US?
H-5		m
	1-2.1-3.1-4			m			M.	
2008 Permitted exit distance increases with the presence of a sprinkler, enabling deeper buildings.
PAGE 106
ASBESTOS: DEATH FROM ABOVE
From hero...
"Pine lumber over which kerosene oil had been poured made such a blazing fire that the little building was cracked and nearly riven open with the force of the heat.
At the end of two hours the flooring on top of the asbestos ceiling was scarcely warm to the touch and the iron beams between the ceiling and the second flooring were almost cold."
— Chicago Daily Tribune, August 18, 1901.
False ceiling of asbestos sheeting or gypsum board over furnace insures against instant firing of tinder-dry joists and flooring in case of blowback • and sudden flames. Ordinary fiberboard retards fire only a third as long as asbestos.
1948 The Home Workshop advocates asbestos sheeting for ceilings at home.
PAGE 107
to villa'0
"|sjow, asbestos can be credited with saving many lives: fireproof clothing, fireproof insulation in buildings, safer and more durable brake linings, etc.
But, now asbestos is beginning to reveal jts other side, not only in the appearance of the comparatively rare mesothelioma, but, on a much broader scale, as a catalyst of just plain lung cancer, and of asbestosis, a crippling disease which scars lungs and interferes with the passage of oxygen into the blood. Anyone with an advanced case of asbestosis will probably feel more comfortable climbing the stairs backward, so that he can sit down on each step. He also can be certain that because of the presence of asbestosis he has as much chance of developing skin cancer as of escaping it. Heavy doses of asbestos in the lungs also encourage the carcinogenic effects of tobacco smoke to a remarkable degree; studies have shown that asbestos workers who smoke have a lung cancer rate 800 per cent higher than smokers in the general population."
—New York Times, January 21, 1973.
much of architecture -including the ceiling -suddenly needs to be stripped back and purged. The process reveals anew the almost gotesque layering of papery, spongey, soggy, dusty materials that compose the ceilings of the mid 20th century.

PAGE 108
Pre-SMOKE ALARM...
1947 Conceived in a cloud of smoke: as he works on designs for the United Nations headquarters in New York, architect Wallace K. Harrison boldly smokes under a false ceiling not yet equipped with smoke alarm.
INTRODUCTION...
AT LAST-
m
ONLY £59.95 DELIVERED
1963 "Life-Saver Dual Action Smoke Detector approved by insurance underwriters, advertised in the Boston Globe, February 10, 1963.
1976 "SMOKEALERT detects ... invisible particles [given off by a nascent fire] ... a piercing 85 decibel alarm goes off. ... Installation is easy. All you need is a screwdriver, lust two screws into the ceiling and it's up." Ad in the Washington Post, Dune 27, 1976.
PAGE 109
iirIQUITY"
"Emergency. There's carbon monoxide in the bedroom. Move to fresh air."
"Burned the toast? Nest Protect won't just start yelling at you. Before turning on a loud, howling alarm, Nest Protect gives you an early warning we call Heads-Up. Nest Protect lights up yellow and speaks with a human voice. It tells you where smoke Is or when carbon monoxide levels are rising. This gives you an earlier warning if there's an emergency, or allows you to silence Nest Protect if it's just a nuisance alarm, like an overly enthusiastic toaster."
Nest Protect helps you prepare for an emergency with our What To Do feature. You can enter an emergency contact and when something goes wrong, you've got a plan."
FRIEND FROM ABOVE...
Rather than a merciless, uniform, authoritarian shriek from the ceiling, the postmodern smoke alarm is an intelligent, friendly participant in your life, responsive to your voice and your behavior, able to assess risk, aware of its surroundings. The Nest Protect literally speaks to you from above - the human voice having been identified as more likely to illicit action than a mechanical alarm - with a gentle "Heads up" when the device detects mild smoke, and a more firm "There's smoke in the bedroom" (or kitchen etc.) in more severe cases. The alarm can be overidden with a "Nest Wave" of the hand (a gesture as new as the swipe on a tablet). Shortly after launch, a small margin of possibility is discovered for inadvertent use of the wave, and the device is temporarily removed from the market while a software patch is written. Nest CEO Tony Fadell writes an urgent memo: "During recent laboratory testing ... we observed a unique combination of circumstances that caused us to question whether the Nest Wave ... could be unintentionally activated. This could delay an alarm going off if there was a real fire. We identified this problem ourselves and are not aware of any customers who have experienced this, but the fact that it could even potentially happen is extremely important to me and I want to address it immediately." ("Consumer Safety Notice for Nest Protect: Smoke + CO Alarm," Tony Fadell, April, 2014.)
NEST PROTECT AD COPY
"Heads-Up. There's smoke in the living room."
Silence alarms with a wave. No more frantically winging towels at the smoke alarm to quiet down. If there's a nuisance alarm, just stand nder Nest Protect and wave your arm to hush le alert. As you wave, your hand should be to 8 feet away from the alarm.."
In addition to an alarm sound, Nest Protect oeaks to you with a human voice. It tells you 'hat the problem is and where it is. And if ou have more than one Nest Protect, they onnect so they can speak up at the same time ven if Wi-Fi is down. Voice alarms can be nportant to your family's safety. You have more iformation when seconds count. And according 3 a study, children can sleep through a beeping larm. So Nest Protect sounds the alarm nd uses a human voice to help kids wake up."
■L clian of the night: "You don't have jq1 .j 0f the dark. Next time you stumble tobea^rad ¡n the middle of the night, Nest Protect °ut mrnatically light your way. You willaU ,ho Pathlight feature on or off using ran turn tne re
the Nest a^p'
PAGE 112 HEATING
Dust as the thermostat is initially developed as a tool to assist the incubation of eggs, insulating false ceilings provide thermal stability first of all for chicken farmers, before the same system enters the home...

1937 Insulating ceilings maintain warm and dry conditions within hen houses.
1939 Used inside the home, drop ceilings maintain the same temperature as the floor.
PAGE 113
THE OUTDOOR FALSE CEILING
A housing project in Milan by Aldo Rossi, the Galleratese, features a covered walkway beneath apartments above. Their floors feature no insulation, so a drop ceiling is slung from the underside of the slab in the walkway outside to insulate the space above...
1974 Aldo Rossi's Galleratese, with smooth slab ceiling over a walkway.
1994 Installation of outdoor ceiling, meant to insulate the apartments above.
PAGE 114
RADIANT CEILING
Widely advertised in the US, the ceiling panel as a source of heat never catches on; forced air systems coming from vents in the lower wall or regular radiators are preferred. Where radiant heat is used, the source is usually the floor, even though the ceiling performs better.
1949 Lustron radiant ceiling panels distribute heat throughout the room, according to the comforting arrows in their ad.
1950 "Uskon Electric Ceiling Panels offer architects new freedom in design..."
1948 Popular Science describes the manufacturer and installation of a "rubber 'furnace' in your ceiling."
PAGE 115
d y2- 0.0. L COPPER SUPPLY CONNECTION
(5) ADDED INSULATION FOR SOUND REDUCTION (OPTIONAL)
g) WALL MOLDING
2013 Airtite Radiant Ceiling System, embedded in drop ceiling panels, with two layers of acoustic insulation too.
g) ACOUSTICAL THERMAL INSULATION
(§ WIRE HANGER
"In most buildings, the ceiling is the least disrupted surface. It is free of objects and coverings. Floors, by contrast, are often covered by many objects (furniture, rugs, equipment). Despite this, radiant floors are common in the history of thermally active surfaces due to their ease of installation.
But in terms of performance, the ceiling is preferable; it becomes a large thermal transfer surface, imbuing it with a more active role."
—Kiel Moe, Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture (Princeton Architectural Press, 2010), 80.
PAGE 116
VENTILATION
THE PUNKAH FAN
A ceiling ventilation device - part fan, part louver -originating in India evolves into the ceiling vent on passenger airplanes...
1844 David Boswell Reid's depiction of the Indian punkah in his tome Illustrations of the Theory and Practice of Ventilation. The device hangs from the ceiling but requires an attendant to pull the cord to generate movement.
ca. 1880 Punkahs installed over pews in the Kanpur Memorial Church.

1856 George Alfred DePenning of Calcutta is granted the first patent ever issued in India, for "An Efficient Punkah Pulling Machine."

1856 The same year in the US, an early air conditioning system is patented by A.S. Lymann: air forced over a ceiling-mounted ice rack.

PAGE 117
punkah louvres
Me'
yen
OÜ
' hanized and made into a jet of air, “ ' becomes another device the ceiling...
itilation
;Cupy|ng
1931 Connected to hidden HVAC system, ceiling-mounted punkah louvres dispense high velocity cooling.
Range of the Thermotank Revolving Punkah Louvre, better than a fan since it blasts external air into a room.
Installed on the underside of the ceiling at the Automatic Telephone Exchange owned by England's Post Office, Thermotank punkah louvres distribute cool air to sensitive electrical equipment.
2017 Punkah louvres used today as local ventilation devices in the ceiling above every airline seat.
PAGE 118
MODERN SYSTEMS OF THE LARKIN BUILDING
Frank Lloyd Wright's Larkin building, in Buffalo, New York, completed in 1906, is the first to accommodate a complete mechanical ventilation system using ducts and chases.
But the building does not have a suspended ceiling: the structure and mechanics applied to it are exposed for viewing. Cladding is only used around columns to disguise ductwork.
Larkin interior: ventilation ducts run inside columns (covered with brick finish); lighting attached to raw concrete celling.
1906 The Larkin Building: container of mechanical systems.
Reverse ceiling plan shows Larkin's ventilation system with ducts channeled inside columns.

PAGE 119
THE FAN SYSTEM FOR HUMIDIFYING VENTILATING AND HEATING MILLS.
BY W H. CARRIER, U E.
1907 Carrier patents dew point control, a water astern that manipulates the saturation point ‘he air to perfect the Interior climate.
The importance attached to proper atmospheric conditions may be best understood by referring to the structure of the cotton fibre. The fibre is an elongated cell, whose walls are almost pure cellulose, 85 per cent, of it being of this substance. Surrounding the walls is a substance of a waxy nature for the preservation of which so much is done in the mill by carefully maintaining the proper temperature and humidity. This envelope is of a very delicate character and consequently easily damaged; in fact, it can be rubbed off in a warm room where it becomes softened. This softening makes the fibre pliable and elastic.
After the cotton leaves the bale in the breaker room and passes through the different machines in its process of manufacture, it is subject to severe treatment and tends to lose its moisture, and unless the cotton fibre retains this waxy substance or oily covering that nature has provided it with, it will be
TEXTILE MILLS: TEST BEDS FOR AIR CONDITIONING
W.H. Carrier, grandfather of air conditioning, installs an early spray-type humidity control system in the Farr Alpaca factory, in Holyoke, Massachusetts (and publishes it in Carrier Engineering Corporation Bulletin, No. 103, 1916). The factory ceiling, a surface from which machinery has hung since the Industrial Revolution, forms a prototype for office buildings of the 20th century...
impossible to obtain good results from the weaving and spinning of yarn.
In order that the best results may be secured in a cotton mill the air must contain a certain per cent, of moisture. With a certain amount of humidity the fibre becomes more adhesive and pliant, consequently the yarn becomes smoother, stronger and softer.
In cold weather there is very little moisture in the air, and when the temperature is raised by means of warming the air in the mill, the humidity is lowered, thus leaving a very dry and warm air, which is a poor conductor of electricity. A dry atmosphere is detrimental to the manufacture of cotton goods, in that it causes a great deal of electricity, which causes the fibres to be separated and stand apart. It also shortens the thread, weakens the fibre and causes numerous breakages. More waste is made, due to the fact that the fibres tend to cling to the rolls of the picker, drawing, and roving frames, thus forming an imperfect lap from which it is impossible to obtain a perfect roving. The frames become clogged, friction is increased, the fibres become hot, break and often ignite.
PAGE 120
THE BASICS OF HVAC
Typical configurations of heating, ventilation, and air conditioning systems for different types and sizes of building...
Single story: from below
In a single story condition where it's possible to create a mechanical room below grade, efficient distribution of air can be achieved within the floor plate. Piston ducts provide temperate or chill* air into the space. Heating can be provided b radiant floor in the slab. Independent exhaust units are required on the roof to provide a ste exchange of air.
Low rise, no basement: from above
Where a basement is not available, mechanical systems can be relocated to the roof. In this configuration, cooled or heated air is supplied to the spaces below from the ceilings.
Forced air cooling, radiator heating: from above and below
Air handling and cooling is controlled from the roof and delivered via the ceiling, so cooler air naturally falls downward into the inhabited spaces; while heating from radiators rises from the floor. Perhaps the most efficient combination of systems.
PAGE 121
hvac components
forced air system, including provision TyPlCf .. ajr Heating may be supplemented provided entirely by radiators.
or
Ducts for forced air
Main components of a forced air system include the supply plenum, main duct, supply branches and diffuser types. Diffusers can be mounted high or low within the wall or in the floor or ceiling.
Varied thermal conditions
Displacement ventilation systems use a supply of cool air, which is naturally heated in the room and then rises to be returned into the system through ducts in the ceiling. The occupied zone is considered to be the area 45 cm away from the walls and up to 2.10 meters above the ground. Displacement systems create cool zones near diffusers, but have the advantage or allowing hot air to pool at the ceiling where it does not affect the comfort of users.
Drawings by Kurt Nieminen and Wui loon Ha for Harvard GSD studio "Real and Imagined Variables," taught by George Legendres.
PAGE 122
THE INVENTION OF MODERN CEILING LIGHTING, IN PATENTED STEPS...
RECESSED CEILING FIXTURE
April 10, 1956	h. u schockett	2,761,695
4ECE53GD LlOHTINO fIXTJUS April 19. 1994
1956 H.U. Schockett's patent tor recessed lighting fixtures: "Lighting fixtures recessed behind the wall or above the ceiling are rapidly becoming a common feature in modern home and office building construction. The lamp is customarily held in a reflector which is in turn mounted in a cavity in the wall or ceiling. In many instances a removable transparent cover is fastened over the lamp substantially flush with the surrounding surface."
2000 Steve Cohen's "Universal adapter bracket and ornamental trim assembly using same for in-ceiling recessed light fixtures."
TRACK LIGHTING
PATENTED NN2719H	3.832.503
SHEIt 1 » 3
1974 R. Crane, "Two circuit track lighting system": "In recent years track lighting systems have gained in popularity for both commercial and residential applications. The systems consist basically of a channel-type track, the internal sides of which support elongated conductors which may be tapped at any point along their length by suitable connectors to provide power for fixtures mounted to the track. The fixtures may then be used as spotlights, accent lights or to provide general illumination for an area."
FLUORESCENT TUBE
Feb. 26, 1952
Filed Doc. 1, 1949
R. I. BERRY
LIGHTING FIXTURE AND LOUVER FOR ELONGATED TUBULAR LAMPS
2,586,908
2 SHEETS—SHEET 1
¡J ^./ ,,y_ t-LfS
1952 R. J Berry, "Lighting Fixture and Louver for Elongated Tubular Lamps": "Another object of my invention is to provide a horizontal lighting fixture for fluorescent lighting tubes of a simple, novel and efficient structure so arranged as to permit ready removal of the tubes from the top of the fixture without removing any parts of the fixture."
PAGE 123
^orescent tube
Aug* 24» 1^43*	h.J- poehling	2,327,552
FLUORESCENT SAFETY LIGHTING FIXTURE
Filed Dec. 15, 1941	2 Sheets-Sheet 1
Feb. 23, 1960
Filed Nov. 12, 1957
s. E. sorenson	2,926,237
CEILING LIGHTING SYSTEM
2 Sheets-Sheet 1
JJ/s ¿TToat/er’s.
1941 HJ. Poehling, "Fluorescent Safety Lighting Fixture."
LIGHT EMITTING DIODE
I960 S.E. Sorenson, "Ceiling Lighting System": "The length of the tiles determines the modular spacing of the runners and the lathers channels are desirably spaced at regular intervals, the module of which Is an even multiple of the runner module."
2011 Tickner, lerold-Newnan, "Light Emitting Diode Recessed Light Fixture": "The invention provides a recessed light fixture with an LED light source. The light fixture includes a housing or 'can' within which an LED module is mounted."
PAGE 124
1958 Dignity of the drop ceiling: Inland Steel Building, Chicago, by Skidmore Owings Merrill. The unadulterated open plan demands an unadulterated ceiling: clean, calm, seemingly able to continue forever, a perspectival instrument pointing towards new horizons... Like the office cubicle, the false ceiling starts out as an ennobling and democratic innovation - before being reviled as symbols of bland conformity - here offering a perfectly uniform field of light under which anyone can work, anywhere in the floor plate. In 2008, SOM executes a renovation that preserves the thin profile of the original ceiling, inserting "chilled beams" into the ceiling for local temperature control, reducing the need for HVAC equipment. Despite the respectful preservation, a visit in 2017 reveals the inevitable accumulation of devices on the ceiling plane to ensure the safety and comfort of those working underneath it. Meanwhile the cluttered landscape of the contemporary office (standing desks, shelving, foliage) obscures the broad horizon SOM's false ceiling used to point to...
PAGE 126
ILLUMINATED CEILING
Rather than emitting from discrete objects, in the luminous ceilings of certain 1950s modernist office buildings, the whole surface is the light. The result is a new ceiling typology and the exaltation of uniform light - partly as an aesthetic joy, partly as part of a drive towards optimum working conditions. Luminous ceilings in turn create urban-scaled lamps, spilling light out onto the surrounding streets. The luminous ceiling will migrate from high-modernist offices to the home, from Manhattan and Chicago to the suburbs, via real estate advertising and trade catalogues.
1949 Lighting engineers Parry Moon (MIT) and Domina Eberle Spencer (Brown University) prove the superiority of the luminous ceiling over the t louverall ceiling (featuring embedded or upward-facing luminaires): "the : complete luminous ceiling costs no more than the louverall ceiling, has a ’ higher coefficient of utilization, and eliminates that great defect of the louverall - reflected glare. Properly designed, the luminous ceiling gives ideal lighting that satisfies the 3:1 brightness (helios) criterion" for rooms "in which the visual task is severe." Moon and Eberle Spencer establish seven 1 rules for the optimum illuminated ceiling, including that the translucent plates diffusing the light should have the lowest possible "optical absorptance"
(Le. they should allow as much light through as possible while still diffusing it), and "the spacing between rows of lamps should not exceed twice the 1 distance between lamp centers and translucent plates." (Parry Moon and Domina Eberle Spencer, "Luminous Ceiling Lighting," Illuminating Engineering, August 1949.)
2011 The interior of the Manufacturers Trust Company is much manipulated over the decades, including the addition of a new mini "lobby" and extra set of doors in front of formerly monumental escalator, erasing the view of the illuminated ceiling. In 2011 though, the interior is designated a landmark by the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, finally catching up with the exterior, which had the status since 1997. The citation recognises that "Even from the outside, the interiors constitute the major sensation of the building, because they are under luminous ceilings, providing light so brilliant that the interior space is entirely and perfectly revealed." The citation notes:
"Vast 'luminous ceilings' hover above both floors ... Corrugated 'paper thin vinyl sheeting,' hung from T-shaped metal channels, gave the ceilings an uncluttered directional character. With none of the lighting fixtures visible, it could easily be seen from both streets [Fifth Avenue and 43rd street] and reads as a floating, illuminated grid. ... Luminous ceilings also enhanced each floor's minimalist character. Not only did the panels diffuse and disguise the lighting source but they hid such necessary elements as public address systems, air diffusers, and acoustical materials." (Matthew A. Postal, Landmarks Preservation Commission, "Designation List 439 LP-2467," February 15, 2011.)
The award coincides with a legal battle between building owner Vornado Realty Trust - which wants to add new doors, move escalators away from the facade, reduce the vault wall, and convert the interior into two stores - and DOCOMOMO (Documentation and Conservation of Buildings, Sites and Neighborhoods of the Modern Movement) and other preservationist bodies. The illuminated ceiling largely survives.
PAGE 127
1954 The Manufacturers Trust Company Bank, by Gordon Bunshaft of Skidmore Owings Merrill, has a policy of keeping its lights on until 1am every morning. The illuminated ceiling works wonders, making the whole building a block of light. Lantern effect captured by Ezra Stoller's nighttime exposure on Fifth Avenue.
PAGE 128
URBANISM OF THE ILLUMINATED CEILING
1957 "Tower of Light" graphic concept for the Seagram Building by Richard Kelly in Architectural Forum.
1959 Seagram building as beacon, completed.
nocturnal, a day-for-night building. We know it is a
his idea. He told me that he had discussed the issue ! with Mies van der Rohe "over the phone"...
PAGE 129
OMESTICATION of the illuminated ceiling
1963 The more light the better: the Pinafore model is composed of 8" luminous plastic ceiling panels, in American Builder.
Elco Plastics' range of louvres for illuminated ceilings, from "plasmatic diffusing panels" to "specular louvres."
THE SEMI-ILLUMINATED CEILING
1976 Meticulous reconstruction of the Washington Post offices for All The President's Men, complete with 50/50 semi-illuminated ceiling:
"Set designers crawl through the building with tape measures and light meters. And boxes of authentic Washington Post trash are dutifully gathered for shipment to Hollywood, where another newsroom, a fake, is being built. ... Since The Post has denied permission to film in its newsroom (the movie people claim logistical problems make it impossible anyway), that sprawling, open arena is being reproduced, at a cost of $200,000 on two sound stages in Hollywood's Burbank Studios. Nearly 200 desks at $500 apiece were purchased from the same firm that sold desks to The Post four years ago, and to color them just right, the same precise shades of paint - be they '6 Vi PA Blue' or '22 PE Green' - are being mixed on special order. Post administrative clerk George Middlebrook supplied production designer George Denkins with a brick from the main lobby so it could be duplicated in fiberglass for that set."
— "When Worlds Collide: Lights! Camera! Egos!" Washington Post, April 11, 1975.
PAGE 130
"I don't want to die under a false ceiling"
— Louis Kahn, paraphrased in: Jacqueline Glass, Encyclopedia of Architectural Technology (Chichester: Wiley-Academy, 2002), entry "Ceilings", 51.
In a possibly apocryphal story,* Louis Kahn, who pays close attention to the ceiling throughout his career, signals an early aesthetic, life-or-death revolt against the regime of the false ceiling, which reaches its apex in hospitals, and in a laboratory that he himself designs...
*an email exchange with Glass, a professor of architecture at Loughborough University in the UK, does not reveal the source of the quote; only its report.
The remark does not appear in the published anthologies of Kahn's writings and recorded lectures, though on many occasions Kahn praised the exposed ceiling and criticized the modern habit of hiding the building's entrails above hanging tiles. Kahn died in 1974, reportedly in the restrooms of the recently rebuilt Penn Station in New York. An investigation into whether these restrooms had false ceilings yields no evidence...
— Manfredo di Robilant
1953 Louis Kahn examines the light piercing his panel-free tetrahedral ceiling at the Yale University Art Gallery. The exposed concrete carries beauty and function simultaneously: air conditioning ducts are visible as well as the lighting system, forming an articulated grid that solemnizes the ceiling as something worth looking up at. Kahn calls his ceiling "the revolt against the hung ceiling" and elsewhere states: "Structures should be devised which can harbor the mechanical needs of rooms and spaces. Ceilings with structure furred in tend to erase scale." (What Will Be Has Always Been: The Words of Louis /. Kahn, ed. Richard Saul Wurman (Rizzoli, 1986), 125 and 206.)
PAGE 131
1972 Kahn points to the ceiling at the opening of the Kimbell Art Museum, Dallas, formed by a series of concrete vaults reflecting his admiration of Roman vaulted architecture. The evocation is not a nostalgic mise-en-scene but rather a celebration of the ceiling as a multitasking element, capable of bringing natural light to the indoors, while air ducts are hosted in the spaces between the vaults. Neither modern nor postmodern, the Kimbell grants the ceiling the paradoxical status of being more important than foundations.
PAGE 132
HACKING THE CEILING
For tightly packed shacks in slums around the world, with no possibility of windows or access to electricity for lighting, Brazilian mechanic Alfred Moser invents, in 2002, an illumination system that makes the underside of corrugated iron roofs into functional ceilings: 1) drill hole in metal. 2) insert plastic bottle half filled with water and a bit of bleach so the water doesn't turn green. 3) seal in place with polyester resin so the joint doesn't leak. The result is a brilliant bulb refracting sunlight, illuminating the room below. NGOs, like Philippines based Liter of Light, train people to produce units of these water filled bulbs that can be easily installed, usually in corrugated metal ceilings.
1
Installed light.
Roof into ceiling: the installation of the plastic bottle lamp in shacks in Manila invests the raw roof underside of the metal roof with one of the typical functions of the ceiling: illumination.
PAGE 134
PLATE, TUBE, SKIN
The ceilings of Toyo Ito's Sendai Mediatheque are often doubled: a drop ceiling containing lighting, hanging lower than the first drop ceiling, containing other services. The showpiece 7th floor ceiling - a complex, decorative merger of two false ceilings - endures the 2011 magnitude 9.0 earthquake.
PAGE 135

<î>
2000 Reflected ceiling plan, Sendai Mediatheque, Toyo Ito.

PAGE 136
LIGHTING AS WAYFINDING

\50% Off] UmCAPOS'
Spotting David's location at the fresh vegetables section, the light fixture prompts the app to offer him 50% off on avocados






PHILIPS
2014 Personalized navigation embedded In the ceiling: "Each fixture is identifiable and able to communicate its position to an app on a shopper's smart device," explains Gerben van der Lugt, of Philips Lighting. "This enables the shopper to get information related to his position in the store . and location-based services to be triggered."
LIGHTING as surveillance
PAGE 137
2014 Hidden: "Visitors to Terminal B at Newark Liberty International Airport may notice the bright, clean lighting that now blankets the cavernous interior, courtesy of 171 recently installed LED fixtures. But they probably will not realize that the light fixtures are the backbone of a system that is watching them. Using an array of sensors and eight video cameras around the terminal, the light fixtures are part of a new wireless network that collects and feeds data into software that can spot long lines, recognize license plates and even identify suspicious activity, sending alerts to the appropriate staff... What began as a way to help governments and businesses save energy by automatically turning lights on and off has become an expanding market for lights, sensors and software capable of capturing and analyzing vast amounts of data about the habits of ordinary citizens. 'No one really wanted the smartphone 20 years ago because they didn't know they could have it,' said Fred Maxik, founder and chief technology officer of Lighting Science Group, which manufactures LEDs. 'And I think the same is true of lighting today: No one knows what lighting is going to be capable of.'"
—New York Times, February 17, 2014.
"We felt what you'd want to use this network for is to gather information about people and the planet," Hugh Martin, CEO of Sensity, a surveillance-light system in use at Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan.
PAGE 138
CONSCIOUS LIGHTING
"Bulbs like the Philips Hue or LIFX can have their brightness, color and timing of when to come on and go off controlled wirelessly from a smartphone. The Philips programmable LED uses a separate router box, but the Australian LIFX bulb has the networking electronics built into the bulb itself. The LIFX can even be set up to change color to music. That may be a gimmick, but it gives some idea of how domestic lighting is poised to become yet another network appliance around the home, with each bulb having its own internet address.
Once that happens, the possibilities become endless."
— The Economist, April 2013.
2012 "Now, instead of building out single point solutions, start to think about each one of these devices and the role it can play in a larger ecosystem of connected devices."
—Sean Carney, chief design officer for Philips Consumer Lifestyle.
Dubbed "your personal wireless lighting system, the router box links all Hue light bulbs to your smartphone.
Geofencing: using the geographical coordinates of your	Alarm: recurring alarms can be set to determine when you
cellphone, the system automatically switches your lights	wake up and go to bed - replacing the traditional alarm
on when you get close to your home.	clock with artificial LED light.
Timer: programmed color variations remind you when	IF I I I (If This, Then That): connected to external data sources
your favorite TV shows are about to start or when your	set up by the user, hue can adapted to alert you when
cupcakes are finished baking.	the weather changes, when your favorite sports team scores,
or when you get an alert from Facebook.
PAGE 139
2012 Hue users select lighting conditions from a suite of prescribed color recipes to match their current activity or mood.
2013 You I ube user bimon Walker tests his Internet-enabled LifX bulb by walking across the street to turn on his living room lights.
13 The Ambify app's visualization algorithms turn tt?5i.0fdinary ^*c^en int0 a disco, syncing light patterns 1 h smart-device playlists for an Interactive audio-Vlsual experience.
PAGE 140
POLICE OFFICER IN THE CEILING
The dream of having an officer continuously on patrol is at the origin of security lamps and CCTV. The ceiling is now also a powerful surface for controlling and inspecting the behavior of people within or outside a building.
"Employers have a legitimate interest in monitoring work to ensure efficiency and productivity. But electronic surveillance often goes well beyond legitimate management concerns and becomes a tool for spying on employees. A few years ago, postal workers in New York City were horrified to discover that management had installed video cameras in the restroom stalls. Female workers at a large Northeastern department store discovered a hidden video camera installed in an empty office space that was commonly used as a changing room. Waiters in a large Boston hotel were secretly videotaped dressing and undressing in their locker room."
—American Civil Liberties Union, December 31,1997.

PAGE 141
2013 Some of the 100,000 cameras installed in Macau's casinos. "Asia's new mega-casinos are driving sales and Innovation In advanced surveillance technology, from chips with built-in radio transmitters to hlgh-deflnltlon, multi-lens, digital cameras that can scan huge gaming floors and catch the deftest sleight of hand. ... Security solution providers such as German-Australlan joint venture Dallmeler International, California-based Pelco, a unit of Schneider Electric PA, and Samsung Techwln Co, about 25%-owned by Samsung Electronics Co Ltd, are among those reaping the benefits of Asia's casino building boom." (Reuters, September 15, 2013.)
iBP^ystic Lake Casino's $10 million control jOom monitors 1,800 surveillance camera eeds for the gaming tables and neighboring Bpmunity of Prior Lake, Minnesota.
PAGE 142
ACOUSTICS
1957 "Go ahead, put your fingers in your ears. Notice how quiet and peaceful it suddenly becomes? That's the kind of difference Sound-Conditioning will make in your home when you put in a beautiful new Armstrong Conditioning Ceiling." (Ad from Life magazine, March 1957.)
PAGE 143
OND SOUND TEST

PAGE 144
1929	In an experiment published in the Journal of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology, a typist performs at a rate of 150 words per minute while her caloric expenditure is monitored by the face mask. Energy consumption increases by 19 percent under noisy conditions, with extra energy being used in facial and stomach contractions, concludes industrial psychologist Donald Laird, noting that typists worked seven percent faster in quiet conditions. The price of the additional comfort provided by acoustic ceiling panels is a culture of smooth efficiency descending from above. New York City Health Commissioner Shirley Wynne appoints a Noise Abatement Commission in the same year as Laird's experiment.
"Time was when most offices were dark, dingy, noisy places ... The Acousti-Celotex ceiling ... will always ensure quiet, because repeated painting does not effect its acoustical efficiency."
PAGE 145
1931 IS. Offutt, Acoustic Ceiling Tile: "Tiles, attached with metal spring clips (37) lock metal tile (27) into place. Sound absorbing material (23) is hidden behind (27) and has perforations (28) to facilitate sound absorption.
1952 Theodore Prisland's Acoustical Correction Tile.
PAGE 146
DOMESTIC ACOUSTICS

1950 Greensboro, North Carolina, by Edward Lowenstein. Commercial Buildings, An Architectural Record Book, (New York:
F. W. Dodge Corporation, 1953).
1957 "Nobody has to keep quiet In this SOUND-condi-tloned home." (Armstrong Ceiling ad, Life magazine, February 1957.)


PAGE 147
1957 "Do-it-yourselfers" installing"Cushiontone" acoustic panels by Armstrong. (Ad in Life magazine.)
1956 Modernity = noise. "Much of the noise in a present day home is the fault of modern equipment and the use of smooth, polished interior surfaces." Chicago Tribune, April 8, 1956.
no'se trapping holes" of Armstrong's pU^°an,c'om™ Cushiontone ceiling. The unpredictable n i's deemed superior - more humane, more ural? - to a regular grid of holes.
1956 "Almost forgotten, decoratively speaking, for more than a century, the ceiling is making a big comeback - and all because American noise is finally becoming too much for American ears." Armstrong's Full-Random™ Cushiontone ceilings (Life magazine)
PAGE 148
2011 Divine contact under the false ceiling, Rev. Michael O. Minor at the Oak Hill Baptist church, North Mississippi.
it seems everything happens under a false ceiling,
PAGE 149
2004 Graduating under the false ceiling, location unknown.
the physical horizon of our beliefs and wishes...
PAGE 151
PAGE 152
THE WEAKEST SURFACE
As the thinnest membrane of a building, the false ceiling is usually the first victim of a disaster - earthquakes, fire, a collapse - the building's entrails bursting through the ruptured surface like a hernia...
1994 Northridge Earthquake, Los Angeles: ceiling framework ruptures; strip lights and air ducts left hanging.
2001 Peru: an 8.4 magnitude earthquake destroys a factory's suspended ceiling: lights, air vent, and insulation drops.
2001 World Trade Center, New York City.
"There was a twist, if you like, to the building when it got hit, and therefore the plane's hitting explained some things to me later, like why the ceiling fell apart. The ceiling tiles and some of the brackets and so on fell; some air conditioning ducts, speakers, cables, and things like that that were in the ceiling fell. I seem to have a sense tha some of the floor tiles even buckled a bit or were moved. Some of the walls, I recall vaguely, were actually torn in a jagged direction rather than up and down. Again perhaps explained by the torque, some of the door frames popped out of the wall and partially fell or fully fell." (Brian Clark, Nova, PBS, April 30, 2002.)
Furniture store ceiling collapse.
PAGE 153
2011 The double-drop ceiling system of Toyo Ito's Sendai Mediatheque is damaged but not destroyed by the earthquake; the building structure remains intact.
2011 Tohoku earthquake, Japan: all ceiling tiles fall into a public swimming pool; framework remains.
This type of failure has been replicated on the E-defense shake table and occurs when the U-shaped clip holding the cross furring (M-bar) to the main runners (channel) opens into a V-shape and releases the furring grid.
2011 Christchurch earthquake, Canterbury, New Zealand: air duct punctures false ceiling.

PAGE 154
WAR ON THE FALSE CEILING
In a host of buildings in the US and Europe, tolerance has run out for the false ceiling and its regime of stunted room heights and concealed control of the interior environment...
Unveiling: King Street Station, Seattle.
1906 Construction.
1963 False ceilings added to improve acoustics and lighting; windows boarded, metal doors replace wooden.
2010 False ceiling stripped back.
Statement by Seattle department of transportation: "Last week a crew of six persons worked at night to remove 1,600 suspended ceiling tiles in the main waiting room of the historic King Street Station. With the acoustical tiles gone, the original, ornate plaster ceiling that graces the main waiting room of the historic King Street Station is now uncovered and open to public view.
The tiles were installed in 1963 to 'modernize' the station. ... The ceiling's old fluorescent light fixtures remain as interim lighting. Ceiling restoration work and historic lighting will be part of a future phase when funding is available."
PAGE 155
Scarring where the false walls and false ceiling met the original masonry.
Ceiling grid left intact for now, to accommodate lighting.
The largest drop ceiling: ca. three meters between suspended ceiling and 'real' ceiling.
PAGE 156
WAR ON THE FALSE CEILING II
At Schiphol airport, Amsterdam, constant maintenance is an undeclared form of warfare, the ceiling's secrets perpetually, almost embarrassingly, on display.
PAGE 157
Intelligent lighting detects motion and increases In brightness accordingly. Walking through quieter, dimmer areas of the airport, your way is lit progressively, triggered by every step.
2013 Fit for Free Gym - in a ground floor/mezzanine unit inside Flugh Maaskant's 1953 Groot Flandelsgebouw, Rotterdam, one of the first major buildings to be completed after the city's destruction in the Second World War - is retro-fitted at some point with a false ceiling, a panel of which later has to be removed so as not to impede the most strenuous exercises...
FLEXIBILITY OF THE FALSE CEILING
PAGE 159
SYMBOLISM IN THE FALSE CEILING
2000 Symbolism re-emerges in a modern parliament: red star in the Great Hall of the People, Beijing.
PAGE 160
TRUE CEILING
The true ceiling - exposing not only the underside of the floor above but also the guts of the building's systems hanging from the slab - becomes an aesthetic in itself, applicable to museums, malls, offices... Behind the principle might be an exaltation of technology, an accommodation with the given, a proud rawness and informality...
1977 Tech unveiled: Centre Georges Pompidou, Pahs by Renzo Piano, Richard Rogers and Gianfranco Franchini.
PAGE 161
2013 Cheapness enforced: Hyper supermarket, Recife, Brazil.
• Newness embraced: architecture office otterdam occupies lower, undecorated floor, ecides to leave it that way.

PAGE 162
TAMING THE TRUE CEILING
Architects AHMM and engineers Arup begin actively designing the freshly exposed components of the ceiling for efficiency and for aesthetics. At the White Collar Factory development in London, next to the so-called Silicon Roundabout at the end of Old Street, the raw aesthetic of the start-up - ceiling panels ripped off in a gung ho moralism of truth-to. systems - comes ready-made, and made intelligent. The flattened air duct reduces the intrusion of the ceiling's systems into the space, and a rationalized system of wiring and sprinkler plumbing is introduced. The result is the triple holy grail: higher ceilings (3.5 meters), improved energy efficiency (the exposed ceiling slabs are the crucial tool in heating and cooling the building), and easy access for upgrading systems in the future.
2014 Building systems slimmed down and made tidy in the true ceiling of the White Collar Factory show suite, Old Street Roundabout, London.
PAGE 163
If you have high ceilings, good daylight and natural ventilation, then you don t need full air-conditioning and all the lights on constantly. So building and fit-out costs are lower, rents and running costs are less - and your working environment is healthier."
— Derwent, developer of the White Collar Factory, 2014.
12m-18m	40
la ^ ®usta'naEility and comfort: the logic of the White Collar Factory, according to Derwent:
^ 3500mm floor to ceiling heights
Exposed services - easy to maintain and adapt for particular uses 2C Minimum fresh air mechanical vent with extract from bulkhead 2d p1*	included as basic product
2e p v'!er ar|d data 'n shallow raised access floor 3.' ¡~dlant slab for cooling & heating 3b wPenin9 w'nd°ws
4a ”lr|dows adapt to suit solar conditions i.e. small openings to south, larger to the north 5a p ener°us scale provides maximum flexibility to suit a wide range of users 5b X(P°sed concrete soffit
5C °ncrete Perimeter upstand increases structural spans and eliminates perimeter columns jRKobust self finished, activated for heating & cooling
PAGE 165
BIM's advent was made possible and necessary by the pervasive technological infrastructure that overlays the physical spaces of contemporary buildings. Possible, because it is only with such a complex network of computation and communication technologies that collaboration within a common software environment becomes practical. Necessary, because that same network of communication, despite all its aspirations to continuity and virtuality, is of course supported by a rudely physical and often messy reality of conduits, pipes, and cables, as well as the ductwork for cooling that machinery. The more technology that runs through a building, the more technology is needed to manage its design and implementation, and to create an effect of seamlessness in the spaces produced.
BIM is only the most recent development in this trend of technology chasing technology in the ouroboros of the mechanization of buildings. As Reyner Banham observed, the suspended ceiling of the mid-century office building was an early case of technologies developed for mitigatating the effects of increasingly technologized buildings. Banham suggested three environmental inventions of an earlier era made possible the modernist ideal of a prismatic rectangular plan skyscraper: acoustic tiling, air-conditioning, and fluorescent lighting - the modern suspended ceiling package, which Banham elegantly termed the 'power membrane.' Air conditioning in office environments became necessary with the rise of electrical lighting, given the excessive heat generated by incandescent bulbs. Fluorescent lighting, with its diminished heat output, made air conditioning far more economical, which made possible the rationalization of the plan-form of both the office tower and later the deep plan office park typology. With the acoustic tile ceiling, ventilation and light could be introduced anywhere in the floor plate, a paradoxical opening up and concealment, whereby the entire ceiling became hollowed out and its surface perforated, and the volume that it concealed filled with ducts, conduits, and lighting. The suspended ceiling allowed for the even, homeostatic distribution of the elements rendering the contemporary interior atmosphere inhabitable: artificial lighting, electricity, and air.
This combination of technologies effectively negated connections between envelope and interior, by displacing the traditional role of the envelope (climate regulation) to the ceiling. In doing so, it heralded the era of Bigness, as the interior environment became autonomous and exponentially large. Mechanical systems liberated the plan from its relation to its perimeter, as the façade was no longer called upon to function as the sole source of light and ventilation. The deep plan building, and ultimately the building-as-city of the contemporary airport or shopping mall, quickly established a new norm that pervaded cities throughout the world. Environmental conditioning inaugurated a type of building that was not only Big, but also complex, comprised of many small parts, each with its own regime of sourcing, construction logic, materiality, and associated trades.
o|MneSS
or The problem of integration
Jeffrey
Inaba and Benedict Clouette / C-Lab
„• ness is the threshold beyond which a building exceeds ^ of architectural control, BIMness proposes a new hnologicel sublime that manages the design of big hidings as a large but quantifiable sum of parts. In the , e of ever-escalating complexity in the contemporary h iding industries, the claim of Building Information Modelling miM) is t° tame construction processes and render them Igjjgible, allowing multimillion square foot projects to be resolved with systematic detail. With BIM, the Bigness of even massive projects is supposedly reduced to a manage-able scale. But what are the architectural consequences of and just want kind of wiggle room does it give to
PAGE 166
All previously presumed solid elements (floors, ceilings, walls) have become varieties of 'sandwich' or 'package.' The composite nature of the contemporary architectural element, now not just structure and ornament, but also pipes, conduits, vapor barriers, waterproofing, fireproofing, and ducts, multiplied by the millions of square meters of interior enabled by those same environmental systems, was able to forestall the inevitable overwhelming of architecture by pipes, simply by creating a massive volume above each floor that could be occupied by environmental technologies with surprising indifference to their physical expression, hidden behind the suspended ceiling.
Mechanical systems thus became the dark matter of archi tectural space, invisible and constituting an increasing percentage of the whole.
As building installations became even more technologically intensive with the advent of telecommunications and com puters, the suspended ceiling proved insufficient. With the introduction of more communication and data technology in the space of office buildings, in the 1970s, the suspended ceiling was mirrored in the raised floor. The 'sandwich' of the raised floor/dropped ceiling package, is now typical f°r new office buildings.
The obvious disadvantage of the suspended ceiling / raise floor strategy, both economically and ecologically, is the illogical wastefulness of built volume that results. Typical
towers now have a mechanical floor for every 7-10 occupiable floors, and even the occupiable floors often have 15 percent of their floor-to-floor height consumed by mechanical systems. The optimization of the plan via the introduction of mechanical climate control - ideal from a real estate standpoint - led to inefficiencies in the overall volume of the building.
The substantial effort required to simultaneously pack more wiring and ductwork into buildings while minimizing the volume lost has introduced a new priority for architectural design: coordination. As buildings have become more complex in the decades since telecommunications and computers, the three-dimensional positioning of mechanical systems has become more problematic. Coordination errors on typical large-scale projects currently run as much es five percent of total construction costs, reflecting the difficulty of fitting so much stuff into the same space. Previously it had been sufficient to design mechanical systems using two-dimensional, diagrammatic drawings lndicating routes but not necessary heights or intersections *|th other systems (think of riser diagrams or pathway dla9rams for ducting), with the assumption that all can be jammed into ceiling plenums, riser chases, and rooms with e conveniently vague label 'MECH.' But as buildings
uiivi ciiicia u mo pi uuici i ia cLjuauun i uui 11 picAi iy
technology) + scale (bigger Bigness) with algorithms to reduce guesswork and error, and supporting coordination between the multiple, layered systems that make up a building today. In place of two-dimensional diagrams, BIM offers three-dimensional, dynamic routing of mechanical systems, allowing pipes and ducts to be spatialized as an inherent part of design, as well as detecting and rectifying spatial conflicts earlier in the process. Recent developments in BIM have expanded its use to incorporate four-dimensional (time) and five-dimensional (money) modelling. BIM's proponents point to reductions in mechanical space and cost by supporting integration between the architectural design, structure, and mechanical systems. The combination of BIM with the current imperative for reduced energy use and carbon emissions may reconfigure the architect-MEP engineer relationship and promote an integrated process of design, one that brings to the table all the professions involved in the realization of a building: architects, engineers, climate consultants, contractors, and owners.
PAGE 168
Imagine the result of an Integrated process: a more tightly integrated building, with a snug fit between the different systems and agendas that comprise Its mass. Indeed, BIM has been sold on this narrative of continuity, not only of process, but of the built form - its ability to rationalize the most complex curvilinear façade into a series of buildable components. But the usefulness of BIM-based integration confronts a limit in the design of mechanical-environmental systems. It may be tempting to create a tight relationship between MEP and architectural form, seamlessly weaving pipes, ducts, and conduits into the geometry of a complex envelope or an atypical floorplate. But mechanical systems often frustrate such attempts at formal-technological coordination, insofar as their performance is tied to the ever-changing life of the building, its daily rhythms of occupancy and shifting uses, as well as near-constant maintenance and upgrading, all of which exceed the architect's control once the building is constructed. With BIM, we may have reached a point where our ability to model complex relationships between systems encourages a fetish for formal integration that exceeds its utility. In creating dependencies between form, structure, climate control, and program, architects run the risk of producing buildings with too much specificity - that is to say, too tightly integrated relationships, and very few opportunities for creating strategic non-alignments between systems, whether technological or formal.
The technological sublime of BIM makes the knotted layers of electrical plumbing, and mechanical components, characteristic of the late 20th century office celling, appear all too casual and inefficient.
1906 Pre-BIM Intelligence in the celling: In the Larkin Administration Building, Buffalo, Frank Lloyd Wright Integrates ventilation system Into the iconic columns of the atrium, with the main ducts housed In the four llthlc corners.
PAGE 169
onsequences of over-integration are not only The .jC or limited to long theoretical debates (continuity 36j variability versus disjunction and contradiction). The 3°° ric of integration affects the adaptability of buildings IS® t|rng( and thus their capacity to accommodate °ver .¡cipated uses and required changes to environmental
if r-iO+i i rr-iir\n +/-x tko i	ov/or'i io-
systems.
Without returning to the undifferentiated, evacuated
^erfit between program, form, and climatic conditioning. Khjr than promoting formal integration, BIM could become tool for introducing precisely calibrated instances of reparation or non-alignment between systems. Moments of ^ integration would not only allow for a richer range of °rchitectural expressions, but would allow for adaptation and evolution by strategically separating the layers of technologies that make up buildings, and allowing their replacement or upgrading to occur independently as eeded. While BIM makes intricately dependent relationships possible, the desire to merge architecture's many systems into a coherently designed environment ignores the
of the midcentury plenum, we might consider a
fact that this kind of integrated space exists as an ideal and would at best be temporary. Perhaps pipes, ducts, and conduits, the very technologies that support BIM and that BIM exists to coordinate in the construction process, should be allowed to retain a degree of independence, in order to remain adaptable to an ever unstable environment. Architecture that creates strategic non-alignments between systems - mechanical, structural, programmatic, and representational - might not only reduce energy by allowing for greater adaptability, but may produce a new aesthetic.
It could embrace breaks, stoppages, and disruptions between systems. Rather than aspiring to seamlessness, it would present beautiful and resilient seams. If not, we may just continue boxing ourselves into a very shallow ceiling.
971 IBM Pilot Headquarters, Cosham, UK, by HWnan Foster. HVAC is worked out as part of a Modular package rather than a centralized system, 0 allow for the building to grow or shrink.
PAGE 170
RETURN OF THE ORNAMENTAL CEILING
In some of the buildings of contemporary High Architecture, the ceiling is making a comeback as an expressive surface. Thanks to high performance materials, parametric design tools, and the streamlining of mechanical services and their storage in other parts of the building, the ceiling is liberated to again become ornamental, even - or thanks to - its continuing utilitarian role in performing crucial functions like lighting...
2002 Pleated ceiling: Yokohama International Passenger Terminal, by Foreign Office Architects. A structural folded plate forms the ceiling. In lieu of the more typical steel decking with a dropped ceiling surface, structure and ceiling are merged into one.
2011 Made from custom molded glass-fibre reinforced gypsum, the ceiling curves to merge with wall at Zaha Pladid's Guangzhou Opera Flouse. A constellation of lights, air diffusers and acoustic diffusion patterning mark the interior surface.
2008 Wooden ceiling at the TRUMPF campus canteen, Ditzingen, Germany, by Barkow Leibinger Architects, drawing from the cellular pattern found in leaves. Over 300 individual cells are functionally identified either as skylight, acoustic surface, or artificial lighting.
Ceiling Plan
1997 Kunsthaus Bregenz, Austria, by Peter Zumthor: a field of opaque glass panels hovers over every space like a cloud; with diffused glowing patches of illumination near walls.
PAGE 171
M^The most benign false ceiling: free from Cumbersome HVAC, fire safety, and (mostly) if“", electronic systems, the sandwich of Zurich consists of warm and cool colored lighting Cached to the underside of the concrete slab, ^Peking the variations of skylight, while fabric Is hanging below diffuse the light and absorb the sound of bustling travelers.
2012 Bulging, thin skinned, skylit ceiling: basement extension of the Stadel Museum, Frankfurt, by Schneider Schumacher Architekten.
2011 Sky as ceiling, achieved (or: the return of the illuminated ceiling): Terminal 1, Zurich Airport. "With the LightFrame system and innovative light variations, we were able to simulate a sky to create a pleasant, comforting and relaxing environment," explains Florin Baeriswyl from dai Zurich, the architects responsible.
Five-layers of lighting management per oculus: glass, sunblind, LED, light scattering membrane, accent lighting.
Zumtobel's "Natural Sky" system, installed in a dentist's surgery. "The textile not only allows the lighting system to be used as acoustic elements, but is also fireproof, smoke-less, and contracts - instead of falling-when burned."
PAGE 172 SKY
The highest aspiration of the ceiling is to disappear and let the sky in, or at least to accurately simulate the sky... Giuseppe Terragni's designed the "Hall of Heaven" in 1938 to be the climax of the Danteum, a never constructed building in the heart of Rome whose goal was to translate Dante's Divine Comedy into architecture. In the paradoxical effort to materialize the immateriality of blissfulness, Terragni opted for a transparent ceiling, impossible to build with the glass technologies of the time. In the effort to convince the promoters (and probably also himself) that a transparent ceiling on 33 transparent columns was buildable, Terragni asks the Italian branch of the French firm Saint Gobain to assess the probable cost.
ca. 1917 Keystone Studios: open roof studios with only cloth diffusers as ceilings, to allow in the maxmimum amount of California daylight for shooting interior scenes.

A
PAGE 173
PAGE 174 bibliography
Alberti, Leon Battista, and Luigi Mallé. Della Pittura. Firenze: Sansoni, 1950.
Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space. Boston: Beacon Press, 1969.
Banerjee, Rumu , and Biswajyoti Brahma. "'Trespasser' brings down false ceiling at Nehru Stadium - The Times of India."
The Times of India. http://timesofindia. indiatimes.com/sports/news/Trespasser-brings-down-false-ceiling-at-Nehru-Stadium/articleshow/6605975.cms? (accessed May 12, 2014).
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment. University of Chicago Press, 1984.
"Bed to Hide in Ceiling. New Ideas from the Inventors." Popular Science, November, 1956. 162.
Bulletin No. 103 by Carrier Engineering Corporation of the USA (CIBSE Heritage Group Collection). Reprint for the UK, 1916.
Cardwell, Duane. "At Newark Airport, the Lights Are On, and They're Watching You." The New York Times. February 17, 2014. www.nytimes.com/2014/02/18/business/at-newark-airport-the-lights-are-on-and-theyre-watching-you.html?_r=0 (accessed March 5, 2014).
"Carrier Temperature and Humidity Control in the Textile Mill" Carrier Engineering Corporation Bulletin No. 103, 1916.
Caudil, William Wayne. "Toward Better School Design." New York: F.W. Dodge Corp, 1954.
"Ceiling Bears Fire Test." The Chicago Daily Tribune, August 18, 1901.
"Consumer Safety Notice for Nest Protect: Smoke + CO Alarm." Letter by Tony Fadell. CEO Nest, https://nest.com/letter-from-the-ceo/ (accessed May 12, 2014).
Edwards Metal Roofing, Siding, Ornamental Ceiling, and Other Sheet-Metal work. Catalog 68, The Edwards Manufacturing Company, Cincinnati, Ohio. 1923.
Feldman, A.M. American Society of Mechanical Engineers. "A Combination Ventilating, Heating and Cooling Plant in a Bank Building," VIEW6, No. 12. 1909.
Frohne, Henry W. Home Interiors. Grand Rapids Michigan: The Dean-Hicks Company, 1916.
Giedion, S. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Glass , Daqueline. Encyclopaedia of Architectural Technology. Chichester: Wiley-Academy, 2002.
Gloag, Dohn. Colour & Comfort. London: Duckworth, 1924.
Hutton, Charles, and Olinthus Gregory.
A Course of Mathematics. 10th ed. London: Longman Rees, 1832.
Irwin, Robert. The Alhambra. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2004.
Laird, Donal. "Experiments on the Physiological Cost of Noise," Journal of the National Institute of Industrial Psychology 4, Princeton University Library, 1929.
Lambert, Phyllis. Building Seagram.
New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013.
Lampedusa, Giuseppe di. The Leopard.
New York: Pantheon, 1960.
Lucae, Richard. "Über die ästhetische Ausbildung der Eisen-Konstruktionen, besonders in ihrer Anwendung bei Räumen von bedeutender Spannweite." Deutsche Bauzeitung 4, 1870. 12.
Moe, Kiel. Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture. Princeton Architectural Press, 2010. 80.
Moon, Parry and Spencer, Domina Eberle. "Luminous Ceiling Lighting." Illuminating Engineering, August 1949.
Peck, Richard L. "How MEP Design Keeps Up With the Trends," Healthcare Building Ideas, Winter 7, 2010. 18-21.
Postal, Matthew A. and Landmarks Preservation Commission. "Designation List 439 LP-2467." February 15, 2011.
"Privacy in America: Electronic Monitoring." American Civil Liberties Union, www.aclu. org/technology-and-liberty/privacy-america-electronic-monitoring (accessed May 12, 2014).
Sedlmayr, Hans. Verlust der Mitte; die bildende Kunst des 19 und 20 Jahrhunderts als Symptom und Symbol derZeit. Salzburg: O. Müller, 1951.
Semper, Gottfried. Style in the Technical j and Tectonic Arts; or, Practical Aestheti J Texts & Documents, 2004. 46-147.
Stone, Peter. British Hospital and Health U Care Buildings: Designs and Appraisals 1 London: The Architectural Press, 1980
Tacitus, Cornelius, and Richard Greenwe The Annates of Cornelius Tacitus; The tj Description of Germanie. London: Arn ' Hatfield for Bonham and Dohn Norton, I5gg
The Economist Newspaper. "Difference ■ Engine: Lux Aeterna." The Economist, economist.com/blogs/babbage/2013/04/ lighting (accessed May 12, 2014).
Thompson, ID. and G. Goldin. The Hospital: A Social and Architectural History New Haven and London: Yale University ' Press, 1975.
Timm, Dane C. "Drop a bag in NYC? Cue the Bomb Squad," MSNBC, April 22, 2013
Tolnay, Charles de. The Sistine Ceiling. 1 Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1945
US Public Health Service. Public Health | Reports. Volume 121, 1913.
Wallace, Sabine. Collected Papers on Acoustics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1922.
The City of New York Building Code. New York City Department of Buildings, 2008.
"west meet east" arthur liu
Frank Lloyd Wright. Modern Architecture, Being the Khan Lectures for 1930. Princeton University Press, 1931.
Morse, Edward Sylvester. Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings. New York: Dover Publications, 1961.
Neutra, Richard. L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui. Paris: Art d'Aujourd'hui,
No. 6, May-Dune 1946.
Neutra, Richard. Life and Shape. New York: Appleton Century Crofts, 1962.
Neutra, Richard. Survival Through Design-New York: Oxford University Press, 1954.
Wright, Frank Lloyd. A Testament.
New York: Horizon Press. 1957.
"comfort descends from above" manfredo di robilant
Aldrich, M. Gothic Revival. London: Phaidon, 1994.
PAGE 175
E ^¡chelle Elizabeth. Cleansing the City: Ajj®r' Qeographies in Victorian London. gfliniversity Press, 2008.
i Colin, and Gavin Stamp. "New of Westminster," in: Victorian PjfL of London, 1837-1887. London:
^ Architectural Press, 1982.
Paul (ed.), A.W.N. Pugin, Master Vj^ythi'c Revival. New Haven and London,
1995-
■lam, Reyner. The Architecture of h Well-tempered Environment. Chicago: jhe University of Chicago Press, 1969.
ckett, J. V. The Aristocracy in England Oxford and New York: Basil
Blackwell, 1986.
uegmann, Robert. "Central Heating and j Ventilation: Origins and Effects on hitectural Design," Journal of the Society '¿Architectural Historians, voi. 37, no. 3,
Ip.
olvin, H.M. "The Origins of the Gothic ivival," Quaderni delTAccademia Nazionale deiLincei, no. 241, 1978.
Curl, James Stevens. Victorian Architecture: its Practical Aspects. Newton Abbot:
David and Charles, 1973.
-iDejean, J, The Age of Comfort: When Paris Discovered Casual - and the Modern Home Began. New York: Bloomsbury, 2009.
Hastings, Maurice. Parliament House:
The Chambers of the House of Commons. London: The Architectural Press, 1950.
1 Hill, Rosemary. God's Architect: Pugin and t the Building of Romantic Britain. London:
Allen Lane, 2007.
Hpbsbwam, Eric. "Introduction: Inventing jj Traditions," in Inventing Traditions in
[Nineteenth-Century Europe, ed. Eric
Hobsbawm and Terence Ranger. Cambridge:
1 Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Ingels, Margaret, and Willis Haviland. Carrier: Father of Air Conditioning. Garden City NY:
. Country Life Press, 1952.
j feman, V. G. The Duel in Europe History: Honour and the Reign of Aristocracy. Oxford University Press, 1988.
PfpMw Palace at Westminster - House of i °mm°ns - Sections, 5th contract,
■	RIBA archive.
, Rngin, Augustus Welby. Contrasts: or,
1 aralfe/ between the Noble Edifices of
the Middle Ages, and corresponding Buildings of the Present Day; Shewing the Present Decay of Taste. 2nd ed. Edinburgh: John Grant, 1898.
Pugin, Augustus Welby. "Letter to Rev &
Dear Sir," RIBA Archive, Box 1, Folder 1 (Acc. 2) Ref PuAW/1/1.
Reid, David Boswell. Illustrations of the Theory and Practice of Ventilation. London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longmans, 1844.
Salmon, Philip. "The House of Commons, 1801-1911," in A Short History of Parliament, ed. Clyve Jones. Woodbridge: The Boydell Press, 2009.
Shenton, Caroline. The Day Parliament Burned Down. Oxford University Press, 2012.
Watkin, David. Morality and Architecture:
The Development of a Theme in Architectural History and Theory from the Gothic Revival to the Modern Movement. Oxford: Clarendon, 1977.
Wedgwood, Alexandra. A.W.N. Pugin and the Pugin Family. London: Victoria and Albert Museum, 1985.
2008 Human pyramid: an effort to reach the ceiling that spreads through discos in Europe, reaching the "Number One" club in Brescia, Italy.
"People never tire of recalling that Leonardo da Vinci advised painters who lacked inspiration when faced with nature, to contemplate with a reflective eye the crack in an old wall! For there is a map of the universe in the lines that time draws on these old walls. And each of us has seen a few lines on the ceiling that appeared to chart a new continent. A poet knows all this. But in order to describe in his own way a universe of this kind, created by chance on the confines of a sketch and dream, he goes to live in it. He finds a corner where he can abide this cracked-ceiling world." —Gaston Bachelard, The Poetics of Space, 1958
PAGE 176
image sources and courtesy
PO Boeing, from Matt Burgess, "These are the design tricks that make long-haul flights bearable," Wired, April 13, 2018.
P2 Blaser, Werner and Monica Stucky. Drawings of great buildings. Birkhauser, 1983.
P3 RTKL Associates.
P6 Gabinetto Comunale delle stampe.
P8 Cabestan, ]ean-François. La conquête du plain-pied : L'immeuble à Paris au XVIIIe siècle. Picard 2004.
P9 Photo by Bgabel.
P10 Image by Hans Weber Visualization, commissioned by Perkins + Will.
P11 OMA.
P12 "Catal Hüyük Restoration B" by Stipich Béla is lisenced under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P13 "Temple of Heaven, Beijing, China" by Maros M r a z is lisenced under CC-BY-SA-2.5.
P14 Photo by Mathew Suen; ©2014 Artnet Worldwide Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
P15 Stephenson, David. Heavenly Vaults: From Romanesque to Gothic in European Architecture. Princeton Architectural Press, 2009; H. D. W. Thunnissen, Gewelven: Hun Constructie en Toepassing in de Historische en Hedendaagse Bouwkunst, Ahrend & Zoon, 1950; Ir. H. D. W. Thunnissen. Gewelven: Hun Constructie en Toepassing in de Historische en Hedendaagse Bouwkunst. Amsterdam: Wed. D. Ahrend & Zoon, 1950.
P16 Collins, George R. "The Transfer of Thin Masonry Vaulting from Spain to America." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 27, No. 3. October1968; Columbia University Record, April 26, 1996, Vol. 21, No. 25.
P17 "USA-NYC-St Thomas Church" by Ingfbruno is lisenced under CC-BY-SA-3.0; The Guastavino Fireproof Construction Company/George Collins architectural records and drawings, Department of Drawings & Archives, Avery Architectural & Fine Arts Library, Columbia University;
W.C. Sabine, R. Guastavino; patent/
US 1119543 A; patent / US 1197956 A.
P18 "Proceedings of the \CE."Civil Engineering, Vol. 126, Issue 2, 01 May 1998; Trachtenberg, Marvin and Isabelle Hyman. Architecture, from Prehistory to Postmodernity. Harry N. Abrams, 2002.
P18-19 Hennebique Construction Co. concrete; Division 03; reinforced concrete; steel reinforcing; rebar. Hennebique Construction Co, 1908. Book contributor: Canadian Centre for Architecture; Cité de l'Architecture et du Patrimoine, Paris.
P19 Béton Arme No. 32, Dan 1901.
P20-22 PORCHEDDU, G.A. Elenco dei lavori eseguiti in calcestruzzo armato, sistema Hennebique, dal 1895 a tutto il 1909. Société Porcheddu, 1909.
P22 Nelva, Riccardo and Bruno Signorelli. Avvento ed evoluzione del calcestruzzo armato in Italia: il sistema Hennebique. Aitec - Edizioni di scienza e tecnica, 1990.
P 23	© FLC / AD AG P; © Archivio
Storico della Città di Torino.
P24 CIBSE Heritage Group Collection.
P25 RIBA Archive London.
P26 Bouquet, Simon. Entrée de Charles IX à Paris. Denis Du Pré, 1572.
P27 Flury, Aita, and Christopher Baumberger. Cooperation: The Engineer and the Architect. Birkhauser, 2012.
P28-29 Konrad Wachsmann.
P29 A+D Museum.
P30	© Dulius Shulman / Getty Research
Institute; Hedrich Blessing Collection,
1991.0505. All Rights Reserved; Library of Congress; photo by Dohn Edward Linden;
© 2014 Eames Office, LLC; Ernie Braun.
P31 Glass House Archives; The Historic American Buildings Survey,
National Parks Service.
P32	© All rights reserved by eonradius;
"Trier.ceiling" by Sheredot.
P33 "Andrea Pozzo - Apoteose de Santo Inacio" by Bruce McAdam is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0.
P34 Giulia Foscari.
P35 Trizzino, Lucio. La palatina di Palermo. Flaccovio Dario, 1989; Kostof, Spiro. The Orthodox Baptistery of Ravenna. Yale University Press, 1965; Marcela / www.flickr. com/photos/armxesde/5439289603/sizes/l; © President and Fellows of Harvard College; Blaser, Werner and Monica Stucky. Drawings of great buildings. Birkhauser Verlag, 1983.
P36	© Getty Research Institute for
the History of Art and the Humanities; Dean-François Colonna.
P37 Goury, Dules, Owen Dones and Pascugj de Gayangos. Plans, elevations, sections 9 and details of the Alhambra, from drawinga M taken on the spot in 1834. O. Dones, 1842
P39 Christie's, London.
P40 "Santa Maria del Fiore 0029" by Arnaud 25 is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0-MousyBoyWithGlasses / www.flickr.com/
photos/mousyboywithglasses/4434058088/ 1
sizes/o/; Arthur and Elizabeth Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America 1 Radcliffe Institute.
P41	© President and Fellows of Harvard
College.
P42 Mandracci, Vera Comoli and Andreina Griseri (eds.) Filippo Juvarra: Architetto delle capitali da Torino a Madrid 1714-1736. Fabbri,1995; Gritella, Gianfranco. Juvarra: L'architettura. F.C. Panini,1992; Biblioteca Reale di Torino.
P43 Leonardo / www.flickr.com/ photos/39502023@N04/5495800610/in/ photolist-9nDq3W-dEp4ND-9nDpcO-d7UE8E-9nAk2k-9nAksr-9nDriS-9nAoNk-kgb4QM.
P44 Verlet, Pierre. Styles, meubles, décors, du Moyen Age à nos jours, Volume 1. Larousse, 1972.
P45	© The Trustees of the British Museum; ©
2005 The Construction History Society (CHS); Massimo / www.flickr.com/photos/ ske61 /3447743459/sizes/l.
P46 Canadian Gypsum Company. Build for a Lifetime. Canadian Gypsum Company, 1945; Simpson, Friench. "Rat Proofing: Its Practical Application in the Construction or Repair of Dwellings or Other Buildings." Public Health Reports, Vol. 28, No. 15, April, 1913; National Building Museum; Popular Science Pub. Co.; Citizen Kane, RKO Pictures, 1941.
P47 This image is a work of USG Corporation; Chicago Daily Tribune, May 3, 1981; "Lookup at your ceiling." Popular Science, February 1927.
P48 Morse, Edward S. Japanese Homes and Their Surroundings. Tuttle Publishing, 2007;
© Copyright 2001, 2014; photo by Dack E. Boucher; "Murals-inside-wright-larkin"c is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P49	© Pedro E. Guerrero.
P50 The Carmelite, November 28, 1928; photo by Rebecca Orlov.
PAGE 177
■ g^p/^R architecture systems; Elze P5‘ Yurlrey; Kansas Sebastian, Neutra Dek°r' fnr Survival Through Design.
Institute t°rJ
fslational Maritime Museum. p52
Greenwich, London; Hastings,
P5^'. parliament House: The Chambers lylaune	Commons. Architectural
0f the House
Press,1950-
,. ©the Heritage Group.
P54
Jg palace OF WESTMINSTER
COLLECTION.
:	59 Reid, David Boswell. Illustrations
T/ieo'v and Practice of Ventilation. Longmans, 1844.
IL "Westminster palace" by DaniKauf Is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P60-64 RIBA Archive London.
P63 Image scanned by Nathalie Chevalier.
P66 Mullin, Donald C. The development of the playhouse, A survey of theatre architecture ¡row the Renaissance to the Present. University of California Press, 1970; Leacroft, Richard.
The Development of the English Playhouse. Cornell UP, 1973.
P67 Leacroft, Richard. The Development of the English Playhouse. Cornell UP, 1973.
p68-71 Bibliothèque-Musée de l'Opéra National de Paris.
P72 Harvard Art Museums; Unidentified Artist Walter Gropius Total Theater for Erwin Piscator, Berlin, 1927, 1927d, thecharnelhouse. org.
P72-73 Izenour, George C. Theater design and modem architecture: Two lectures given at the College of Fine Arts in Carnegie-Mellon University. College of Fine Arts, Carnegie-Mellon University, 1978.
P73 Hensel, Michael. Performance-Oriented Architecture: Rethinking Architectural Design and the Built Environment. John Wiley & Sons, 2013.
p74 University of Virginia Library; National Park Service, The United States Department °f Interior.
P75 Patent / US 931962 A; patent / US 1065287 A; Popular Science Pub. Co;
™ New York Vmes.
I>78 CIBSE Heritage Group Collection. pT7 Photo By Bob Owen / rowen@
exPress-nevvs.net.
P78 Thompson, John D. and Goldin, Grace. The hospital: a social and architectural history. Yale University Press 1975.
P79 Stone, Peter (ed.) British Hospital and Health-Care Buildings: designs and appraisals. The Architectural Press, 1980.
P 80-81 Supplement to research study report. VA HOSPITAL BUILDING SYSTEM Department of Veterans Affairs Office of Facilities Management, Dune 2006.
P 82-83 Salk Institute Section via www. oxfordartonline.com courtesy UofPA Archives
P84 Banham, Reyner. The architecture of the well-tempered environment. University of Chicago Press, 1984.
P85 Thompson, Emily Ann. The soundscape of modernity. MIT Press, 2002; Banham,
Reyner. The architecture of the well-tempered environment. University of Chicago Press,
1984; Feldman, A. M. A Combination Ventilating, Heating and Cooling Plant in a Bank Building. American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 1909.
P86-87 COURTESY OF: Scott Tallon Walker Ltd.
P88-89 Guise, David. Design and Technology in Architecture. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1991.
P90-91 Armstrong Acoustical Ceilings, Progressive Architecture, February 1963.
P92 Brown, Theodore M. The work of G. Rietveld, architect. A.W. Bruna and Zoon, 1958.
P93 "The Minimal Room Offers Privacy at a Price the Patient Can Pay." The Modern Hospital Vol. 77, September 1951; Arts and Humanities Research Council; Hour of the Wolf, Svensk Filmindustri, 1968.
P94 SCALA, FLORENCE; Ford, Edward.
The Details of Modern Architecture. MIT Press, 1996; New York Historical Society.
P95 Progressive Architecture, March 1955.
P96-97 Caudill, William W. Toward Better School Design. F.W. Dogde Corporation, 1954.
P100 Pedlar People Limited.
P101 Fireproofing of Buildings. I. C. S. Reference Library. International Textbook Company, 1909.
P102 The Effect Of Fire, A report on The Parker Building Fire by W.C. Robinson.
P 103 TRADE CATALOGUE: Portland Cement Association, The Key to Firesafe Homes, 1927; Trial by Fire at San Francisco. National Fireproofing Company, 1908.
P 104 Thompson, Silvanus P. "Apparatus for the Automatic Extinction of Fires." Journal of the Society of Arts 34. November, 1885; patent/US 231711 A.
P105 The Literay Digest, February 21, 1917; Popular Science, December 1918; The National Geographic Magazine 35, 919.
P106 "Fire-Prevention Projects for the Home Workshop." Popular Science, October 1948.
P107 "Asbestos Ceiling Tiles How To Identify," chinesedic.com.
P108 Dudley, George A. A Worshop for Peace, Designing the United Nations Headquarters. MIT Press, 1994; Boston Globe, February 10, 1963; "If Fire Strikes Your House Tonight Will Your Family Escape in Time?" The Washington Post, Tune 27, 1976.
P109-111 ©Nest.
P112 The Country Gentleman, March 1932; Copyright © The Dow Chemical Company (1995-2014). All Rights Reserved; TRADE CATALOGUE: Burgess Manning Company Chicago in: American Society of Heating and Ventilating Engineers Guide, 1955; "The Story of Insulation Board." American Builder, December 1939.
P113 Ferlenga, Alberto (ed.) Aldo Rossi: architetture 1959-1987. Electa, 1987; photo by Martino Lunghi.
P114 "The newest kind of heating for the newest kind of house." LIFE, January 10, 1949; Progressive Architecture, February 1950; "Hide a Rubber 'Furnace' in Your Ceiling." Popular Science, April 1948.
P115 Moe, Kiel. Thermally active surfaces in architecture. Princeton Architectural Press, 2010; Airtite Radiant Ceiling Systems.
P116 Malavika, T. V. "Intellectual property? Right!" The Hindu. April 9, 2006; ebay, July 2008; Kasturi & Sons Ltd.
P117 Dave Gorman / www.flickr.com/photos/ dgbalancesrocks/4006980640/; Punkah louvre system heating and ventilation for buildings, ships and railroads. Thermotank Limited, 1931.
P 118 http://ah.bfn.Org/h/larkin/admin/ source/2.html - from the collection of Jerome Puma; en.wikiarquitectura.com
P 120-121 Drawings by Kurt Nieminen and Wui Joon Ha for Harvard GSD studio "Real and Imagined Variables," taught by George Legendres.
P 122 Patent / US 2741695 A; patent / US 3832503 A; patent / US 6364511 B1, patent / US 2586908 A.
PAGE 178
P123 Patent / US 2926237 A; US 2327552 A; patent / US 7959332 B2.
P124-5 Esto, New York.
P126 Parry Moon and Domina Eberle Spencer, "Luminous Ceiling Lighting," Illuminating Engineering, August 1949; Postal, Matthew A. and Landmarks Preservation Commission. "Designation List 439 LP-2467." February 15, 2011.
P127© Ezra Stoller / Esto.
P128 Architectural Forum; © Ezra Stoller / Esto.
P129 American Builder, Duly 1963; All The President's Men, Warner Bros., 1976.
P130 Lionel Freedman Archives.
P140 Raw Cut TV © 2010; Graham Tebby / www.flickr.com/photos/ grahamtebby/8462397677/.
P141 Winstead Control Room Consoles; REUTERS / Bobby YiP
P142-143 LIFE, March 11, 1957.
P144 Thompson, Emily Ann. The soundscape of modernity. MIT Press, 2002; Celotex.
P145 Patent / US 2009512 A; patent / US 1931574 A; patent / US D168763 S.
P146 Gridded ceiling: Commercial Buildings, An Architectural Record Book. F. W. Dodge Corporation, 1947.
P146-147 Armstrong.
P154-155 SDOT.
P160 Photo by Stefan Di Leo.
P163 ARUP, London.
P164-166 Image by C-Lab based on the demo model from Autodesk Revit.
P 166-167 Copyright © 2007-2014,
Energy Air Inc.
P168 Photo by Jeffrey Inaba.
P168-169 C-Lab / Jeffrey Inaba, Benedict Clouette, Phillip Denny, Maria Broytman.
P 170 Studio Olafur Eliasson; a toshiaki, flickr; photo by Christian Richters; courtesy of Barkow Leibinger.
P131 © Robert Shaw.
P134-135© 2012 EL CROQUIS S.L. Digital edition.
P136 ©Philips.
P137 Peter DaSilva for The New York Times; © Copyright 2000 - 2014 Fox Television Stations.
P138-139© Philips.
P139 Videostill, Philips Flue and Ambify = Instant party pleaser! by Jimmy Selix / www. youtube.com/watch?v=plOriNIQ9Ns; Videostill, UFX on 7th Ave, by Simon Walker / www.youtube.com/watch7vspnv5oCjqC4l.
P147 "Banish Jangling Noises at Home: Acoustical Tile Ceiling Does a Good Job." Chicago Daily Tribune, April 8, 1956.
P148 SCALA, FLORENCE.
P149 II Sole 24 ORE
P150-151 SAS International.
P153 Dhakal, R.P., MacRae, G.A., Hogg,
K. "Performance of ceilings in the February 2011 Christchurch earthquake." Bulletin of the New Zealand Society for Earthquake Engineering, 44, 2011; Courtesy of Jody Verser; Shojiro Motoyui /Tokyo Institute of Technology.
P171 SEFAR architecture systems; dai; ©Norbert Miguletz courtesy of the Stadel Museum, schneider+schumacher; Zumtobel lighting.
P172-173 Giuseppe Terragni; Keystone Studios ca. 1917.
P 174-175 www.discotequeros.com.
P179 Photo by Sara Krulwich / New York Times, Dec 27, 2013.
PAGE 179
The author's preoccupation with this problem [Michelangelo's work at the Sistine chapel] dates from that limpid ar|d radiant September day of 1921 when he first saw the Sistine Ceiling. Why should it not be said that this gigantic Work had on him, then a young student, an effect of the revelation of an absolute truth? It was not a work of art JJ'hich he seemed to envisage but a second reality superposed on our own and containing the essence of existence.
°ubtless many visitors to the Chapel during many centuries must have felt the same thrill of the Absolute." "Charles De Tolnay, The Sistine Ceiling (Princeton University Press, 1969, first edition 1945), XII.
5900-4000 BC Painted model, made from fired clay, of a gabled hut from Tell Al-'Ubaid (Iraq), a settlement 5km west of Ur. British Museum curator Alexandra Fletcher:
"Traditionally, scholarship has assumed that the model Is one of a typical house with a roof thatched with reeds ’^Rncient times extensive marshlands made reeds readily available, ^rowever, this assumption may not be correct and it is not clear if this is a representation of a domestic dwelling or a special building. Recent research has identified images of very similar buildings painted on pottery or made into amulets from sites found in southern Turkey, north Iraq and north Syria dating from 6100-5400 BC. This has been interpreted as a mythological symbol representing shared beliefs or worldviews. It is possible that the house model was
part of these shared symbols and beliefs ar-d
therefore linked the community where it was
made to others. It mf^mave been representative of a place Where some of the ritual practices and ^roents that helped to hold early farming communities together despite other stresses that may have encouraged them to split apart. As such it should perhaps be seen as an unusual or special building rather than an ordinary one." (see Stuart Cambell and Alexandra Fletcher, "Scale and Integration in Northern Mesopotamia in The Early 6th Millenium Cal. BCE" in Interpreting the Late Neolithic of Upper Mesopotamia, Brepols, 2013.)
J
F
contributor's ¡apt jiren feng
■fjiM’r fang zhenning Stephan petermann
roof
.the paradox of the roof is that its inevitable regionalism -the Black Forest roof, the Chinese roof etc. - coexists with universal principles and physical requirements that must followed in order to keep the roof up and the weather °ut... the roof used to be our closest connection to the heavens, forging and expressing sacred, social, and political Meanings... while ancient roof structures become fetishized through preservation and tourism, sustainability colors our °ofs b|ue (photovoltaics), green (vegetation), and white reflective)... while ironically our new political centers are evered by flat, basically invisible roofs, abdicating any a|m to symbolism in what was formerly the most eloquent
2013 The five star Chedi resort emerges, replacing several smaller residences in the Alpine village of Andermatt. Swiss vernacular - conceived by a team from Kuala Lumpur, Australia, Hong Kong and a tree consultant from Miami - becomes hyper-inflated by the programmatic and economic demands of Gstaad-like wellness and cosmopolitan luxury, pitching the roof into an almost tragi-comic condition: a "traditional'' form of shelter/camouflage for its new global clientele...
PAGE 3
As one of the most primary elements of architecture, the roof is seemingly our most locally-inflected element. The roof in fact originates from continuous exchange - never a single source but a process of constant synthesis, tweaking and upgrading. Beyond the performance of its practical duties of
shelter against the elements, the roof was used by the powers that be as prime symbols of social status and political stability (while remaining flexible for regimé changes)...
In 299 AD, Roman Emperor Diocletian installed a large rotating dome reflecting the^felestial system over his banquet hall in Antioch. As a Kosmokrater, the heavens conceived in the dom? would literally turn around him... a fixation with the stars underlying Buddhist, Christian, and Islamic sites of worship, which use the domed roof as the centerpiece of their architecture projecting their ultimate place in the universe. In China, social hierarchy defined the size and shape of early imperial architecture - especially its roofs - through a prescient form of standardization: an empire defined by a single ingenious building system that combined prefabrication, elegance, and efficiency, almost a thousand years before the advent of modernism.
In the process of breaking down societal barriers in the 19th century, the modern movement in Europe levelled the roof and with it much of the signifying power it had accrued over centuries.
Their non-roof fundamentally questioned locality for the first time. What used to be a more generous process of give and take between traditions of the roof became a radicalized form of cultural warfare - flat vs. pitched - still underway in many places and sectors of society today... After this polarization, the roof was forced to declare what it stood for, negatively: a denial of tradition or a denial of modernity...
The result has been a series of bifurcations. The contemporary roof became an artistic expression powered by digital and parametric technology; a dutiful or reverential exercise in nostalgia - why is the renovated barn always so exhibitionistic in its roof structure - or mobilized as a tool to solve global needs like sustainability... while retaining an atavistic longing for a personal sense of safety, displayed to the world. The roof today, burdened with the duty of so much symbolism, is no longer sure what to symbolize...
PAGE 4
IN THE BEGINNING...
There is little certainty about a beginning of the roof, but much about the desire to have one. Of all the elements, the roof seems most fundamental in homo sapiens' transition from hunter-gatherer to civilization - or so generations of writers, theorists and archaeologists suggest. The lack of firm knowledge leads to speculation in which the roof is discovered as a device to alternately justify and condemn humanity's ¿Wnitectural, cultural and social desires...
"The first attempt was the mere erection of a few spars united together with twigs and covered with mud ... Others built their walls of dried lumps of turf, connected these walls together by means of timbers laid across horizontally, and covered the erections with reeds and boughs, for the purpose of sheltering themselves from the inclemency of the seasons."
—Vitruvius, De Architectura (30-15 BC)
"Posidonius says: 'When men were scattered over the earth, protected by eaves or by the dug-out shelter of a cliff or by the trunk of a hollow tree, it was philosophy that taught them to raise up roofs.' But I, for my part, do not hold that philosophy devised these shrewdly-contrived dwellings of ours which rise story upon story, where city crowds against city.... What! Was it philosophy that taught the use of keys and bolts? Nay, what was that except giving a hint to avarice? Was it philosophy that erected all these towering tenements, so dangerous to the persons who dwell in them? Was it not enough for man to provide himself a roof of any chance covering, and to contrive for himself some natural retreat without the help of art and without trouble? Believe me, that was a happy age, before the days of architects, before the days of builders! All this sort of thing was born when luxury was being born - this matter of cutting timbers square and cleaving a beam with unerring hand as the saw made its way over the marked-out line."
—	Seneca, Moral Letter to Lucilius/Letter 90: On the Part Played by Philosophy in the Progress of Man (62-64 AD)
"It must be believed that when Adam was driven out of Paradise, it was raining. Since he had no readier shelter, he put his hands up to his head, to defend himself from the water. And since he was forced by necessity to find food so as to go on living, so dwelling was a skill [he discovered] to protect himself from ill weather and from water. Some have said that there was no rain before the flood. I believe in the contrary, since earth was to produce fruit, it was necessary that it should rain. As feeding and dwelling are necessary for living, it must therefore be believed that Adam, having made himself a roof with his two hands, considering the need for making a living, he reflected and exercised himself to make himself some habitation to defend himself from these rains, as well as from the heat of the sun ... If that is how things happened, then Adam must have been the first."
—	Filarete, Trattato di architettura (1465)
"Here is a calm riverbank, dressed by the hand of unaided nature, towards which the eye turns constantly, and which you leave with regret; here at time when innocent and virtuous men wanted to witness turned wicked, tired of the embarrassing onlookers, and relegated them to magnificent temples. Finally men chased the gods out altogether, so as to inhabit those temples themselves: or at any rate the temples of the gods came to look very much like the citizen's houses. Then came the height of degradation, and vice was never carried so far as when it was seen, to speak figuratively, supported by marble columns and engraved on Corinthian capitals."
—Dean Dacques Rousseau, Le Discours sur les Sciences et les Arts (1750)
« Adam confronted by rain after being °oted out of Paradise, according to Filarete.
PAGE 6
ROOF
LOST TRADITION
Apart form literary musings on the origins of the roof, architects for centuries made representations of the primitive hut It is a by now a lost tradition in which speculations on origins are used as justifications of the architecture of the presen' or immediate future, and to create and compare a basic repertoire of primitive huts around the world... In parallel, archaeology attempts to do the same thing scientifiRnlyTT
¿Ijt .e'WaÉr'
1465 Filarete in Libro architettonico.
1521 Cesare di Lorenzo Cesariano in Vitruvius's De Architecture.
1673 Claude Perrault in Les dix livres d'architecture de Vitruve.
1675 Francois Blondel, Cours d'architecture, vol. 1.
1755 Marc-Antoine Laugier, Essai sur l'architecture.
1781 Francesco Milizia, Principi di architettura civile.
1875 Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, l'Histoire de ¡'Habitation Humaine.
1833 Dean Baptiste Rondelet, Traité théorique et pratique de l'art de bâtir.
1860-63 Gottfried Semper,
Style in the Technical and Tectonic Arts.

PAGE 7
400000 BC FRANCE
Marvin Trachtenberg, Architecture, from orehistory to post-modernism: the Western tradition (1986).
lomon Era (12,000-300 BC) JAPAN
Paul Oliver, Dwellings: The Vernacular House Worldwide (2002).
5,000-3,000 BC CHINA
Sunqitun cave, Henan Province, History and Development of Ancient Chinese Architecture (1986).
2950-2300 BC JORDAN
Charnel House, Bab edh-Dhra, Jerry Moore in The Prehistory of Homes (2012).
2000 BC-100 AD WESTERN EUROPE (Celtic)
B. Risebero, A.G. van Melle and WJ. van Melle-Meijer, Architectuur: vijftien eeuwen bouwkunst van de westerse beschaving (1981)
1850 BC IRAQ
Friedrich Ragette, Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region (2003).
1200 BC-500 AD RUSSIA
ademia Arhitektury Sssr Institut Istorii I Teorii tnitektur, Istoria russkoj arhitektury (1965).
300 BC-300 AD WALES
Reconstruction of Welsh Tribal house, Friedrich Saeftel, Krummolz-und cruck-Dachwerk in Nordwest-Europe (1970).
Nomad's hut, according to Henri Maclaine Pont Gerrit de Vries, Gerrit and Dorothee Höweler, Henri Maclaine Pont: Architect, Constructeur En Archeoloog (2i
PAGE 8
HOW TO BUILD A ROOF
ANTIQUITY
A scan of early architectural treatises reveals that most, if they mention
the roof at all, lack the exposition of a theory of the roof and its ¿¡Instruction.
Vitruvius's De Afcnitectura, otherwise ^B^^heory, gives only basic propositions for how the relationship between architecture and the roof should be defined - he and later Indian and Middle Eastern treatises, seem to leave the roof entirely open for suggestion
30-15 BC
De Architectura, Vitruvius, Roman Empire
Despite his detailed account of the origins of the roof, emphasizing the local character determined by the availability of material, and by the geography, topography, and orientation of the site, Vitruvius is less outspoken on the specific shape of the roof. Despite some minor hints for some types, the only clear instructions he gives are in Book IV, chapter II, dedicated to the ornaments of columns:
"In all buildings the timber framed work, which has various names, crowns them. The timbers vary as much in their uses as in their names. Those are called bressummers (trabes) which are placed over columns, pilasters (parastatae) and antae. In the framing of floors, beams (tigna) and boards (axes) are used. If the span of the roof be large, a ridge piece (columen) is laid on the top of the kind post (columna, whence is derived the word column), and a tie beam (transtrum) and struts (capreoli) will be necessary.
If the roof be of moderate span, the ridge piece (columen), and rafters (cantherii), of sufficient projection at their feet to throw the water off the walls, will answer the purpose. On the rafters laid purlines (temple) and again on these to receive the tiles, are placed common rafters (asseres), which must be of sufficient length to cover the walls and protect them. Thus each piece has its proper place, origin and purpose."
The drawings above are done post-scriptum, by Cesare Cesariano in 1521-
6th-7th century
Vastuvidyasastra Ascribed to Mahjusri (Science of Architecture), India
Vastuvidyasastra Ascribed to Mahjusri\s one of the earliest manuscripts to be found about ancient monastery architecture in India, with little attention for roof construction. The majority of the text focuses on planning, orientation and positioning of the openings and spaces within the monastery complex using astrological measuring and mythical proportions. The only two roofs explicitly discussed are kufas and caityas. Kutas are four-sided sloped roofs which are used to define the size of the sancta sanctorum, the holiest space in the monastery. They are also described for the Sabha,
¡Jto assembly hall of the monastery, "which will have one, three of four ™?as." The second roof definition given in Vastuvidyasastra is for the caitya, a domelike enclosure used to protect religious artefacts. There are five types ot caitya based on different shape ranging from onion to lotus, which "all brin9 success." Not following these types will however "lead to destruction, sorrow and fear for the ruler."
9th-10th century
Treatise on the Mensuration of Paraboloids, Thabit ibn Qurra, Persia
While it is sure that treatises on construction did exist in the Persian world, like Ibn al Haytam's Kitab al-abinya wa al-cuqud (Book of Buildings and Constructions), no copy of these, probably practically oriented, works has survived. What is left is a diverse collection of treatises mostly focussing on the theory of geometry and arithmetic. In some cases, like the Treatise on Mensuration of Paraboloids by Thabit ibn Qurra, we find practical considerations of the construction of arches, vaults, and hyperbolic and parabolic domes. The page above starts explaining the formulas and various parameters of the circle and parabola, including properties of the diameter, the radius the center point, lines, heights, angles, bases, cylinder, and area.
PAGE 10
HOW TO BUILD A ROOF
1103 Page from the "Major Carpentry" section of the Yingzhao Fashi. Rediscovered and republished in the early 1920s, the treatise expounding traditional Chinese architecture arrived again just as China discovered concrete and steel...
ANCIENT CHINA
YINGZAO FASHI (State Building Standards)
Yingzao Fashi (YZFS), by state building supervisor Li Die, is the oldest complete architecture treatise found in China. Written in 1103 - a time, like the 21st century, of immense growth in both population and prosperity - the Yingzhao Fashi offers a complete construction system defined by the state for all types of architecture and at all scales, from imperial palaces to curtain rod and covering detail descriptions, and for all subjects from accountancy, construction management, responsible material use, and design. The Yingzao Fashi's main aim was to curb corruption and improve both the efficiency and quality of architectural work. Stipulating simple materials (wood, stone, earth) and a limited number of components -	(dou), ft
(gong), and In (ang) - the instructions could be deployed throughout the entire empire, in all its climatic zones and seismic conditions. The Yingzhao Fashi's system was an integral part of Chinese society, which adopted the YZFS's bureaucratic rites and rules as a basis for defining its architecture - the free plan embedded with elaborate social, economic, and sustainability strategies. Despite its generic nature, the YZFS still contained space for local dialects.
A
2014 Yingzao Fashi Dougong bracket set, reconstructed at the 2013/14 Shenzhen Biennale of Urbanism and Architecture.
Only rediscovered at the beginning of the 20th century - just as concrete and steel would start to replace traditional Chinese architecture - a literal translation of the Yingzao Fashi to a foreign language doesn't exist to this date. Together with a group of 18 Chinese students and supported by a number of Chinese experts, AMO looked at the text's central component - the construction of the Chinese roof - and attempted a first translation. Puzzled by the text, we re-prototyped the roof construction using blue foam in two workshops in early 2014 at the Shenzhen & Hong Kong Bi-city Biennale of UrbanisnAArchitecture.
Experts: Dr. Diren Feng, Fang Zhenning, Dr. Dia Zhao, with Marieke van den Heuvel
Students:	CHEN Shanling,	DENG Boren, 'iSf-flS HE Zicong, ^iifn LUO Yiqian, ilKffi XIE Tianyang,
2HU Yuanzhi, XPffifz DENG Boren, HAN Wei, MSS HUANG Diayi,	HUANG Minkun, MM LIANG Yuan, XiJ£H
EIU Jingxiang,	LUO Yiqian, ffiJB» WU Sihong, XIE Tianyang, nf* YE Qing, »«£ ZHENG Xiangfa, £Si£
^HU Yuanzhi, ZHUANG Yanshan Cedric van Parys, Stephan Petermann
anks to: Ole Bouman, Dorn Konijn, Vivian Zuidhof, RD Models and Alpha Suen eveloped with the support of the Dutch Creative Industries Fund.
PAGE 12
2U14 Yingzao l-ashis archaic tormulation forces gestural interpretation: Diren Feng helping in translation at the Shenzhen workshop.
PAGE 13
PAGE 15
jONG 1
AND PROSPERITY
compl'ments t0 emperor, His Majesty, on his policy of benevolence and restraint from a\aence, which are his innate wisdom ... Extravagances such as red columns and carved
, rc have been removed completely. He eats meagre '
id lives in humble palaces,
has
'corT1p|etely restored a plain lifestyle." g -jje introduction to Yingzao Fashi
During
the Song Dynasty (960-1279) culture and science reached unprecedented heights, and,
Song Achievements:
3 out of 4 great Chinese inventions were invented during the Song Dynasty:
Particular, capitalism started to sprout in the form of handicrafts and agriculture, while cities llnan to develop and the population grew. The peak population of the Tang Dynasty (618-907 AD), hich carne bef°re ^e Song, was 52 million; during the Song Dynasty, the population grew from 464 million in the early years to 125 million towards the end of the era. Jiehua, a new genre of ¡ ting designated for the depiction of architecture, arose during the Song; architecture began P be appreciated in its own right rather than as part of a general aesthetic appreciation. Comparing the architecture of the Song and Tang, grandeur and majesty-typical qualities of the Tang-dynasty rchitecture- were replaced in the Song-dynasty buildings by refined elegant aesthetics. Song culture showed a strong interest in warfare (new military technology like gunpowder was introduced, and the first standing naval fleet) while the arts, philosophy, and poetry also flourished. But political instability fuels the need for a standard construction system, as every successive regime tends to build new types of palatial compounds. Chinese wooden architecture, unlike its stone architecture (the Great Wall, Buddhist sculptures and pagodas), could emerge through the guidance of the Yingzhao fashi into a highly efficient and flexible building system which could operate large-scale construction works carried out at simultaneously in different locations at a very fast pace...
Compass (1040-1044)
Gunpower (1044)

I
Book printing (11th century AD)
Ay ]ie and the polymath Song society
Li lie $1$ (1035-1110) was bom in Zhenzhou, the son of the minister of revenue and as such part of the political establishment, die had many talents: an intellectual, a painter, a collector and author of books on geography, history, and philology, horses and gambling. In writing the Yingzao Fashi he relied on both his scholarly attainments and his practical expertise in construction and supervising imperial building projects, lie had not been part of the committee compiling the first YZFS, and started at the state directorate of construction as an assistant to the director in 1092. In 1097 he receives the order from the new emperor Huingzhou to recompile the book. After the completion of YZFS, jie was appointed director of all public works, overseeing the majority of imperial production. The fact that LieTi was a polymath was not uncommon in the Song Dynasty. A selection of influential contemporaries:
Wang Anshi Respected poet and prominent statesman who was among those that commissioned Li lie.
Yue Fel Military general known for his uncompromising fight against the lurchen-ruled jin Dynasty. He was also a poet and calligrapher known for his cursive script.
Mi Fu His calligraphy reached the highest level in Chinese history, a refinement based on the development of the Tang Dynasty. He was also known for his passion for collecting precious stones.
Song Huizong Emperor of Song Dynasty, known as a bad politician but an extraordinary poet and calligrapher.
Shen Kuo Government official and military general, Shen had profound knowledge of natural sciences and technology, from chemistry, astronomy, mathematics and geology, to geography, agronomy, and medicine. He summarized them into a book known as the Dream Pool Essays. 3Z
0« Module (cai)
Module of ancient architectural design, this scale is divided into eight hierarchical classes nd the module selection is based on building type class, with the purpose of economizing on ,.a er'a' ar|d fabrication and the efficient installa-n °f structural components. FZ
1« Arm (gong)
.bow-shaped load bearing structui of ;n(ee,r' ct^umns ar|d beams. MultipU tho ki ?ckin9 arms and blocks (dou) “Ook-and-arm bracket set. FZ
) Fp Cantilever (ang)
The purpose of the downward cantilever is to extend the length of the bracket tiers, lower the height of the cantilever, lengthen the eaves, as well as to create a weight balance between the block-and-arm bracket set and the interior beam framework.
0	Playing head
Structural component of the block-and-arm bracket tiers (pictured); at the top of the block-and-arm bracket set, it is cross-joined with the arms and fixed under the central block (qixin dou), serving as the end point of protrusion.
$4 Block (dou)
A rectangular wooden block on top of a column; an official block-and-arm bracket set could contain four kinds of blocks.
PAGE 16
ROOF
pemands physical prototyping: using molds and blue toam, every component ^^Hecrea,ec* following instructions from the Yingzao Fashi.
PAGE 17
PAGE 19
« First Hierarchy
•• & Fen
jr'l? Second Hierarchy ft. i fen0 = 5.553 Fen
$13%? Fourth Hierarchy
#•1 fen0 = 4.853" Fen
Fifth Hierarchy
53-1 fen° = 4.453 Fen
■3=0]
DESIGN GUIDES
Yingzao Fashi asserts its relation to
ancient Confucian sources through
the acknowledgment of The Rites of
Zhou, a collection of text^^M^^T the philosophy of the ancients and the ceremonies of the Zhou Dynasty, which appeared in the 2nd century BC. The collection gives a detailed survey of the bureaucratic order of the Chinese empire, ranging from general governance to education, agriculture, and warfare. In the Yingzao Fashi, the Rites are the foundations for its three-step design decision taking.
1	Unit
Societal position, according to The Rites of Zhou, defines the number of units of an item one can have. Rites of Zhou offers eight hierarchical grades ranging from the emperor to seventh-tier officials. An emperor can have nine units of each, a prince seven units, etc. Concerning major carpentry, the unit system...
2	Cai proportion
Societal status also defines the size of the cai, the measuring unit from which the proportions of all the building's components are derived. This leads to 32 possible floor plans.
The Rites of Zhou-social pyramid used for defining the architectural ambition...
slAfl Sixth Hierarchy
3	Harmonious fine-tuning
The third step in the design process was intended to achieve harmonious proportions, based on the number of bays, their width, and the amount of jumps (the offset between different levels of brackets). JF
® Chi / Cun / Fen / Li
Chits the most basic absolute measurement in China (not only in architecture). Its size has varied between different contractors and different dynasties. Among all ancient Chinese building, it ranges from 294 mm to 329 mm.
In the Song Dynasty a Chi was approximately 308mm.
1	Chi = 308 mm 1 Chi =	10	Cun
1 Chi = 100 Fen 1 Chi = 1000 Li
PAGE 20
2015 Pearl River Delta.
PAGE 24
ROOF
Growini piles cMue
signal progress in the YZFS roof prototype.
PAGE 27
Once the height of the ridge purlin has been determined, one may work on the cross section of building and determine the positions of other purlins from top to bottom. Make a straight line linking the top of the eave purlin and that of ridge purlin, and this line intersects with the axial lines of the upper intermediate purlin (the second highest purlin). From the intersection point on the axial line of the upper intermediate purlin, go down 1/10 of the roof height, which determines the height of the upper intermediate purlin. Likewise, make a straight line linking the tops of the eave purlin and the upper intermediate purlin, which intersects with the axial line of the third highest purlin, and from the intersection point on the axial line of the third highest purlin, move down 1/20 of the roof height, which determines the height of this third highest purlin. Repeat the same method to determine the height of other purlins, move down 1/40 of the roof height for the next purlin, or 1/80 of the roof height for the next one, and so on.
This is how a gentle, beautiful roof curvature is created.
The construction method for roof curvature as stipulated in the Song Dynasty is remarkably different from that stated in the later Qing Dynasty's official building manual Gongcheng Zuofa (Construction Methods, 1734) which inverts the direction of calculation from bottom to top. 3F
Of CURVATURE
I Vingzao Fashi, the principle to determine roof curvature is termed juzhe Ipifr, which literally ^ ns to first ra'se tfle roof and then break it In this method, the total height of the ridge purlin
ff® . determined first, and then individual heights o^mer purlins can be determined in order ^ake the break line of the roof.
ro0f height is determined by the width of a building (total width of bays), precisely cou^M^^ ' m the central line of the front eave-raising tie-beam and that of the rear eave-raising tie-beam / ecifically- from the central line of the front eave column to that of the rear eave column plus h depth of the protrusion of bracketing from the eave columns on both sides). The ratio of he roof height to the width of a building is 1:3 for palatial and tower-type buildings or slightly rthan 1:4 for mansion-type buildings.

The hMsize rmMine arm (Woot arm) and full size flower arm are placed Into the cap block, forming a tenon and mortise joint.
PAGE 31
,zFS: METAPHORS
termin°logy used in the Yingzao Fashi reflects a mixture of popular, vulgar language and refined, literary language.
their structural function or physical position, either straightway or figuratively. To a great extent the terminology is systematic in relation to architectural procedures and there
forw
I‘w-ords usedt0 term architectural comporT
y
3<B or and tree terminology. These terms cover the most fundamental componerT flower
set
systematic patterns of meaning in it, the most striking component
_ x___:__i____ xi_____±____________¿1_______j. £._i_____
rating botanical nomenclature, espcially construction features of a bracket
-phey can be divided into three categories: (1) terms for individual components, from protruding components • racket arms and cantilevers) to lateral components (cross arms); from big capital blocks to smallsup^Pfing blocks; (2) terms
how Pn
for composite units, i.e. a whole bracket set; (3) terms for methods of combining individual elements, cove otruding and lateral components interact with each other, and how particular positions of blocks and bracket
arms
are related to each other. Turning to contemporary literary sources, bracketing was shared by craftsmen and
. ati at least during the Song Dynasty, and such a perception reflects a distinctive architectural conceptualization in Medieval China: architecture is an integral part of nature. JF
Bracketing likened to flowers and columns capped with brackets likened to arrays of blossoming trees.
An overview of terms connected to botanical nomenclature...
Term
hjagong
!#t
juantou tIBH miaogong WÄ danmiao IW liangmiao ffi#
yeü
ying'ang
huatouzi HsI-p
huaxindou
dinghua mohaigong
duo ft
yiduo —ft chuyizhi £tj—tî
zhuanye
Literal translation
lower(ing) arms scrolled head
branch arms, treetop arms, spray arms
single arms
two branches
leaf (or petal)
flower or petal cantilevers
flower head
flower-heart block erased little flower arm
cluster of flowers
two clusters of flowers protruding single branch
rotating leaves
Structural properties
protruding arms, jutting protruding arms protruding arms one protruding arm two protruding arms cross arms
cantilevers projecting from wall plane strut under downward-pointing cantilever
block on the center of an arm incomplete protruding bracket arm placed between two arms of inverted V-shaped brace under ridge purlin
measurement for counting a whole bracket set that includes at least one protruding arm one or two bracket sets method by which arm projects from wall plane
method by which cross arms are installed on the head of a protruding arm
j
PAGE 35
m
A COMPARISON: YZFS AND FLUXUS |103 YlNGZAO FASHI, Lie lie
^^urb corruption in society (a side effect of the thriving
■fracture industry resulting from the increase in housing
arC ondt to reduce the waste of materials and capital, and ¿eWd' '' .	,	. ,	.. .
top'
durinQ
revent local governments from practicing corruption
construction management.
Building process
1	Construction of foundations (moats/fortifications)
2	Construction of platforms and carving (stone)
3	Construction of main structure (major carpentry)
4	Construction of non-structural elements (minor carpentry wood carving, turning and drilling, sawing, bamboo work, tile work, plastering, decorative painting, brickwork, production of tiles and bricks)
Flexibility
Despite the strict regulations on all wooden structural systems, no restrictions are imposed on building layout and scale control. Under the specified regulations, modification could be made according to the specific condition of a project. The methods of "column removal" and "column displacement" could be used to enhance the interior space and use of natural light.
System
The enclosure, structure and servicing systems of wooden structures are summarized into 13 building systems.
The birth of a modular system has something to do with the ancient Chinese ideology of "harmony between human and nature" (tianren heyi) and "letting nature take its course" (shun qi ziran). The modular concept is the "spark" the Chinese took from nature: during the long process of observing the natural world, they learned that the natural cycle obeys certain rules - it always begin with a single cell, which then evolves, spreads, multiplies, and the universe is formed; rationality and prosperity are the result of "letting nature take its course." If the Yingzao Fashi is a grammar book to understand Chinese architecture, then the modular system would be the "organic" part of the book. FZ
1965 FLUXUS PREFAB BUILDING SYSTEM George Maciunas
Purpose
To solve the problem of short supply of housing, and to
enhance urban efficiency ana social welfare. Through the standardization, modularization, and massiTC manufacturing of the prefab system, wastage of energy, matenar^^^( time and costs can be reduced.
Building Process
1	Foundation piling
2	Installation of main structural components (flooring, fixed structural panels, structural wall cabinets, roof slabs, servicing cabinets)
3	Installation of non-structural components (movable interior panels, movable cabinet doors)
Flexibility
Flexibility of a smart structure is achieved by a system permitting change in room layout, the simple expansion or contraction of room size, and climate control, where all non-structural panels (50 percent of all wall panels) are movable, without any addition of components, since sliding panel tracks exist in every floor panel joint because they are structurally necessary. Rooms can therefore be enlarged by opening dividing, nonstructural walls; climate control can be effected by using various materials for exterior sliding panels: transparent low-insulative material in a mild climate, opaque, high-insulative material (asbestos) during severe heat or cold, or any combination of the two; the number and area of transparent and opaque panels can be varied by the simple sliding operations.
System
The enclosure, structural and servicing systems of a smart structure are integrated (the electrical and mechanical works of the building are also integrated in this structure). The Fluxus Prefab Building System is distinct from other prefab systems since it is embedded with logistic networks, recycling flows, and the efficient use of resources by providing a network of intercommunicating passages built into hollow structural components - an advanced version of the traditional column-beam system, emulating the living system of the human body.
PAGE 36
2015 Pearl River Delta.
PAGE 37

PAGE 39
yflfS
CURBING CC
riON
Song court had ignited a building boom through its frenzied construction of buildings, gardens and sumptuous fl1®... ns. At the same time the court was greatly concerned about false statements and reports relating to necessary PaV unts of materials, manpower, and funds for such projects. A record in the Song huiyao (Essential affairs of the Song)
^0 that in 1077 AD, in response to a memorandum from local omftials seeking government funds for the construc-5"° f |0cal cities, Emperor Shenzong ordered the Imperial Secretariat and th^flWial Advisory to "draw up regulations
gndrep°rtto the court-"
their report, they pointed out that it was essential for central government to find ways to counter the corrupt pra f bureaucrats in charge of financial statements and construction budgets. Among those corrupt practices was "false ° timates of work and materials" (xuji gongliao). They drew up the rules stipulating that minute calculations of measurements and comprehensive estimates of labor and materials must be made and reported to the dispatched officials for
irfpect'on'
gtate financial deficiencies were among the greatest crises that Emperor Shenzong had to address during his reign. Exerting himself to make the country prosperous, Shenzong approved his prime minister Wang Anshi's (1021-1086) initiatives in institutional reform that took place during 1069-1074. The core of the reform was to manage state finances effectively and many new regulations were issued involving the construction and management of farmland, irrigation, and cities. As such Anshi replaced the ancient feudal system of corvee labour with a more modern monetary based taxation system, which increased the amounts of money flowing around within the empire. Anshi most likely was the one who ordered the compilation of YZFS around 1071-1074.
In 1091 a first version of the YZFS was published. As Li die stated in the 1103 edition, the Emperor Zhezong was dissatisfied with the first edition because it was "merely a description of materials, lacking in adaptable systems of the application of the modular unit; and in it, the estimates for labor and materials are too generous, stipulating no ways to prevent waste and graft." Li Jie continues: "the standard for construction, setting down labor and other rules is completely essential for preventing misuse of man-hours and materials, and therefore, it should be in force both within and outside the capital."
In order to effectively apply controls based on the exact needs of a construction project and to evaluate itemized accounts in budgetary statements before and after construction as reported by local bureaucrats, a powerful imperial standard on constructing cities and buildings became a must. Such an imperial standard would serve both as authoritative instructions on standardized city building and on architectural methods and use of materials and manpower, and as an official standard to be consulted and followed in the central government's monitoring and approval of construction projects. The compilation of the YZFS was precisely intended to meet such political and financial demands by the Song Dynasty. ]F
®TFp Downward cantilever
^ÔÜfp Zither-shaped cantilever
Ltt'tTF’ Split-bamboo shaped cantilever
Where blocks are installed onto a cantilever, they should be all the same as any case of the flower arm.
®4ciR»il'TWiOT«n
Block opening and the under side of cantilver should be made of tenon and mortise.
©Si* can# ,
Concave by 2 fen° smoothly caved in at the middle.

PAGE 41
PAGE 43
Stolen Heart
©
Playing head (Shua Tou)
Also known as bird head or locust head.
protruding 25 fen°
©$&,«¿»a
Slashing downwards, making Magpie Stand
value ENGINEERING GUIDE
»(lied heart" construction (jinxiri zao tt'CiÜt) and a "stolen A *',, construction (touxin zao ÎÉpGiÊ) are the Yingzao Fashi's bea ¡ca| terms for two types of bracketing structuresthafflM^ teCn auished from each other according to the arrangements of ff n bracket-arms on top of each layer of protruding bracket-cr°sS According to the Yingzao Fashi, whenever a bracket set ar^Ssigned to have cross arms (arms extending laterally) on 5 end of each single protruding arm or downward cantilever c or cantilevers jumping out from the wall plane), the 3 rketing structure is called a "filled heart"; if no cross arms galled on the end of each protruding arm or cantilever Üh'le these protruding arms or cantilevers continue to jump ard, the structure is called a "stolen heart." Although these
o construction methods are defined by whether or not the ■ stallation of cross arms takes place on each single protruding arm or cantilever (termed "each jump") - namely, either cross arms installed on all layers of protruding arms, or no cross ar(lis at all on any protruding arms - the Yingzao Fashi actually ncludes a mix of these two types of bracketing structure, that ¡s cross arms are installed on the end of some protruding arms 0nly. It is often stated in this text that a bracket set is designed to be of "stolen heart" on the "first jump," or on the first and third ones, or on both of the first two. This style of discourse implies that bracketing of a complete filled heart construction has become dominant in Song Dynasty architecture. As seen from archaeological materials, bracketing in Chinese architecture progressed from complete "stolen heart" construction (Han toSui times, approximately 1st to 7th centuries) to partially "filled heart" construction (started from the mid Tang period,
8th century). Extant Song wooden framed buildings or masonry structures that imitate wooden framed architecture show that it is since the mid Song period that bracketing tended to be made mostly filled heart, especially for the bracketing of external jumps (under exterior eaves). With a "filled heart" construction, different bracket sets at the same height (for instance, those on top of eave columns) can be connected laterally through tie beams supported by the cross arms, and consequently, a bracketing network is formed under the eaves or on top of those inner columns of the same height. This not only makes a strong load bearing bracketing structure and strengthens the beam structure, but it also significantly changes the appearances of a whole bracket set which resembles the form of a flower or a flowering tree when viewed from the façade and from the side, and when looked up. JF
2015 Pearl River Delta.
PAGE 44
ROOF
rC. ACCOUNTANCY
VZFS g = c • s • I ■ W
tot
= c
where G - Gong, standard unit of measurement expressing one day of work C = complexity of the work”**'* Chlgh-end=X, CaVerage=X, Clow-end=X
S = season of work	Ssummer=oy^pr^/ammn=5, Swinter=4
I = laborer type	UoMnr=l, lnormai=2/3
Wtot=work
l * (W stand parts	flex parts) (Work is differentiated in standard parts and flexible quantity based)
= c
s ■ l ■ (2 Nj • Wstandi + Y,Nj • Wfiex.)
where Wstandl = Work standard part i Nt = amount of standard parts i W^exj — Work flexible part j Nj = amount of flexible parts j
= C
Loi
I • ((Si Ni- Wa. + whieri + wspeCl) + E; Nj ■ (I^-; )
= c
I • (( Si Nr ^ + whieri + wspeCi) + I; Nj • (;
L°i
length-W partj^^bj
))
1 Gong = Digging and building 1.54 m of the base of a city wall = Making 90 tile edgings = Painting and dying 942cm2 of wood
= Carry 1 Dan (50kg) for 30Li (15km)
where ff^hierj — 0.05(6 Nhierarchy)
= -0.03(8 -NMerarchy)
Lbj	— 6 — Nhierarchy
— Nhierarchy ~ 0
Wpartll	= work coefficient
L0.	=Nhienrchy ' SCOlC
qi	= quantity of part i
Nhierarchy = chosen hierarchy Wspec	= addition for special
for 1 < Nhierarchy < 6 for 6 < NMerarchy < 8 for 1 < NMerarchy < 6 for 6 < NUerarchy < 8
Half of the chapters in the Yingzao Fashi are (though they are shorter) dedicated to accountancy and building efficiency. They give precise instructions for calculating the costs of structures. To calculate remuneration for labor, the gong is the standard unit expressing one day of work. The amount of gong equates to a number of different activities / achievements (see table). The formula for calculating gong (see above) consists of parameters with fixed coefficients, including the type of laborer (craftsmen, soldier), time of year (spring, summer, autumn, winter), and the expected quality of work (high-end, average, low-end). These are multiplied by the structure's components and divided into fixed and flexible parts, which have correlating standard work requirements adapted to the relevant hierarchy.
For the structure prototyped at the Shenzhen Biennale, the equation comes to roughly 20 gong, the equivalent of building 30 m of city wall, laying an 1,800-tile floor, painting and dying 20 m2, or carrying 50 kg for 300 km.
® ^-4- Cap block
Blocks
Cap block
Connection Block
The upper 8 fen0 makes the flange, the middle 4 fen0 the platform, and the lower 8 fen° the trapezoid.
Flange 8 fen°
Platform 4 fen° Trapezoid 8 fen°
Concaved one fen°
1.	Resting on protruding ends.
2.	Loading two directions of arms.
gj
(J)	Central block
1. Positioned on the middle of an arm.
16 fen
©	End block
1.	Positioned on any arm end.
2.	Loading only one direction of an arm.

The upper 4 fen° makes the ear, the middle 2 fen° the platform, and the lower 4 fen0 the trapezoid.
nnTTTTT	! 111I T ITT
	tl

rrrmn	im inn
	/

mnun-

3
4+-
lEar 4 fen°
J Platform 2 fen” jTrapezoid 4fen°
Inside the opening along the direction of the protrustion, leave two bars uncut.
Example of cap bloc^ Other blocks half t|
size.
PAGE 52
1984 Standardized structural diagram of a YZFS building, rendered by Liang Shicheng. Shicheng made these and other explanatory drawings in the 1940s for A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture, the first book in English on traditional Chinese building practices. However Shicheng's drawings got lost in the mail and didn't reach the US until decades later, published only in 1984.
PAGE 55
$0NG
. RENAISSAh
Song Dynasty is the Chinese proto-renaissance, when Chinese culture reached its peak (it would fade with the de-The | Song). From a historical perspective, the Han Dynasty strengthened the power of the nation, Tang the power
fl^Ttary, Song the power of civilization. Even though the ordinsffy people of Song were not richer than those of other of*'' they were skilled at creating arts and crafts with their ordinary occupations, such as the Southern Song Guan ■teelaiH' Painied 9°^ embroidery etc. The Song is a dynasty ruled by the fum/om/pW) and was relatively weak in P°iC power. The prohibition on executing fumioni created considerable freedom of thought ancrbpinion for intellectu-1,11111 i^jg a|So resulted in great cultural prosperity in literature (the "Old literature movement" guwen yundong' try (c'> and otherarts (f-e- painting, calligraphy). The Song unified aspects of Confucianism, Buddhism, and ^■srn and the co-existences of different philosophic concepts of neo-Confucianism. Foreign cultures were also
Tccep,ed and assimilated ]Z
Caligraphy: on the basis of the robust and majestic aesthetics of calligraphy developned during the Tang Dynasty, the calligraphy of the Song Dynasty reached the highest level of elegance. It was used by intellectuals of Song as an expression of artistic individualism.
One flower arm protrusion or one cantilever protrusion from the cap block is called one protrusion step. It can proceed up to five successive steps.
.«lor*»*
-UU.

A bracket protruding one step is called a ‘cur-tier bracket.
bracket protruding five steps is called an eight-tier bracket.
Single-arm type of eight-tier bracket with two branches and three cantilevers, the flower arms using the "stolen heart" technique.
Tie beam Longer arm Melon arm Tie beam Mudline arm
Single-arm type of eight-tier bracket with two branches and three cantilevers, the flower arms using the "full heart" technique.
PAGE 59
I
45
PAGE 61
poetry &PHIL0S0PHY
IN THE SONG DYNASTY
V* ' for Its
twr^forte
« dement with sh,
iC !j (in which a|i
SgsiTSS-8555*5" rJbt-ir
tiiePerl0a T reached the
gSt level. Compared h'ghes	more
«dha^om Zeal and rhythmic Ldom thanks to hna and short Nonces. Poets in the SL Dynasty like Su Shi, LiuYong, Lu You, Huan Tingjian, and Li Qingzhao expresses a
broad range of themes
in ci poetry- V-
The Great River eastward flows,
With its waves are gone all those Gallant heroes of bygone years.
West of the ancient fortress appear^^^(|
The Red Cliff. Here General Zhou won his earl^MB When the Three Kingdoms were all in flame.
Tagged rocks tower in the air,
Swashing waves beat on the shore,
Rolling up a thousand heaps of snow.
To match the hills and the river so fair,
How many heroes brave of yore Made a great show!
I fancy General Zhou at the height Of his success, with a plume fan In hand,
In a silk hood, so brave and bright,
Laughing and jesting with his bride so fair,
While enemy ships were destroyed as planned Like shadowy castles in the air.
Should their souls revisit this land,
Sentimental, his wife would laugh to say,
Younger than they, I have my hair all turned gray.
Life is but like a passing dream,
I'd drink to the moon which once saw them on the stream.
— Su Shi (1037-1101), "Tune: Charm of a Maiden Singer: Memories of the Past at Red Cliff."
PHILOSOPHY
Up to the Song Dynasty, Taoism, Buddhism and
Confucianism went through several evolutions.
On this basis, neo-confucianism eventually divided into two schools in the Song Dyansty, namely
the school of Principle (L/) represented by Zhu Xi
and the school of Mind (X/'ng) represented by Lu
liuYuan. In the terms of Western philosophy, it wa
one as to whether laws of nature are legislated by the mind or not, like the issue betweenPIc^^B realism and Kantanian idealism. For the first timeT] academies are established for the followers of H the philosphy. 1Z
I
1Raw beam
i S; Ping beam
Cross beam of the structure.
Dwarf column
1	Short column on Ping beam
2	Supports Ridge purlin.
^ §?£ Moon beam	Slanting struts
Beam modified by hand, with a slight cresent shape. -| standing on Moon beam
2 Supports Ridge purlin
PAGE 63
1085-1145 Along the River During the Qingming Festival: a 5.5 meter long scroll depicting for the first time every day life and architecture in China. The roof structure on top of the gate shows a five-tier bracket set roof.
, g-#-«, mm- ©n* Timu / Fu
ft ; jtm« ,	-,
ilire
For a tower-type hall, the diameter of the purlin is one cai, one zi, or two car; for a residence, the diameter of the purlin is one cai, three fen, to one car, one zi; for an ordinary house the diameter of the purlin Is one cai, one fen to one cai two fen; the length is the same as the spans of the bays.
Used on the outermost step in the outer branch.
The top of the beam is made arch-shaped and the bottom Is made concave; both are made by 4-segment entasis. At the bottom, it curves in by 4 fen° at the end point of the 4th segment.
The beam used above the single blocks is 96 fen in length.
The beam used above the regular arms is 104 fen in length.
The beam used above the double-layer arms is 126 fen in length.


PAGE 69
* ppplSCOVERY
K g reprint of the Yingzao Fashifrom 1145 by Zhu Qiqian was found in
In -jng provincial Library. Republished in ra20. it became instantly popular fectual circles in China. Copies also reached EuropWnd fueled a short in interest. Two western scholars tried to comprehend Chinesear^roecture, 'ive ' cording to Liang Sicheng (1901-1972) they did not "know the gram-Wta f Q^jnese architecture; wrote uncomprehending descriptions of Chinese ^- and used Yingzao Fashi carelessly." (A Pictorial History of Architec-
hiiilaintP' . .
L 1984- p. xiv.)
Sicheng would become the Yingzao Fashi's prime scholar in China.
was part of the first batch of students studying in the United States
Liang
riTrt of the Boxer Indemnity Scholarship Program) between 1924 and lo96and worked in the beaux-arts office of French born, Philadelphia based .¡feet Paul Philippe Cret. While in the US, Sicheng's father, an eminent poet, 3 I his son a copy of the recently discovered Yingzao Fashi, though Sicheng uld not make much of it at the time. Upon his return to China he was sent C Manchuria to head both a new architecture department at the Northeastern University and an office responsible for planning the underdeveloped area.
The Japanese invasion of Manchuria in 1931 prompted Sicheng's return to Beijing where he was asked to head the Society for Research in Chinese Architecture, founded by Qiqian in 1929, where he began seriously studying the Yingzao Fashi. Puzzled by the many unreadable characters, he set out to the countryside to find answers and worked on translation in the belief that "the only available teachers are craftsmen." Through the difficult process of interviewing the craftsmen and studying ancient temples in remote areas in China - by 1941 his team had studied more than 2,000 monuments - he and his assistants were largely able to decipher the book. During the Second World War, under threat by Japanese invading forces, the institute was relocated inland, and was able to continue some of its research.
Liang Shicheng with his wife and fellow architect Lin Huiyin posing during fieldwork investigation into the application of the Yingzao Fashi across China.
The postwar period started with international recognition for Sicheng: he received an invitation to come to Yale to speak about Chinese architecture and during the same trip he consulted with Le Corbusier and others on the design of the UN Building in New York. In 1950 the newly established People's Republic appointed him to a leading position in planning and redevelopment in Beijing, but in a sudden change, his theory of architecture, which emphasized the greatness of Chinese building tradition, was severely criticized by the Communist Party. In 1956 Liang was forced to self-criticize and admit that he had made mistakes. During the Cultural Revolution Sicheng was condemned as "an authority of counter-revolutionary scholarship" and suffered severe persecution. He died in Beijing in 1972. Sicheng's Annotated Yingzao Fashi - his translation to contemporary Chinese, accompanied with explanatory drawls and diagrams - was only published posthumously, in 1980. It remains the authoritative Chinese guide to understanding the Yingzao Fashi.
»•»«


■
PAGE 70
HOW TO BUILD A ROOF
ROOF RENAISSANCE
I
LEONIS BAPTI8TAB ALBERTI
í¡ open inter cl udantur, funt qui forraiTc purent fu tu rum imadran /ti1/ minibus,immune.Bquidcm id ego (que' pofleuideor fpcrare,atqid lud credere, cp aiunt ranam rubetam ftâdi inclufam,medioc]idefoffani agro, arce re alites ab femenns.Et ofirim arborera,it in dorounff infera/ tur, reddcre partus difficiles. Et enoraion Lesbiam fronde Tub tedia ha bitam prardpirare aluum ÔC inanitatepeftem inferre.Redeo ad r?. Hie repeter e oporta quar fupra, aun de linéamenos xdifiaorum trad are/ mus,perftrinximus.
Dc redilinas tedi9,deq? rrabibii*,ttgnts&,& oflmm inter fe conpadione. Caput XII.
TBftorum igftur alta fub diuo,alia non íub diuo.Et horum aliqua lineis'coníbnt redis,aliqua ficxré,aliqua muaré. Hit addito, qcf hiefádatad rem.Nam aut ex arború materia pone r<dhira,aut lapide* Tedorum ua. Ordieraur inde adeo r€ principio bine furapto, ut fbtuamus quidpiS na genera.	*ffc,quod ipfum ad unmerfi tecfi rariocination? pertinear, 6C fit hunif/
modí.T edo cuiuis 8í offa 8C neruos ,# coplementa,5í cornees,# cru /lulas ineíTc arque, atepin muro interpretctnur,tñ hoc ita nc (n re ¿pía co
uerfum pofitas columnas non mfidabimur.Offisergo loco eríttrabs.
xp fi per impenfx radones Iiceret,qs non opta tom habere opus( ut ita k>quar)ofreum,# fbItdiflrmum,hoc
i,hoc eft.conrmnaris colfíftis,# coura/ tn trabibus conpadu 8C obfirraatumcSed parfimonúr1pfpidmus,fti/' perfluu putañees qcqrnd femara opens firmaste poffit detrahi,eaderc trabium hic fmunturinterualla.Ex quo SC trabibustranfuerfalia impo nunturrigna,# abduatntur decurr entes quadruh, #f> qua funtiflisfl «ni Ita. Qua? omnia haudepiac^dedetaputaflt dligamfta.In bsdcmS afíes, tabukrcpampliorescoapratar nmurttm cdpfrmenn uic? tenebur,
paríib ranone pautmerum, regulase^ cordcf effe extfroum.Corkim ut ro tcdi,q
i,qdfTupra capul pendcat tnmnum eíTe corneé non negabimus. Ergo káec itacflefiimlat^mreftigCTn^ii qd (Tt,qood cinqi horum debe acur,quo hésrtcognids firotius.q lapidas redu c5ueniat,tmcITigam* . De h» igítur, quoarf res poftukr,brcu iffi rnetr ifigam tis.Sed fadar hoc adr¿,hutus xtansarchitedos nonkntdo,qconngnanonibus haben/' én 9 indias fbramtnurelacrranóneripfkm offibus parietíF reíinquiin^ qudxis abfoluco pañete tr abñim eaprt* immittanv&c qua re paries i m; bt0ü*oraK^adu<rfüsignium populaoonc^xdifiaum nul< tura red/
1485 De Re Aedificatoria, Leon Battista Alberti, Italy
Building on the rediscovered work of Vitruvius, Alberti is more explicit about roofs than his predecessor and dedicates four chapters of Book III to them. Firstly he differentiates wooden and stone roofs to give some preference to the first: "The most gratifying roof is one of only who would not want the covering to consist, if nothing but ribs and solid work [out of wood]; that is to say of continued columns and beams tied close together. But here we consult economy, and suppose everything to be superfluous, that without prejudice to the strength of the work may be possibly retrenched; and for this reason we leave spaces between the beams."(Chapter XII) In chapter XIII Alberti discusses the origins of the arch - "An arch is nothing but a beam bent" - and urges architects to use only "perfect" arches as the ancients did. Chapter XIV discusses stone coverings and vaulting techniques for cupolas. In chapter XV, the last which mentions the roof, he discusses roof finishes and adds to Vitruvius's accounts by quoting Pliny: " Cheleonophagi (Garamanates) where they use tortoise shells, the greater part of Germany uses shingles, Flanders and Picardy uses a white sort of stone, which saws easier than wood, the Genoueze and Florentines use thin pieces of a scaly sort of stone - others have tried Pargets ... But having experimented with everything, the wit and invention of man has found out nothing yet more convenient thanks of baj^d clay." He ends with a supposedly great inv^^ft: the only lightly tiltek lead roof found in the gardens of Syria.
to form an octagon and above it they are arranged to have 16 sides and then the circular shape at the bottom of the dome is formed. In order that lengths of sides of different geometrical figures as given below could be obtained, the above calculations are given.
[See ref. 7.]
sniPi NisilUH ^ TpT	cT^fcT: I
TT qgqiTi	^6 II
28 (In order to construct a dome above the mandapa) first place (a layer of stones) arranged in an octagon, then above it with 16 sides and above it form a circle (a circular arrangement of stones). The height (of dome) is one-half its width. (The height is divided into six parts(?).)
(The dome is comprised of six layers, Karnadardarika, Rupakantha, three layers called gajatalus placed one over the other and kola).
^f^ft^T TTFfWfa	I
tj H^i?i fg^rnfaffi Mhhji 3^ ii
29.	Karnadardarika (a layer of stones above that of circular layer) shall be seven parts in height and its offset is same (i.e., seven parts). (The next layer) Rupakantha is five parts in height and its offset is two parts.
[See ref. 8.]
30.	(At the element of Rupakantha) 8, 12, 16, 24 or 32 number (of images) of vidyadharas are placed.
f^nVT:	TTHRtl	1
cTgpf	iiFwl ’jwilfacTT: II 3^ H
31.	Vidhyadharas are seven parts in width (height?) and their offset is equal to their height. Above them, dancing women in different dancing and picturesque poses are located.
'MdlWTJ	igdl^ll g ^
qdldl	chklpT W ^ II H
32.	(The height of) the first gajatala is 6'/2 parts, that of second 6 and that of third 5'/2 parts. (The height of first) kola is five parts and (that of second) three parts. (Figs. 62 and 63)
[See ref. 9.]
ca. 1450 Präsäda Mangana, Sütradhära Mandaría, India
Prasada Mandana is a treatise on the temple architecture of northern India, written by engineer Sutradhara Mandana around 1450 AD. Compared to the Vastuvidyasastra Ascribed To MahjusrJ the roof is discussed here in far more detail (though the largest emphasis remains at the positioning of door openings). Chapter 7 - Pavilion, Gallery and Sarpvarna (the decoration on top of a dome) - gives a detailed account of building domes, the most important roof shape in Indian architecture: "In order to construct a dome above the mandapa [pavilion] first place a layer of stones arranged in an octagon, then above it with 15 sides and above it form a circular arrangement of stones. The height of the dome is one-half its width." The height is then divided into six layers which are then all described in detail in terms of heights and amount of parts. It is followed by a detailed descriptio of decorating the ceilings and ends with a short section describing the layout of the decorations on top of the dome through a complicated theory determining the increase and number of bells: "The first type of Samvarna consists of five bells. There are 25 types obtained by the addition of four bells (at a time) up to one and hundred bells. There are eight divisions in the first (type) and increasing the divisions by four each time, there are 104 divisions for the 25th type" etc., suggesting an exponential amount o possibilities...

j
1734 Qing Gongcheng Zuofa Zeli lllli®Jft, China
One major difference with Yingzao Fashi compared to its Qing Dynasty successor, the Gongcheng Zuofa, is the roof slope construction sequence termed jujia (literally, raise and elevate). Using this method, the roof slope is calculated by determining the heights of the purlins from bottom to top, instead of top to bottom. Jujia requires that you first determine the height of the lower intermediate purlin (the one next to the eave purlin), and then determine the height of the one next to it, and so on, until the ridge purlin, me height of the lower intermediate purlin is determined by raising 50 Percent of the rafter span from the height of the eave purlin. Then the height otthe next intermediate purlin is determined by raising 60 percent of the ratter span from the height of the lower intermediate purlin. Then the next on® is to raise 65 percent of the rafter span, 70 percent of the rafter span, nd so on, until the ridge purlin that is determined by raising 90 percent of ™srafter span from the height of the upper intermediate purlin (the second '9 est purlin). The ratios of the increased heights of the purlins to the rafter o^n.f,ro0resses from a gentle one (50 percent or 'At) gradually to a steep M|v'10). The roof curvatures generated by these two methods, jujia and ton S’ jfe c^erent< but in both cases, the slope of the roof is steep at the P snd gradually gentle at the bottom. JF
12th century Treatises on Astrophysics, Rasa'el-e-Nojoumiyeh, Persia
The Treatises on Astrophysics by Rasa'el-e-Nojoumiyeh is a further example of the relatively remote position of architecture writing in the Persian world. The topics put forth as chapter titles are (1) [ground] surveying tools, (2) geometric shapes, and (3) surveying methods. Other chapters tackle astrophysics, optics, algebra, mathematics, trigonometry and geography; more than a quarter of the treatise is dedicated to geometry and cartography, both of which exert a technical and decorative influence on Islamic architecture. Nojoumiyeh deals with surveying and mapping sites of various shapes, geographic orientation, dividing geometric shapes into equal or proportional parts, and embedding geometric shapes in one another. The treatise provides a technical foundation for architectural innovation, as reflected in the works of Persian architects in mosques, caravansaries, gardens and later in private residences.
PAGE 72
UNIVERSAL ELEMENT?
Through dendro-chronological dating - the science of tree growth analysis -historians can date wooden roof structures with a great degree of precision. Their efforts in analyzing the roof structures of religious buildings shows that, despite variations in exterior appearance, the structural systems undergirding
them - sets of rafters, purlins, tie beafl^^age pieces - are remarkably similar. There is a discrepancy betwfen the locality suggested by the roof, compared to the structure mat holds it up. Gravity is the same everywhere, and all early ^P^^^iornatter their cultural context, have to deal with the same forces using the same material: wood...
CHINA
Liang Ssu-ch'eng,
A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture (1984)
JAPAN
Mary Neighbour Parent, The Roof in Japanese Buddhist Architecture (1983)
750 AD
857 AD Fo-kuang Ssü, Wu-ta¡ Shan Shansi
670 AD Horyu-ji kondo, Ikaruga, Nara 739 AD Höryu-ji dempödö, Ikaruga, Nara
WESTERN EUROPE
Herman Janse, Houten Kappen in Nederland 1000-1940(1989)
Friedrich Ostendorf, Die Geschichte des Dachwerks (1908)
Patrick Hoffsummer (ed), Roof Frames from the 11 th Century to the 19th Century (2002)
SOUTHERN EUROPE

8th-9th century
Santa Maria in Valle, Cividale
EASTERN EUROPE & RUSSIA
David Buxton, The Wooden Churches of Eastern Europe (1982)
) Kuan-yin nu, iu-i« bbu, Chi Hsien, Hopei
I	Odll-lcl-ai III I I ICI I,	i i t-yj— I nw i iv-»ni i ion, <JMau nua oou,
Kuang-chi ssu, Pao-ti, Hopei	Tat'ung, Shanshi
PAGE 73
■apury Muröji kondö, Muroji, Nara 1053 Byödö'in Phoenix Hall, Uyi, Kyoto
1148 Sanzen'in hondo,Ohara, Kyoto
11th century
O.L Vrouwenkerk, Maastricht
hnGermain-des Près,	1178-1188 Episcopal
Palace Chapel, Aisne Department, Laon
1030 Cathedral Aquileia
459
PAGE 74
ROOF
1200 AD
1350 AD
CHINA
Liang Ssu-oh'eng,
A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture (1984)
JAPAN
Mary Neighbour Parent, The Roof in Japanese Buddhist Architecture (1983)
WESTERN EUROPE
Herman Danse, Houten Kappen in Nederland 1000-1940(1989)
Friedrich Ostendorf,
Die Geschichte des Dachwerks (1908)
Patrick Hoffsummer (ed), Roof Frames from the 11th Century to the 19th Century (2002)
1198 Daigöji sutra, Fushimi-ku, Kyoto
1230-1333 Myödöji Amidadö, Yunomae, Kumamoto
1230-1333 Köryüji Keikyün, Uzumasa, Kyoto
zß:
1280 Ridderzaal, The Hague
1325 Reformist Church, 1386 St. Martin's Brouwershaven	Cathedral, Utrecht
1353 Eihöji kaisàn* Tajimi, Gifu ™
• i
1400-1450 Church
of Brothers, De
15th century
St. Leonhard, Tamsweg, Austria
SOUTHERN EUROPE
1216-1239
Madeleine Church Aube Department, Troyes
1220-1330 Notre Dame Cathedral, Paris
1356-1379 Saint-Etienne Cathedral, Auxerre
ßr~ Mit
1387 San Miniato al Monte, Florence
1481 Notre Dame Cathedral, Reims
14th century Old St. Peter's Basilica, Rome (renovation)
EASTERN EUROPE & RUSSIA
David Buxton, The Wooden Churches of Eastern Europe (1982)
460
0	10 m
SCALE
20 m
1405 Gure Amir Mausoleum, Samarkand, Uzbekistan
1600-1625 Saint ]ohn Cathedral,
1760 Lutheran Church, The Hague
Late 15th century
St Stephan, Vienna
16th century St. Bartholomai Church, Wolburg
First half of 16th century 1520 Saint-Merry Church, Paris
Yvonne Church,
Saint-Martin-des-Champs
Chateau chapel, Vincennes
1676-1685 Sainte-Croix Cathedral, Orleans
1642 Belaya Sluda, !■ Krasnoborsk
1714 Kizhi Cathedral of Transfiguration
1764 Kizhi Church of Intercession
1798 Kizhi Church of Intercession
1854 Bird's eye view of an "Idéal Cathédral," in Viollet-le-Duc's Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du XI e au XVI e siècle, Vol 2, plate 18, 234.
PAGE 78
THE RAIN PIPE
The only architect to write extensively about the rain pipe is Eugène Viollet-le-Duc. In his 1854 Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du XI e au XVI e siècle, he reveals the intricacies of gothic rainwater management... (excerpt here from pages 502-509).
Pipe Metal pipe, terracotta,
stone, serving toTonduct the
jifSiTCr either in a horizontal plane, or from the top of a building to its base. Romans often had vertical lines in their great monuments to get rid of stormwater through the buildings. Auditoriums and theaters especially, which had a considerable area of bleachers directly exposed to rain, had at intervals of just perforated vertical drains through the masonry and brought the water on the ground. In buildings of more simple construction, such as temples, basilicas and private homes, rainwater fell from the roofs on the ground freely, either at the end of the hedge, or passing through small gargoyles breakthroughs in gutters of stone or terracotta.
It was so natural means used by Roman architects, which only made buildings of great simplicity of plan and covered by a roof with two drains. However, there were some circumstances where you felt the need to collect rainwater, and thus lead them. In the cloisters of monasteries, in the courtyards of castles, often built on high places, sources were missing and could not obtain water supply only if they dig cisterns in which they led the waters attic, avoiding the pass on the ground to have them as pure as possible. So establishing the gutters of stone or wood falling roofs, builders stood at intervals,
j	— 502 —
CONDUITE, s. f. Tuyau de métal, de terre cuite ou de pierre, servant à conduire les eaux, soit sur un plan horizontal, soit verticalement, du sommet d’un édifice à sa base.
Les Romains disposaient souvent des conduites verticales dans leurs grands monuments pour se débarrasser des eaux pluviales à travers les constructions. Les amphithéâtres et les théâtres particulièrement, qui présentaient une surface considérable de gradins exposés directement à la pluie, possédaient de distance en dislance des égouts verticaux simplement perforés à travers la maçonnerie et qui amenaient les eaux sur le sol. Dans les édifices d’une construction plus simple, les temples, les basiliques et les habitations particulières, les eaux pluviales tombaient des toits sur le sol librement, soit à l’extrémité de la couverture, soit en passant à travers de petites gargouilles percées dans des chéneaux de pierre ou de terre cuite. Ce moyen si naturel fut employé par les architectes romans, qui ne construisirent guère que des édifices d’une grande simpli-cité de plan et couverts par des combles à deux égouts. Cependant il était certaines circonstances où l’on sentait le besoin de recueillir les eaux de pluie, et par conséquent de les diriger. Dans les cloîtres des abbayes, dans les cours des châteaux, bâtis souvent sur des lieux élevés, les sources manquaient, et l’on ne pouvait se procurer des approvisionnements d’eau qu’à la condition de creuser des citernes dans lesquelles on conduisait les eaux des combles, en évitant de les faire passer sur le sol, afin de les avoir aussi pures que possible. Alors, établissant des chéneaux de pierre ou de bois à la chute des combles, les constructeurs élevaient, de distance en distance, des piles creuses munies à leur sommet d’une cuvette qui recevait les eaux amenées par les pentes de ces chéneaux. Ces piles étaient presque toujours isolées, ne participaient pas à la construction, et l’on évitait ainsi les infiltrations lentes, mais très-funestes, de l’humidité dans les bâtisses. Nous avons encore vu, le long du mur du collatéral sud de la nef de l’église .abbatiale de Vézelay, des conduites isolées destinées à diriger les eaux pluviales tombant sur les combles dans la citerne creusée au centre du cloître. Ces conduites n’appartenaient pas à la construction primitive, mais à l’époque où le cloître fut construit, c’est-à-dire à la fin du xh* siècle. Elles étaient bâties en assises de pierre carrées, percées au centre d’un trou cylindrique, avec entailles circulaires dans les lits pour recevoir le ciment.
Voici quelle était (1) la forme extérieure de ces conduites : en A, on voit une des pierres avec l’entaille circulaire de son lit. Nous avons souvent vu, dans des châteaux des xn* et xin' siècles, des conduites carrées de pierre ménagées dans l’épaisseur des constructions (conduites qu’il ne faut pas confondre avec les porte-voix), et qui étaient destinées à envoyer dans des citernes les eaux pluviales tombant sur les combles. Lorsqu’au xm' siècle la construction des églises dut présenter des combinaisons compliquées, des surfaces très-considérables de combles recevant les eaux pluviales, les architectes songèrent tout d’abord à se débarrasser des eaux
PAGE 79
— 503 —	[ coW
par le plus court chemin, c’est-à-dire en les faisant couler des chéneaux sur les chaperons des arcs-boutants jusqu’à des gargouilles très-saillantes qui les rejetaient sur le sol en dehors du périmètre de l’édifice. Divisant ces eaux en une infinité de jets, ils diminuaient considérablement ainsi leur effet destructif. Ce moyen, qui est toujours le meilleur lorsque les matériaux employés dans les parties inférieures des bâtisses sont solides
et ne craignent pas la gelée, qui permet de s’assurer continuellement de l’état des conduites, puisqu’elles sont à l’air libre, est désastreux lorsque la pierre employée dans les soubassements est gélive ou poreuse ; car alors celte quantité de cascades, mouillant les parements inférieurs, ne tardent pas à les salpêtrer et môme à les détruire. Ces inconvénients furent reconnus évidemment par les architectes «lu xnr siècle, puisque, dans plusieurs grands édifices de cette époque, nous voyons les conduites fermées verticales remplacer les gargouilles. En Normandie et en Picardie, où le climat est humide elles matériaux sensibles à la gelée, les conduites d’eau furênt adoptées dès 1230 environ dans certaines églises. A Baveux, nous voyons les arcs-boutants de la nef amener les eaux des combles supérieurs dans des conduites de plomb incrustées dans les contre-forts. Ces conduites sont apparentes ou masquées de deux en deux assises ; elles se trouvent ainsi protégées contre les chocs extérieurs, et visibles cependant, s’il survient une rupture.
Voici (2) en A le plan de celle disposition, en B l’élévation des parties des contre-forts munies de conduites, et en C le détail des incrustcments cylindriques contenant les tuyaux de plomb légèrement aplatis du côté des
batteries fitted to
their top ofenWwl which received the water brouc the slopes of these gutters. These batteries were almost always isolated, did not participate in the construction, and thus avoided the slow infiltration, but very deadly, moisture in buildings. We have seen along the wall of the south aisle of the nose of the abbey church of Vezelay, isolated pipes for a direct rainwater falling on the roof in the tank dug in the center of the cloister. These lines did not belong to the original building, but by the time the cloister was built, that is to say at the end of the twelfth century. They were built of square stone foundation, drilled in the center of a cylindrical hole, with circular indentations in the beds to receive the cement. Here is what was the external shape of the ducts (1): in A, we see one of the stones with circular notch bed. We have often seen in the castles of twelfth and thirteenth centuries, square stone lines formed in the thickness of construction (pipes should not be confused with the megaphone), and which were intended to send in tanks rainwater falling on the roof. When in the thirteenth century the building of churches have had complicated combinations of very large roof surfaces receiving rain water, architects first thought to get rid of spirits by the shortest way, that is to
I
PAGE 80
say by the flow of gutters on chaperones buttresses to very ^^fflnent gargoyles who rejected on the ground outside the perimeter of the building. Dividing the waters in endless jets, they decreased significantly their destructive effect. This method is always the best when the materials used in the lower parts of the buildings are strong and not afraid from frost, which ensures continuous state lines, since they are in the open air, is disastrous when the stone used in foundations is frosable or porous, for then this amount of waterfalls, wetting the lower siding, not slow to the treat with neglect and even destroy them. These disadvantages were clearly recognized by the architects of the thirteenth century, as in many large buildings of this era, we see the vertical closed conduits replacing the gargoyles. In Normandy and Picardy, where the climate is humid and frost sensitive materials, water pipes were taken from about 1230 in some churches. In Bayeux, we see the flying buttresses of the nave bring water higher roof in lead pipes embedded in the buttress. These lines are visible or hidden every two seats, they are well protected against external shocks, and visible however, if a break happens.
Here (2) in A the plan of this provision, in B the elevation of the buttress parts equipped with pipes, and in C the details
T conduite ]	— 504 —
ouvertures pour laisser passer les petits linteaux D. Les contre-forts des arcs-boutants du chœur de la môme église contiennent des tuyaux de
descente moins bien disposés que ceux donnés ci-dessus, en ce qu’ils sont ncrustés au milieu de ces contreforts et ne sont vus que par deux petites
meurtrières. En plan (3), ces tuyaux sont placés en A, les meurtrières en B, et les débouchés ou dauphins dans une gargouille placée en C. Du chéneau supérieur du grand comble, les eaux sont amenées dans la rigole
— 505 —	[ CONDUITE
des arcs-boutants, de môme par des conduites passant à travers un contre-fort terminé à sa partie inférieure par une tête formant dauphin (voy. ce mot). Nous trouvons, au-dessus des arcs-boutants de la nef de la cathédrale de Sées(1230 environ), une disposition analogue, mais préférable à celle adoptée à Bayeux, en ce que les contre-forts contenant les conduites de
chute des eaux du grand chéneau ne sont que des coffres, des appendices crevés à leur base verticalement, sans coudes ni ressauts, de manière à éviter tout engorgement. Voici (4) en A la section horizontale de ce« conduites, en B leur élévation perspective, en C la coupe sur l’axe de la conduite. Habituellement, comme nous l’avons indiqué en D, les conduite:;
ni. — 64
of cylindrical incrustements
containing leSTl’pipes slightly
flattened on the side to let small lintels D. The buttresses of the choir of the church contain downspouts less willing than those listed below, in that they are embedded in the middle of the buttress and are seen only by two small slits. Plan (3), these pipes are placed in A, the loopholes in B and opportunities in a gargoyle or runners placed in C. From the upper gutter of great height, the water is brought into the gutter flying buttresses, and by lines passing through a counter has completed its bottom by a head forming dolphin. We find over the buttresses of the nave of the cathedral of Sees (about 1230), a similar provision, but preferable to that adopted in Bayeux, in the buttress containing lines falling waters of the great gutter are only chests, punctured appendages to their full height, without bends or projections, so as to avoid congestion.
Here ( 4) the horizontal section of the pipes, in B their perspective elevation, and C the horizontal section on the pipe. Usually, as we indicated in D, the vertical lead pipes encased in stone chests have expanded their bowl top and the edges are pinched under the seat of the gutter, the opening thereof forming drip under the lower berth. In this case, the water flowing into the hole on one side, this drip exists only in the
PAGE 82
I
INDUITE ]	— 506 —
verticales de plomb enfermées dans des coffres de pierre ont leur sommet élargi en cuvette et dont les bords sont pincés sous l’assise du chéneau l’orifice de celui-ci formant larmier sous le lit inférieur. Dans le cas présent, l’eau ne coulant vers l’orifice que d’un côté, ce larmiep n’existe que sous la chute, ainsi que nous l’avons tracé en E. Dans les grands édifices élevés au commencementduxin' siècle, les eaux des chéneaux supérieurs se déversaient par des gargouilles à gueule bée sur les chaperons non creusés des arcs-boutants, comme à lacathédraie de Reims encore aujourd’hui. Les eaux dégradaient rapidement ces chaperons: on leur donna la section d’un canal; mais le vent poussait le jet des gargouilles en dehors de ces canaux, c’est pourquoi on adopta les chutes verticales enfermées dans des cofTres de pierre au-dessus des tôles des arcs-boutants. Toutefois, quand même les eaux des combles supérieurs des grands édifices étaient menées par des conduites, celles-ci n’arrivaient qu’au niveau des chéneaux des chapelles ou bas côtés, et de là elles étaient rejetées sur le sol par des gargouilles, suivant la méthode la plus ordinaire. Les contre-forts supérieurs du chœur de la cathédrale d’Amiens recevant les arcs-boutants (1260 environ) laissent voir, dans l’un de leurs angles rentrants, de longues entailles cylindriques destinées à recevoir des tuyaux de descente de plomb qui n’ont jamais été posés (5); la môme disposition est adoptée pour l’écoulement des eaux pluviales dans la cathédrale de Ncvers.En A est tracée la section horizontale de ces entailles. Les eaux descendent des chéneaux supérieurs par les caniveaux B servant de chaperonsà la claire-voie des arcs-boutants. Dans l’épaisseur du contre-fort, au niveau C, est une cuvette qui devait recevoir ces eaux pour les rejeter dans la conduite verticale posée dans l’entaille. Ce n’est qu’en Angleterre que nous trouvons, dès le xiv* siècle, des conduites de plomb aboutissant à la base des édifices. Au lieud’ôtre cylindriques, ces conduites donnent, en section horizontale, un carré, et cela était fort bien raisonné. Un cylindre ne peut se dilater; il en résulte que, dans les fortes gelées, si les conduites s’engorgent, l’eau glacée prenant un volume plus fort que l’eau à l’état liquide, ces conduites sont sujettes à crever. Un tuyau d^it la section est carrée peut se dilater, et les ruptures sont moins à craindre. Ces tuyaux de plomb, posés le plus souvent dans des angles rentrants, sont faits par parties entrant les unes dans les autres, comme nos tuyaux de fonte de fer, avec collets et colliers de fer ou de bronze qui les maintiennent à leur place ; ils sont surmontés de cuvettes également de plomb, et de dauphins à leur partie inférieure (6).
Au xvi' siècle, on posa souvent des conduites de plomb cylindriques dans les grands édifices français, et ces tuyaux sont presque toujours décorés de reliefs ou de dorures. On en voit d’assez beaux sur les côtés du portail méridional de la cathédrale de Beauvais. On en rencontrait en grand nombre dans les châteaux de la renaissance; mais ces objets ont été enlevés à la fin du dernier siècle pour être fondus.
L’écoulement des eaux pluviales était, pour les architectes du moyen
fall, and we have drawn it in E.
In large buildings'Duilt at the ^Pi^mingof the 13th century, the waters of the upper gutters poured by gargoyles a gaping mouth on non-peak chaperones flying buttresses, as the Reims Cathedral today. The waters quickly degrade these chaperones: they were given a section of a channel, but the wind blew the spray from the gargoyles outside of these channels, so falling vertically locked in stone chests above was adopted heads flying buttresses. However, even the waters of the upper roof of tall buildings were led by pipes, they did only reach the level of gutter chapels and aisles, and were rejected on the ground by gargoyles, following the most common method. The upper buttress of the choir of the Cathedral of Amiens receiving buttresses (about 1260) let see, in one of their nips, long cylindrical notches for receiving downspouts lead who never been raised (5), and the same rule was adopted for storm water runoff in Nevers Cathedral. In A is drawn the horizontal section of the bowels. The waters fall from the upper eaves gutters B by using chaperones has clerestory buttresses. In the thick buttress, at C, is a dish that should receive these waters for discharge into the vertical pipe placed in the notch. It is only in England that we find, from the fourteenth
âge, un sujet de préoccupations constantes, li est facile de reconnaître
century, lead pipes leading to
the base of the buildings. Instead of being cylindnc^^^ these pipes give, in horizontal section, a square, and it was well reasoned. A cylinder cannot expand, it follows that, in strong frost, where pipes clog, icy water taking a greater water volume in the liquid state, these pipes are subject to burst. A pipe section which is square can expand, and the breaks are less to fear. These lead pipes, installed mostly in inside corners are made by incoming parts into each other, as our cast iron pipes with collars and collars iron or bronze that keep them in their place, they are overcome cuvette also lead, dolphins and the lower part (6).
In the 16th century, we often put cylindrical pipes in major French buildings, and these pipes are almost always decorated with reliefs or gilding. We see enough of the beautiful shores of southern portal of the cathedral of Beauvais. We met large numbers in the castles of the renaissance, but these objects were removed at the end of the last century to be melted. The storm water runoff was, for the architects of the Middle Ages, a matter of constant concern. It is easy to recognize that they often hesitate between the system that has to drive the water and allow to open, and the one that leads in closed pipes. Both of these systems have their drawbacks
TE ]	— f>08 —
qu'ils ont souvent hésité entre le système qui porte à conduire les eaux et ¡\ les rejeter à ciel ouvert, et celui qui consiste à les diriger dans des tuyaux fermés. L’un et l’autre de ces deux systèmes ont leurs inconvénients et leurs avantages. Le premier mouille les parements et les soubassements en particulier; mais si la pierre employée est compacte, si elle n’est pas sensible à la gelée, cette humidité extérieure est bientôt enlevée par l’air et le soleil. 11 a l’avantage de permettre un entretien facile, puisque tous les canaux sont visibles à l’air libre ; il ne cause pas les engorgements, les dégradations cachées, qui n’apparaissent que lorsque le mal est produit. Le second obvie à ces lavages des parements extérieurs ; il conduit les eaux sur des points lixes; il ne produit pas autour d’un édifice ce déluge qui en rend les abords insupportables ; mais il demande une surveillance constante, surtout pendant les alternatives de gelée et de dégel; il produit des engorgements dans les temps de ’neige, est sujet à des ruptures auxquelles il est difficile souvent de remédier, et dont on ne s’aperçoit que lorsque les dégradations qu’elles causent ont fait des ravages profonds dans les constructions. Il ne faudrait donc pas prescrire d'une manière absolue l’un ou l’autre de ces deux systèmes. C’est à l’architecte à les employer comme il convient, suivant le lieu et en raison des matériaux employés. Toutefois nous devons dire que, dans de très-vastes édifices publics où la surveillance ne peut être exercée comme dans une construction particulière et un lieu habité journellement, les conduites de métal et surtout de fonte de fer, qui se brisent si facilement sous l’effort de l’eau glacée, ont de très-grands dangers, que leur engorgement ou le faible suintement qui se produit à chaque joint finissent par altérer les parements et y entretenir une humidité permanente. Les tuyaux de plomb sont les meilleurs, en ce qu’ils conservent une certaine flexibilité cl peuvent se dilater, surtout les tuvaux à section carrée. Un soin extrême dans l’établissement de
and advantages. The first wet
siding and fourirotions in
HPI^ularTbut if the stone used is compact if it is not sensitive
I to frost, the outdoor humidity is soon removed by the air and sun. It has the advantage of easy maintenance, since all channels are visible in the open air, it does not cause congestion, damage hidden, that appear only when the damage has occurred. The second has obviated these exterior siding washes, he brings water to fixed points, it does not happen around a building that go around the unbearable, but it requires constant monitoring, especially during the alternatives of frost and thaw, it produces congestion in times of snow, is a subject which breaks it is often difficult to overcome, and which cannot be seen that when the damage they have caused havoc in the constructions. One should not therefore prescribe strictly one or the other of these two systems. It is the architect's use as appropriate, depending on the location and the materials used. However, we must say that in very large public buildings where supervision cannot be employed as a special construction and a daily inhabited place, metal ducts and especially cast iron, that break so easily under the effort of ice water, have very great danger that their congestion or low seepage that occurs at each
— 509 —	1
ces tuyaux et dans les scellements de leurs colliers, un isolement complet et des gargouilles de trop-plein, en cas d’engorgement, peuvent toutefois remédier à ces inconvénients.
CONGÉ, s. m. {congié). On désigne ainsi la transition entre une moulure et un parement. Dans la colonne romaine, on nomme congé, la courbe qui relie le fût de la colonne au filet inférieur posé sur la base. Soit (1) un profil de base romaine, A est un congé. Dans l’architecture romane et surtout dans l’architecture gothique, le fût des colonnes étant d’une seule venue, c’est-à-dire ne portant pas de saillie inférieure, la base ne porte
pas de congé, et le premier tore de cette base reçoit immédiatement le fût de la colonne (voy. Base). Il en est de même de l’astragale du chapiteau ; celte moulure n’a point de congé, sauf d’assez rares exceptions, pendant l’époque romane primitive. On désigne aussi, dans l’architecture du moyen ûge, par congé ou congié, la fin, la terminaison d’une moulure taillée, par une arête vive. Le mol exprime bien, en effet, l’objet ; c’est un congé donné à la moulure de cesser d’être. Ainsi, dans les édifices du xir siècle particulièrement, on voit souvent des arêtes abattues, soit par un simple biseau, soit par une moulure, qui ne descendent pas jusqu’au sol, mais s’arrêtent à l’assise inférieure ou sur un bandeau, et passent à l’angle droit au moyen de congés dont la forme est très-variée. La fig. 2 reproduit plusieurs exemples de ces congés, empruntés tous à des monuments de la fin du xn' siècle, appartenant à la Bourgogne ; car il faut dire que c’est dans cette province où l’on trouve le plus de ces sortes de terminaisons de moulures. La beauté de la pierre de taille engageait les appa-reilleurs à conserver les lits intacts et les arêtes vives à l’origine de chaque membre d’architecture. Il est de cescongésqui sont d’une richesse remar-
A.
joint, eventually affect siding
and are maintaining a constant
humidity. Lead pipes best, in that they retain some flexibility and can expand, especially pipes square. Extreme care in the preparatior of these hoses and seals of their necklaces, complete isolation and gargoyles overflow, in case of congestion, can however overcome these drawbacks.?
PAGE 86
DOMES: COSMIC HOUSES
Known since the Stone Age, the dome is universally employed to project power, belief, mourning, annunciation, and celebration. These meanings most likely, in different civilizations and at different periods, gave the incentive to translate the idea of ancient tents, laube, maphalia, vihara, and kubba into monumental structures of wood, brick, stone, or concrete. The process was neither wholly independent of nor indigenous to any civilization. Historically, the dome has been an urban societal focal point, a covered place of worship, the seat of authority, the audience hall where proclamations were read, a memorial or venerated tomb for rulers and saints...
mosques, audience halls, and dining rooms, and described with a plethora of words - tholos, pine cone, omphalos, helmet, tegurium, kubba, kaiube, maphalia, vihara, parasol, amalak tree, cosmic egg, heavenly bowl - the dome is probably the most powerful and longest surviving architectural societal gesture.
In middle Latin doma meant 'house,' 'roof' and only at times 'cupola.' During the middle Ages and the Renaissance it was used all over Europe to designate a revered house, a Domus Dei. This persistent association with the idea of an important house survived in the Italian duomo, the Germanic dom, meaning cathedral and, as late as 1656, in the English dome, meaning town-house, guild' hall, state-house, and meeting-house in a city.

1857 Political dome: an early American state capitol building, St. Paul, Minnesota.
White,feimultanept4a^.u§ed by Pagans, Jews, Christians, Nylis andA:ddhists for tombs, memorials, shrines, tabernacle^Knag^^es, cibria, baldachins, proto-^W^Rs, jRrtyri|^g^isteries, churches, fire temples,
PAGE 87
2014 Sacred dome: newly constructed mosque in Hatta, United Arab Emirates. The dome provides orientation and organisation for the urban context.
During the 17th century, however the original meaning began to fade into poetic usage and by 1660 dosme in France had acquired the specific meaning of a cupola rault, which in the course of the 18th century became standard usage for dome in English.
'n 1951, Baldwin Smith publishes The Dome: A Study in the History of ideas in which he explores the origins and "tfluences of domes specifically in the ancient world, the following pages contain some highlights of his study 1nked to contemporary domescapes.
473
5th century Tomb of Bizzos at Ruweha, Syria
Most ancient domes were probably made of wood and none of these have survived. The tomb of Bizzos is one of the few extant free-standing domes of masonry left from the ancient Arab world. Historian Baldwin Smith describes its construction: "It's shape is a pointed, slightly bulging, conoid and is made of cut stone, fitted together without mortar and set upon a square chamber located to the south of the east end of the church. The rings above were inclined back at a slight angle, so that the bricks of each ring, laid flatwise, adhered till the ring was completed, no centering of any kind being required; the vault thus formed was elliptic in section, arising from the method of its construction. A similar system of construction was employed for the vault over the great hall at Ctesiphon, where the material used was fired bricks or tiles of great dimensions, cemented with mortar; but the span was close upon 25 meters, and the thickness of the vault was nearly 1.5 meters at the top, there being four rings of brickwork."
It is probable, according to Smith, that the large vaults of the Assyrian palaces were constructed in the same way,
"but with sunburnt bricks dried only in the sun: one of the drains discovered by Sir Austen Henry Layard at Nimrud was built in rings sloping backwards. From the fact that each Assyrian monarch on his accession to the throne commenced his reign by the erection of a palace, it is probable that, owing to the ephemeral construction of these great vaults, half a century was the term of their existence. This may also account for the fact that no domed structures exist of the type shown in one of the bas-reliefs from Nimrud; the tradition of their erection, however, would seem to have been handed down to their successors in Mesopotamia, to the Sassanians, who in their palaces in Firouzabad built domes of similar form to those shown in the Nimrud sculptures, the chief difference being that, constructed in rubble stone and cemented with morta®H|§y still exist, though probably abandoned on the Islamic invasion in the 7th century."
474
2013 National Assembly of Angola
1,500 years later, based on technology from the same region: "UAE based PCT [Premiere Composite Technologies] has successfully installed the New Assembly Hall in Angola in less than six weeks inclusive of all touch-up works. The main contractor and PCT's direct client is the Portuguese construction company Teixeira Duarte. The dome was designed by Dar Al Handasah and consists of 150 advanced composite panels, with a diameter of 42 meters and a height of approximately 23 meters, measuring 2.4x11.5 meters and a total composite area of 4,100m2. The dome manufacturing duration was estimated between 16 to 20 weeks. All the prefabricated panels were shipped to Luanda and assembled in record time averaging 130-150m2 of watertight dome cladding (or six panels) per day. This brings the total installed surface to an average of 800-900m2 per week. The dome is finished with terracotta colored glass mosaic tiles and the white projected ribs are lit up by LED fittings to illuminate the decorative elements externally during the night overlooking the majestic Angolan Capital city of Luanda. The composite dome is PCT's largest built dome to date and first in Angola and will form the visual centerpiece of the new National Assembly Hall." (from press release, PCT, 2013)
PAGE 90
DOME: ANCIENT CONNECTIONS
"The mundus [dome] gets its name from the 'sky' above our heads; indeed its she M. Porcius Cato, Notes on Cases: ceilings of the Domus aurea (2nd century BC)
^sembles the sky.'
"Their royal tent and courts of round awnings were Sailed Heavens."
— Hesychius, about Achaemenid Kinf^TOtPersia, 550-330 BC (5th century)
Inferences of theuses of domes in ancient architecture reveal a consensus: the dome was a shared expression to ®P??lfsthe divine, from the Roman Empire, to India, the early Christian and Sassanian East, and later in the Islamic Empire. Probably based on popular demand, the dome has no clear point of origin. It is rather considered an elaborate network of exchange which fueled the diverse meanings of domical traditions and led to its popularity and monumental use throughout the ancient world. Below: a possible road map of interconnected domical traditions.

MAEOTÏ
rotor
CASPIAN SEA
Cand.tr >,in*
Parthian
NVmphii
Pciairins
1.	Asian imperial audience tents (central Asian plateau) The Central Asian mnomas had always lived, as many of them do today, in domed, kabitka tents, like those described by Marco Polo, Calijo, and other medieval travelers. Two of these Asiatic traditions, one the audience tents of the Achamenid kings, and the other the Semitic qobba which the pre-lslamic Arabs had inherited, were most influential in the development of domical ideas in the Near East. The general shape and appearance of these royal tents of Persia, which according to Marco Polo could at least cover a thousand people, was presumably similar to the great domical tents of the Mongol Khans, and were not essentially different from the vast audience tent used by the Chinese Emperors.
2. Indian dome The Indian subcontinent might have an even more ancient dome history than others, with its origin even harder to discover. There is some proof of wooden dome structures

L, h relief works at various ancient temples ^^Enut India- Like the martyrium tradition, BP. {he network of traveling tents, these might ^^Kve||ed west. Scholars studying the ancient ®Lara treatises suggest that early Indian ^Itees about (domed) monasteries might have fenced Vitruvius in writing his De Architecture.
a9ans: Domus Aurea (299 AD, Antioch, Vna)The most significant aspect In the ^htilatlon of domical architecture was the »stence among the Arab tribesmen, prior to ®r cunquest of Syria and Palestine, of a native re''9'°us habitation, also called the K®rd Tent of the World.' These tents were pavilions transported on the backs of palla^S anc* °ffen carried into battle as a kind of Um' These Eastern Ideas came to Rome
during the reign of Nero. Nero adopted the cosmic tent of Alexander the Great, who as "the Son of Heaven" had a tent made with 50 gilded posts, as an imperial cultus symbol of heavenly covering, confirming Roman emperors in their role of a divine and cosmic ruler. The Eastern Inspired prototype for the new Roman imperial baldachin was a round and presumably domelike tent with celestial decorations probably based on the sacral audience tents of Acheamenid rulers. This conception of a universe shaped as a tent In which the Son of Heaven would appear, gave a new impetus to domical symbolism in Rome and throughout its Empire, as in the Diocletian Domus Aurea In Antioch, in which the kosmokrator dined and gave audiences beneath a revolving and astronomically decorated cupola of wood which "went around the world day and night."
3. Pagans: the Marneion (130 AD, Gaza) One
of the most renowned pagan temples in the Syro-Palestlnian region, the Marneion presumably had a wooden dome. The temple was dedicated to Marnas, a sky god, who was probably a Palestinian adaptation of Cretan Zeus, ruler of the universe, who was praised in a free standing structure, bulbous and perhaps with a pointed top like a pine cone. After its destruction In the 5th century it was replaced with a Christian temple using the earlier Pagan domed plan.
6.	Muslims: Qubbar-as Sakhra, Dome of the Rock (689-91, Jerusalem) According to Smith, only a deeply-rooted belief in the symbolism of the domical shape in the cultures of Syria and Arabia explains why the Arabs appropriated the domical structure for much the same purposes as Pagans and Christians used it. The Dome of the Rock was constructed as a copy of the wooden dome over the Holy Sepulchre. After being burned In the 11th century, it was replaced with an Identical wooden structure, which makes the dome one of the oldest surviving timber constructions of such significance today. The Dome of Rock has - since the Quran gives little architectural requirements for worshipping - served as a model for mosques throughout the Islamic Empire.
5.	Christians: Holy Sepulchre church (335 AD, Jerusalem) Covering the memorial tomb of Christ and erected by order of Constantine, who tried to assert his claim to divinity through his construction of the church. It is assumed that the temple's first domed construction was Influenced by other temples In the region and followed the Roman tradition of the martyrium (domed burial tomb). The sepulchre dome was highly admired by both Romans and Arabs and most likely served as the model for the Qubbar-as Sakhra (Dome of the Rock). Burned in 614 AD, rebuilt In 630 and then burned again In 1109, the destruction of the dome caused outrage in Europe which led to the crusades.
PAGE 92
POLITICAL DOMES: 1855-2014
Arguably the US Capitol building in Washington DC has the most famous dome in the world. Its dome is the center piece for media in framing US politics for global consumption. Its history is far from univocal: the product of a mix of five European domesntwas positioned by Lincoln to serve as a symbol of unity, which in turn inspired an OTTspring of 39 state capitol domes, and while the US is wearying of its dome traditi^^urrently six copies exist in China.
The current US ca^oldome is the second dome to cover the capitol building. Due to the various ns of the building, the first dome, by Bullfinch from 1823, had lost its original proportion 7n the overall design. Congress decided to design a new dome in 1855, which would take ten years to construct. During the civil war most construction work to the capitol was halted, but President Lincoln makes it a priority to finish the dome and would be the first president to be inaugurated beneath it, in 1865. The new dome is designed by Thomas Ustick Walter and is a mixture of the domes of St. Peter's, St. Paul's, St. Isaac's, the Dome of the Invalides, and the Pantheon in Pahs, which Walter had studied first hand during a European tour in 1838. From London's St. Paul's cathedral Walter copied its peristyle, attic, and hemisphere. He adopted almost its exact dimensions for the diameters of drum and peristyle. The proportioning of the peristyle and the hemisphere is identical to Wren's. The overall size and position is taken from the dome of Les Invalides - the chapel's 27.8-meter internal diameter is only two meters smaller than the Capitol rotunda. In total exterior height, from grade to top of hemisphere, the chapel's 73 meters is close to the Capitol's 67 meters.
Both domes sit close to their facade walls and thus display themselves more clearly than the other domes Walter had studied. In addition, almost identical dimensions occur in both exterior and interior peristylar heights and in the diameters of exterior peristyles and drum.
Despite its outward appearance as a stone dome, it is made of cast iron, a principle which Walter copies from the first fully cast iron dome - St. Isaac's in St. Petersburg. The choice of cast iron is informed by the masonry of the supporting walls which are insufficient to bear the weight of a stone cupola. In addition it is also much cheaper to construct. The combination of the exterior European look, and its internal 'fakeness' leads to classic European-American criticism and defence, with Turpin C. Bannister seemingly settling the debate in 1948: "There are of course some critics who, assuming a puristic attitude, find a philosophic disunity between form and material: They see only a false front monumentality in which lowly iron apes virtuous stone. They take special delight in pointing to the sheet-iron curtain that pretends to be a solid masonry base, and in recalling that for years the hollow columns of the peristyle were impressed to serve as chimney stacks for fireplaces curtailed by this same overhanging base... If, therefore, Walter's dome performs its simple function as an effective focus for building and city, if its soaring mass lifts the observer's spirit and arouses within him a feeling of graciousness, dignity, serenity, and confident repose, if through its eloquence it requickens his awareness of our common aspirations, we should be generous enough to bestow the accolade such quality deserves. "
Lincoln's appraisal of the dome leads to an unwritten rule extending the dome tradition to the rest of the country through its state capitol buildings. In a kind of regional branding, local capitols embed their own specific ambitions in their dome design: bigger, more expensive, smaller, similar, glided, heavier, pre-fabricated, etc. In total, 39 out of 50 states build a dome for their capitol.
The Great Depression curtails government spending, ending the tradition of domes for state capitols. No new domes have been built since. Now instead of being a copy itself, in more recent years several regional leaders in China have discovered the US capitol dome and used it in at least six cases as a model for regional capitol and justice buildings. Meanwhile in the US the capitol dome finally get a massive $60 million dollar overhaul in 2014, buckets and scaffolding proving something of an eyesore during the inauguration. Restoration work was completed in time for the inauguration of Donald Trump early 2017.
1853 Section of the US Capitol dome, showing the initial (left) and more refined cast iron structure hidden behind its stone skin.
,-,«-1790 Pantheon, Paris.
,7-t” Germain Soufflot,
laCq Raotiste Rondelet.
KiSdomei each shell fitted
She others, permits a view
2S;*.oei*»<>f >he co,,e'ed
*Tdome of the second dome
1922-1932 Nebraska, Bertram G. Goodhue. Broke tradition of US capitol with a steel-frame construction; its dome is covered in gold tiles, with eight abstract Native American thunderbirds in blue, red and yellow mosaic tiles encircling the base.
2005 Jiangyin City People's Court of Justice.
1924-1932 West Virginia State Capitol, Cass Gilbert. The last constructed in the American renaissance style in the US, the dome is just over four feet higher than the dome of the US capitol - but only partially covered in gold because due to the Great Depression.
1860-1874 California State Capitol, Miner Frederick Butler and Reuben Clarkoot.
1506-1626 St.Peters Basillica, Vatican, Michelangelo.
1931-1932 Louisiana State Capitol, Weiss, Dreyfous, & Seiferth.
2007 Huishan District, Career Center for Foreign Students.
1816-1858 St. Isaacs Cathedral, St, Petersburg, Auguste de Montferrand.
1922-1928 Washington State Capitol, Walter R. Wilder and Harry K. White. Dome is made of 1,400 machine cut stones.
1855-1863 US C¡ pitol, Washington DC.
1882-1888 Texas State Capitol, Austin, Elijah E. Myers.
1936-1938 Oregon State Capitol, Francis Keally.
2008 City Hall of Yingquan District.
1675~171° St Paul's Cathedral London, Sir Christopher Wren.
1823 US Capitol, Washington DC.
1896-1905 Minnesota State Capitol
Architect: Cass Gilbert I: one of the largest self supporting domes in the world.
1906-1920 Idaho, John E. Tourtellotte, 63 meters tall.
1932-1934 North Dakota State Capitol, Holabird & Root.
2010 Gaoxin Peoples Court of Justice, Wuxi Province.
tïïrdKinraiidi-5
ROOF
import
CAPITOL
ALLEGIANCE
CRISIS
PAGE 93 EXPORT

PAGE 94 DOMEZEEN
Despite limited attention from architecture aficionados, the tradition of dome construction persists worldwide.
A glance at recent impressive international dome construction
Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque in Abu Dhabi by Halcrow Posted 20.12.2007
Essalam Mosque in Rotterdam by WAM Architects
Posted 02.05.2011
As a testament to the vision of its founder, Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque sits majestically at the entrance to Abu Dhabi City Island, visible from the three main bridges connecting the island to the mainland, the Maqta, Mussafah and the Sheikh Zayed Bridge. The Sheikh Zayed Grand Mosque is distinguished by its pure color, clad with SIVEC marble from Macedonia.
The space desired for the Essalam Mosque is more than the allotment of the site, inspiring a vertically oriented building composed of three major spaces topped by domes: west side entrance, main space and the semicircular mihrab which indicates the direction of Mecca. The highest dome reaches 25 meters. The architecture tries to reject the obvious Dutch and Moroccan inspirations, becoming a global symbol and an extension of the Prophet's mosque in Medina.
Masjid Islamic Center Samarinda in Kalimantan Timur, Indonesia
Posted 16.05.2008
Reconstruction of the Church of Christ the Savior in Moscow by Zurab Tsereteli
Posted 19.08.2000
Second largest mosque in southeast Asia, inspiration comes from the Prophet's Mosque in Medina combined with the Great Mosque in Turkey. Main dome is covered in gold ornament.
After the death of Lenin, the original cathedral is demolished under the s a atheism dictated by the USSR on December 5, 1931. Sixty years later, tne^ Russian Orthodox Church receives permission to rebuild their cathedral, reconstruction uses different building techniques, such as pre-fabricateu domes.
ROOF
PAGE 95
Originally Intended to celebrate the 1,000-year celebration of Russian adaptation to Christianity in 1988, the holy trinity church, on Borisov Ponds near Moscow, is only completed in 2003. The Byzantine style orthodox church features a central dome in a cruciform plan with chapels on each side. The height Including the cross Is 70 meters, and the church has capacity for up receiving up to 4,000 visitors.
The construction of the US Capitol-style Yingquan district City Hall, in Fuyang, a provincial city in central China consumed nearly one third of the total revenue of the entire district. With 640,000 people, Yingquan is a poverty-stricken rural town. The per capita annual income of its farmers is slightly more than 2,000 yuan ($285). The overall size of the building Is roughly a third of the original in the US, Its dome a fourth. After the opening the mayor and a number of officials are arrested on fraud charges.
Putra Masque in Putrajaya Malaysia Posted 01.09.1997
Our Lady of Peace Basilica in Yamoussoukro by Pierre Fakhoury
Posted 10.09.1990
p ® utra Mosque has nine domes made from rose-tinted granite tiles. jE™r Composite Technologies install the 38-meter dome In seven weeks. Mr® visitors are guided to wear pink robes with pink hoods when entering mosque, which can accommodate 15,000 worshippers at any one time.
The alleged largest church in the world is located in the Ivory Coast. Constructed between 1985 and 1989, the architect designed the church after St. Peter's, but with a slightly lower dome at 158 meters.
The country's leader, Felix Houphouet-Bolgny, hoped to construct thi^^H as a symbol of political tranquility. Made entirely of ptarble.nhe cost of construction doubled the country's national d|m. I
PAGE 96
20TH CENTURY ROOFTOP EXCHANGES
1905 Frank Lloyd Wright travels to Japan for the first time In March 1905. His photos of the visit reveal a specific interest in the famous shrines and temples, especially the Great Hall of the Temple of Higashi Hongan-ji In Nagoya. The dramatically present roof of the temple alledgedly inspired Wright in the design of the double-eaved roof for the Frederick Roble House, finished in 1910.
Silesia. A shortage of construction experiment in perfecting thatch.
As world-wide communication and travel continues to increase in the 20th century, so does the exchange and building experience of architects abroad. This section offers a collection of personal notes and observations by archfiWtstravelling abroad looking [at the roofs of others... a vibrant exchange, although seemingly with an international flattening as result...
1902 Sketches by Japanese architect Chuta Ito (1867-1954), depicting Burmese, Japanese and Indian roofscapes as hats. Ito travels widely through Asia and incorporates what he learns into his designs.
ration for May's growing frugality and resourceful-
msj Architect Sutemi Horiguchi (1895-1984) toured Europe in the early 920s and was struck the most by Holland's thatched roofs and the Amster-VL School's expressive brick construction. Back in Japan, he publishes Contemporary Dutch Architecture in 1924. Two years later he builds the first ..dependent house Shienso, merging the Japanese tea ceremony house with Dutch components. In the same year he publishes the essay "The un-urban in architecture" to accompany the Shienso completion. For Horiguchi, the antithesis to urbanism is initially represented by the "Romantic" architecture of Holland.

1927 Robert Wenzhao was one of the first generation of Chinese architects trained in the US in the 1920s. His early designs are a combination of modem western facades with a Chinese roof. "In some Chinese big cities, we can easily see a mix of Chinese and Western style buildings, especially m Shanghai," Wenzhao writes. "These buildings adopt a western style facade, and Chinese style r°of." He rejects ornamental westernisation of Chinese architecture in favor of a more modernist hybrid: "If you close your eyes and think deeply,
'1 is just like Socrates with a Chinese traditional mandarin cap; or Confucious in a western suit. It |s actually a crime, as it breaks architecture's basic sws. All architects should try to fix this problem, mce western science and technology came into hma, architecture has become a landscape of controversy, focusing on form and function. The ason why Chinese style buildings are replaced 2*W»n ones, Is that the International modern-buiwUe^*S modern life. The only thing modernist ln9.s lack is delicacy of decorations. Thus the buildings with Chinese roof prevails." HouA » "'*'ya Apartment, and Ximo Road Urban 1». The Chinese Architects (Zhongguo
nzhu) Vol. 24, 1934).
1933 A visit to Europe to attend an International Conference on Urban Housing in Belgium, and a Czech International Architect Conference radicalizes Wenzhao's view of modernity. (Wenzhao, Robert Fan. "Review of My Europe Travel," The Chinese Architects (Zhongguo Jianzhu) Vol. 24, 1934.)
Wenzhao in front of Big Ben.
At the Czech International Architecture Conference: "Architects mainly discuss new building technologies and international architecture styles."
"Buildings in exhibition all employ latest materials, glass and steel."
"Italians either do absolute conservative, or do absolute innovative. The craftsmanship is also superbly skilful."
1934 Wenzhao, returning from Europe, builds the Jiya Apartment and Ximo Road Urban Housing in Shanghai - both of which completely abandon big roofs, which he later calls a "crime."
1927 As part of his tirade against the flat roof, German architect Paul Schultze-Naumberg praises Italian roofs ("The collective roofs show a slowly pitched roof with tile covering") while distancing himself from oriental roofs, "which have a characteristic appearance which needs no following In Europe as it has a physiognomy of Its own.'
1932 Western-trained architect Yuanxl Guo Is Invited to help design the Chinese Lama Temple for the 1932 Chicago World's Fair, and 60,000 visitors pay 10 cents each just for a peak of the construction site.
1934 When Guo reports back In China about the World's Fair, he urges a transformation of Chinese architecture along the lines of the modern, efficient, and flat roofs he saw In Chicago: "The roof of the Pavllllon of Transport is constructed as a bridge. It Is 37 meters high, 95 meters diametef within of which 62 meters can be used for exhibition, while being much cheaper than the traditional roof construction method ... the flat roof Is a rapidly growing modern development; It Is a scientific and hygienic Invention. It not only Increases joys of living, It will also halve construction cost. This performance Is worthy of our attention ... the provincial architects jus transplant the palace's shapes to factories, shops and apartments, conve the ancient temples to housings, and pagodas to water towers. It confus® the public's cultural ideas."

1930	Tung Chum was part ot rne nrsi generauon oi r ic He completes his architecture degree at the Uni\
U 1929 and before returning to China decides to tra\
P eked with a Beadeker guide he visits 11 countries 'tten entirely in English - reveals a mostly unsparini "Portrait Gallery not worth seeing [London] ... Englisl Rotterdam was a waste of time ... Russia is dirty". He makes sketches and holographs of all the sights and specifically praises Gothic and modern European architecture. He also expresses strong opinions on some of the roofs he sees:
Bad: Cathedral of Magdeburg and St. Severi Cathedral, Erfurt (both roofs are detached from false front).
Good: Basel City Hall (nicely decorated dome), Cathedral of Ely (good Gothic dome), Tahrhunderthalle in Breslau (good dome, not sure of acoustics), Santa Maria della Grazie, Milan (good dome by Bramante), Pavia (excellent dome), Pisa baptistery (good dome, simple and modest),
Florentine dome (detail of the marble of the lantern very fine).
Upon his return to China, Chuin opens an architecture practice in Shanghai, and becomes one of the founding fathers of the South Eastern University in China, as well as the country's leading scholar on garden and landscape design.
Cathedral: "The outside is good but ordinary ... But the side is wonderful, especially the roof structure ... the whole effect looks very modern in spirit. The glasses are very colourful. In fact the whole thing has no fault to be found, nothing unusual in the cloister."
July 8 Breslau: "Saw the modern group called Jahrhunderthalle, a great auditorium with stepped dome of glass, very impressive inside. All of concrete & glass. Don't know how the acoustics works."
May 3,1930 Bath: "Both in Renaissance Style. But somewhat Gothic roof and chimneys, looked weird. Almost lost my way back."
August 2 Milan: "The most charming church, without doubt, is Santa Maria delle Grazie, because of its dome, which is after Bra-mente's design."
August 5 Piza: "The Santa Caterina Cathedral is very good, although the dome from outside looks very funny. The baptistery has the finest dome one can ever imagine. The outside looks superb. The inside is again so bokkandjimple that any modernistic architect would be incline« to Cod'* it The workmanship of^Br^ip is superb."

37. BRASTAGI
Reprinted fron Tuf Architmts' Journal for June IT l«)4(i
RAADHUIS
1931	Dutch architect Hendrik Petrus Berlage travels to the Dutch colonies and keeps a detailed diary of his trip. In notes from his trip to Indonesia, Berlage often refers to vernacular architecture and, inspired by Oswald Spengler's Decline of the West (1918), advocates for the inclusion of non-Western architecture into the so far Western-dominated narrative: "For this journey I anticipated to make a study of the Hindu-Dava monuments, a part of the history of architecture, in which the Western architect normally doesn't pay a lot of attention to." Deeper into his journey, when he visits the Borobodur Buddhist temple: "Where does this disparagement come from with which the entire Eastern art history is treated? Is it because we can't comprehend the Eastern spirit or do we jut not want to accept the deep beauty of its art?" Berlage does not provide detailed description of the buildings he sees and spends most of his diary entries complaining about the failur of Dutch architecture to adapt to the local environment. He seems only able to deepen his insights into the non-Western roof through a large number of drawings...
1945 Ernst May in Kenya. Accommodating construction material shortages after the war, May starts to design a roof-only-house (left) inspired by traditional Kenyan grass huts (above). Despite patenting the do-it-yourself system in various countries, only two prototypes are built.

1961 Aldo van Eyck witnesses the Dogon ritual of Dama in Mali. The ceremony informs his humanistic agenda for architecture, in which the accessibility of the roof remains an important aspect: "Although women and children are forbidden to watch a Dama [masked ceremony which terminates a period of mourning] - its very essence excludes this - they are seen here standing on the roofs in large numbers doing so! All at once a masked figure dances past the houses bordering the open space with great leaps, emitting fierce noises and throwing gravel up at those watching on the roofs. Screaming, terror stricken, the latter disappear immediately. The conflict ls resolved on both levels, the cosmic and the human. The terrifying figure who scares the women and children away actually belongs to the Dama and fulfils this particular dance function. The cosmic equipoise is thus quickly restored. But the human one also, for soon the transgressing spectators, having regained the right composure, reappear on the roofs and proceed to watch the Dama as if nothing had occurred. They are neither forcibly Prevented from doing so nor are they punished for it. Instead, in order to safeguard the houses bordering this particular open space from collapsing un er the weight of so many women and children watching what they should otwatoh, but still 'need' to watch, they are built more firmly than elsewhere th‘ .evi,!a9e- The extra material this requires is furnished by the village. Dust lnk°f (Aldo van Eyck, "A miracle of moderation," Forum, 1967-68.)
1961 Dogon granaries, documented by van Eyck.
1950s Liang Sicheng reports in China on a visit to Warsaw. He doesn't mention the roof, but does show a lot of photos of the old roofscapes.
on a platform with the
same outline a?4hat of the roof or sometimes ’ even of larger size, depending upon the importance of the building. There is magic in the play between roof and platform." (Utzon, Zodiac No. 10, Milano, 1962.)
PAGE 102
FLAT vs. PITCHED
Early modernist architecture sparked a heated debate in Europe about the flat vs. pitched roof, dividing the discipline in two: the modernists univocally supporting the flat roof, and conservatives protecting the pitched roof
In 1926 Walter Gropius launches an international questionnaire about the f^ffoof in Bauwelt. Showing a strong Th technology, taking tectonic implications for granted, architects are asked to provide detailed technical comments. Many prominent modernists answer Gropius' call. They argue that the introduction of central heating, the opportunity of an extra functional surface, its economy and flexibility will inevitably lead to a flat roofed world...
In 1927 Paul Schultze-Naumburg leads the response for the pitched roof camp by launching another questionnaire. This time the questions are less technical and more polemical, with respondents mostly from German academia. They submit that the flat roof lacks consideration of context, is merely a cubist fashion used for personal glorification, is technically and economically flawed (it leaks), a craze that will inevitably pass...
The following pages offer the translated text and outcome of the Gropius and Naumberg-Schulze questionnaires.
1926 Walter Gropius announcing the flat roof questionnaire in Bauwelt. The article would run in three consecutive issues.
1932 Postcard sent by Ludwig Mies van der Rohe featuring a satirical drawing of pitched roofs added to the flat-roofed Weissenhoff Siedlung complex In Stuttgart, mocking the old guard...
PAGE 103
prof. Dr. Paul Schultze-Naumbur
FLACHES ODER GENEIGTES DACH
MIT EINER RUNDFRAGE AN DEUTSCHE ARCHITEKTEN UND DEJREN ANTWORTEN
BERLIN 1927
VERLAG SEGER & CRAMER G.M.B.H.
1927 Paul Schultze-Naumburg publishes his rival questionnaire in a 69-page booklet.
1932	Photo collage postcard satirizing the Weissenhoff Siedlung as a flat-roofed north African village, mocking the avant-garde...
PAGE 104
The flat roof
International Questionnaire about the technical feasibility of horizontally covered roofs and balconies
Organized by
Walter Gropius, Director of the Bauhaus, Dessau
The Bauhaus, originally founded in Weimar and now continuing its work in Dessau (Anhalt), is planning to establish a research facility for all questions regarding house construction and fittings. It will make the scientific and practical results of its trials available to the general public. Hitherto there has been no central public body that has attempted to fulfill this systematic task in conjunction with the industry and specialists. In view of the rapid development of technology, builders, architects, property owners, and contractors need to be able to quickly orientate themselves with regard to innovations in the construction industry (new structures, materials, building methods). The engineer appears to be only just beginning to permeate the building industry - backward in its development compared to other sectors of industry -with his spirit and enter into a healthy and promising working group with the architect who summoned him as a helper.
This combination is indispensable, especially with a view to prefabricated housing, whose introduction throughout the civilized world appears to be imminent.
Independently of its local practical and theoretical work, the Bauhaus central research facility aims to contribute to this exchange and is beginning with the public discussion of current construction issues.
With the aid of modern technical means, modern architecture in all countries is striving to replace the conventional sloping roof by the horizontal covered roof. Numerous draft designs and statements by the best modern architects all over the world* promote cubes with horizontal roof areas as a feature of modern design. This change in shape inevitably following from a new special perception and advances in technology, in contrast to earlier roof shapes, encounters resistance from many specialists and even more laymen, with the argument that this 'oriental roof shape' is not appropriate to northern regions and not without technical problems due to the effects of snow and rain. Practical results, however, have already shown that these assertions are not sustainable.
to make the best experiences generally known throuqh a exchange of ideas and not to generally refute substantial1 counter-arguments against the new roof form in profess! ! circles and in public. For this reason the Bauhaus manant ' ment has submitted the following questions to a selection well known architects and specialists at home and abroad-0
The Five Questions
1 st Question: Given today's state of technolrai 1 do you consider a completely watertight horizontal roof 1 feasible?
2nd Question: Which solutions are in your opinion technically preferable? How long have the roofs in question been in use? (Please specify the material and layinn method, enclosing a cross-section of the cornice with water I drainage on a scale of 1:10)
3rd Question: Can in your opinion zinc sheetinq be avoided for water drainage from the horizontal roof, connections to vertical masonry and vertical penetrations of the roof membrane? (Connections to closed cornices around roof areas or balconies are crucial here, i.e. projecting beyond the actual roof membrane, as well as chimney connections and iron lattice parapets. Please draw examples on a scale of 1:10)
4th Question: What type of water drainage on roofs and balconies surrounded by a closed cornice do you consider most effective? (Drawing please, on a scale of 1:10) 1
5th Question: What form of heat insulation of a horizontal roof directly over inhabited rooms is most effective?
The essential aspect of all questions is that only materials are used that are lightweight and universally available. They should not incur costs that exceed the usual proportions and thus render the horizontal covering uneconomical.
Voices from the past
The objection that the horizontal roof is out of place in the north becomes irrelevant and groundless the moment we consider the practical advantages in execution and habitability. As such it must be admitted that rectangular attics are more practical than those beneath the old sloping roofs, that they are more accessible, that the elimination of wooden roof structures substantially improves fire safety, that the flat roof offers the wind less resistance and that extensions are possible on all sides of the building without restriction in width and height, insofar as the building site permits.
Over the past decades numerous attempts have been made to find the perfect technical solution for a horizontal roof that will withstand all weathers. The objection to the flat roof, even with craftsmen, presumably results from the fact that the horizontal Hausler type roof cladding frequently installed on a timber joist ceiling was susceptible to dry rot after 25 to 30 years, because the wood was unable to breathe sufficiently. This disadvantage ceases to apply as soon as the ceiling is poured in solid concrete or constructed in hollow concrete blocks instead of wood. The cladding of these roofs with the horizontal roof membrane in Ruberoid, Pappolein, Durumix, lead acetate paper or soft and hard asphalt must be evaluated differently in terms of life span. It is essential to determine the quality and durability of these roofing materials. However, special problems are presented by the joints of horizontal coverings to vertical masonry and the drainage of the rainwater and melted snow from these horizontal roof areas.
Given the importance of these questions for lern architecture, it would appear that the time has come ummarize the know-how of architects in this field, in order
Before the results of the survey are published, it may prove helpful to quote some interesting opinions of the past on this j subject:
Schopenhauer: The World as Will and Representation, 3rd edition, Chapter 35. The aesthetics of architecture:
"That in Italy even the simplest and most unornamented buildings make an aesthetic impression, while in Germany this is not the case, depends principally upon the fact that in Italy the roofs are very flat. A high roof is neither support nor burden, for its two halves mutually support each other, but the whole has no weight corresponding to its extension, j Therefore it presents to the eye an extended mass which is entirely foreign to the aesthetic end, serves merely a useful end, consequently disturbs the former, of which the theme is j always only support and burden."
Bernhard Christoph Faust, Dr. Hofrathe and Leibarzt,
Ritter des Roth Adler Ord. 3rd Class, Honorary Citizen of the i Town of Buckeburg, member of several societies. Article on architecture. Buckeburg 1837:
"The flat, stone roof that His Serene Highness Prince of Schaumburg-Lippe has had built on a small building in the stately garden of the Legal Advisor of Langerfeldt, near Buckeburg, on the main road to Minden, upon removal of the old roof, as a trial and first roof of its kind, according ® j the invention and instructions of Court Councillor, Dr. Fans, Honorary Citizen of the Town of Buckeburg - on the revers side of an black painted iron plaque with golden lettering" . the following inscription: 'This roof, supported by beams a | laths, consists of two layers of tiles set in black pitch.
j
Bauwelt
No. 8/ 1926
162
» h flat stone roofs, Instead of sloping roofs, give the H Sf1“’ we||.proportioned appearance, solidity, durability buildings ¡stance. The tiles are almost timeless; and no rain orfigMninS can penetrate the pitch layer.
fit, , r00fs from the earliest of times are a barbaric Inven-■P Thev disfigure man's buildings and cities in the ugliest t'00, JJ. ^ey set a ridiculous kind of Pulcinella's peaked cap 11,3,1 htah fontange - formerly favoured by women - onto the or,lfnas and destroy the general sense of proportion, order bU!t beauty ¡n people from an early stage. The long shadow k cast robs the neighboring houses of the sun's rays. They ich high into the sky and are mercilessly exposed to rain b snow shaken by wind and weather. They are frail, un-3 ind and almost always defective, admit rain and snow and ^Mse the buildings to decay. They require a large quantity of nenslve construction timber for attics and rafters, and due fn their height extremely high, heavy, costly and easily inflammable chimneys. During storms and whirlwinds, especially arthquakes, roofs and buildings collapse on the occupants. The roofs with their dark junk rooms - the attics - are the cause of all major conflagrations that reduce cities to rubble, thus also the reason for fire insurance companies and fire taxes.
"These roofs are the original sin on buildings. Flat roofs open the starry sky to man: relieve the buildings of the roofs.
"Flat roofs do not deny people sun, light and air; Diogenes beseeched Alexander not to take the sunlight from him -buildings with flat roofs are, as already mentioned, are 10, 20, 30 feet lower than buildings with pitched roofs. They do not soar into the sky; they do not suffer damage from rain, snow and wind and do not cause the buildings to decay. They give the buildings a simple, cube-like, appealing form. They offer balance and stability, the greatest strength and the longest life span. They make one's home into a safe castle, even a fortress. They are already watertight the day after completion, even after a two-day downpour. No fire from outside can ignite it, even if the building is surrounded by flames. Barns and stables, magazines, even whole towns with flat roofs, will not burn down. They are in no fire class, are exempt from fear and fire tax. They are not attacked by storms and gales and not overturned. Flat roofs, firmly joined by beams, laths, nails and layers of tiles to the main body of the building, protect the house and its occupants against the lightning from the heavens. They are of great advantage for household activities (weather observations, airing, cleaning, drying, collecting rainwater, handling large items, etc.). They provide the residents with the best opportunity, as the Romans did, to enjoy the sun and breathe fresh, cool, pure air, to take storm baths - the most wonderful of baths, as Franklin and Monboddo - amid thunder and lightning."
Changing views of tiled roofs," Bauwelt, February 23, 1924:
In view of the high esteem that tiled roofs enjoy today in a structural and aesthetic sense, we must be aware that this steem was once the exact opposite."
nr?ir>a?r 9^ an essay by Franz Kugler, published in 1842, inlet' ™ec^r'c^ Schinkel, the author talks about the latest oft|on °f the so-called 'Dorn roof' that Is inexpensive and ltre'^Pract'cal benefit, lending the building a pleasing form. c!earUlreS on^ a 9en^e slope, harmoniously blending with the thi«iei,ene 'lnes °f the classical architectural style. Flowever, s ,0"°weu by a remarkable apodosis:
¿ tied ^US remove the formless load of the previously famil-aPoea r°°^ destroys all elegance and whose barbaric •hat it ¡^nce requires considerable habituation. It is well known was these tiled roofs that drove Winckelmann (who was
referred to as the eye of beauty), from his Nordic homeland, when he returned for a visit after a long absence."
Dr. Friedrich Seesselbera, Prof. attheTechn. Flochschule, Berlin: "The flat roof in the local surroundings" (Werdandi-bund, 1913):
"So remarkable is the change in opinions concerning an object that we see around us on a daily basis and that after the antiquated emotional outbursts of the time of the Empire was reinstated in the era of romanticism."
No complicated calculation is required to recognise that flat roof construction is often far more cost efficient. From the social welfare and state perspective the question of aestheticization of the already interfusing flat roof is thus deserving of an earnest examination ... the flat roof as an indispensable condition for the development and equality of so many important new building materials and give it free reign for beautification.
Everywhere in the German provinces efforts should be concentrated on enabling normal citizens to purchase of an inexpensive home. In doing so, we should dispense with the pompous pitched roof and give priority to landscaping. A modest but attractively overgrown house will always have a charming appearance. Nevertheless, the flat roof will come into its own right. And even if attractive countryside settings are to be achieved with this roof as with the pitched roof, there can in our opinion be no doubt which of the two competing interests deserves precedence: the centralist state concept or the painter's dream. If we wanted to say: the inhabitants of the north German plain have always had steep roofs, "as a consequence it should remain that way," this conclusion is quite unjustified. In our opinion the question has absolutely nothing to do with the racial feeling. It resolves itself from the respective constructive wishes, depending on one's preference in suitable building materials.
Reinforced concrete is likewise proving to be an emerging fashion, for the benefits of this method of construction lie in the large spans. Buildings for the heavy industiy will become wider. Although the modern department store finds special advantages in neight, it exploits its walls, not its roofs. And the new wave of skyscrapers will require high walls, but not high roofs. We must also consider a major new manifestation in the form of aviation buildings. How long will it be until elevated areas must be provided everywhere at the very heart of large cities for ascending and descending aircraft? And here again it will be either expansive buildings or skyscrapers, from whose floors the aircraft can emerge in layers. Whatever the future holds, nowhere will the steep roof play a major role in our unromantic era. Now residential and small industrial buildings will have a stylistic element imposed on them, as once the steeple on the church and the flatness of today's landmark buildings. Based on these criteria, the outlook for the steep roof must be adverse, but for the flat roof extremely favourable...
PAGE 106
Architect	Question 1
Given today's state of technology, do you consider a completely watertight horizontally covered roof practicable?
Erich Mendelsohn, From my experience and practice: Yes. Berlin
Question 2
Which solutions are in yOTTTopinion technically preferabi ? How long hawHhe roofs in question been in use? (P|eas ‘ ^recify the material and laying method, enclosing a cros section of the cornice with water drainage on a scale of 1:10)
My first image shows the construction of a roof garden ceiling with an articulated cornice, executed at the office conversion E.U. Herpich So Berlich, Leipziger Strasse 9-10, Berlin. The build-up is as follows: in betv»s2l iron beams span stone-iron slabs 'System Klein' with 3 cm concrete fini which 4 cm torfoleum plates are laid in cement. On top of these plates o n cm layer of cement is added to provide for the sealing. The sealing cons’ of double layer asphalt paper, stuck using asphalt-glue. Against weather’ the seal is protected by a 7 cm thick slag-concrete layer. Iron-brick-plate"1^ were used for the floor of the roof garden. The roof was executed beqinS of 1925. My second image shows the execution of a balcony floor. Thec'^ struction Is similar to the one in image 1, only difference being that the sk’ ^ folded 30 cm upwards the wall.
Brüder Taut u. Hoffmann, Architecten, Berlin
Ludwig Hilbershelmer, Architect, Berlin
Yes.
Apart from the knowledge of the designer, form is being determined by function, construction and material. The common pitched roof was conditioned by the straw roofing, whose decline the tiled roof simply maintained. The pitched roof essentially Is a mock-up: Almost all tenement roofs in Berlin are flat roofs, only at the front, for the 'pretty looks,' a strip of tile roof is attached; quite analog to the stucco-kitsch of the façades. Behind it though lays a flat roof, which is commonly executed as simple papered roof. The papered roof is cheap, though not a proper functioning cover of a flat roof. Therefore it's hardly used above living spaces, for the most part only above attic spaces etc...
For 45 years a watertight and entirely fire-proof coated roof linen exists, which due to its weather resistance has foremost found use in low-rise buildings and in amounts of up to 120,000 m2 in China, Africa at South-Pole expeditions, etc. (roof lining by the company Weber, Falckenberg, Zernsdor i. Mark). In implementation a combined roof is preferred. Idem is made from a layer of un-sanded asphalt paper and on top of this layer the roof linen, which can be delivered in any color, laid and glued in bitumen.
The following has proved itself successfully: After adding a levelling layer of concrete on the wooden or concrete structure three layers of tar paper which are glued together. On top of that to add it accessible cement layer, or asphalt.
Dr. Ing. Richard Döder, Stuttgart
This question cannot be answered, because experiences of 5, 10 and 20 years for the durability of a structure or material in this case are insufficient for its warranty.
The known covering with "Durumfix" on timber formwork and full- or hollow stone ceilings. Roofs with this covering have been installed between 1 1/3 and 3 years, in doing so for all cases a lifelong guarantee exists on durability and impermeability with the "Durumfix" works.
Haesler, Architect This has to be answered with a yes, and should be considered superfluous in a time where the current state of technology permits the construction of subways and subterranean tunnels, in water and under water. It's obvious that given this state of technology it allows the flawless production of horizontally covered houses, house parts and balconies ... Yes, such solutions are not even new, they have already proven themselves in the course of half a century of a greater structural modification. It turned out that this roof after more than three decades was in such an impeccable, faultless condition that it just as well without any repair could have done 100 years.
For a flat roof I prefer a simple or double tar paper layer, ruberoid cover or similar species on top a sufficient level of groove casing on wooden structure; In cases of fireproof construction, I choose the same roof on a massive roof construction, such as concrete between iron beams, hollow brick ceilings and reinforced concrete floors. ... All of these roofs have a single sided inclination so that only on this one side gutters and waste pipes are required. The outer walls, with the exception of the drain side, reach high above the roof and are - in the aforementioned case - covered with a series of tiles. ... To protect these walls above the roof against atmospheric influences and to seal the connections on the roof towards these or any other side walls requires always the most careful consideration, rich experience and scrupulous execution. To cover the walls, only best pans, nitrous-free and frost-resistant, come into consideration. ...
BDM, Celle
Architecturatelier	Three roof solutions I have used here in the North:	Unfortunately my roofs have not been installed long enough.
Schneider, Hamburg Michaelsen (most expensive), Goebel
(mid-range), Hansa (cheap). In place of the asphalt layer Torfoleum is often used here. From other architects (recently), while the two houses Hansa and Michaelsen have a little slope, the house Goebel is perfectly horizontal.
Dr. Ing. Alfred Sellhorn, Berlin
Cubic design is not identical with the flat roof. Not only the dice but also the cone and ball, are according to Cézanne elements of the form. Only where a moving plan offers no roof solution without falling into gable romance, you will need to maintain a M roof. The massive attic is more expensive than the inclined; the loss of space does not matter, rather the fire safety. However, Jave covered our buildings in Halle with a wooden chair. The office building is built with a flat shed roof as a double paper roo oveka very low wooden construction, under which the massive hollow stone ceiling is calculated non accessible, and therefor is very cheap. A fully-loaded solid ceiling would be much more expensive, apart from the still necessary internal insulation). In J gutter is the usual pre-mounted gutter, the staircase has a simple reinforced concrete ceiling with cardboard pad. Condensa- | tion did not show up, since here are no high temperatures. In contrast, first the double paper roof was sweating under the w	|
offices, whereupon extractor tubes were applied, it deflated and fixed the damage. The hollow stone shed roof of the 'Lauge	5
■ on the 'Gottesbelohnungshiitte' has a paper cover with isolation underneath, installed by the Building Directorate of Mansfel
PAGE 107
1:10)
Q^’your opinion zinc sheeting'TO Canded for water drainage from the &°.	ta| roof, connections to vertical
i,°rlZ°nry and vertical penetrations of ^roof membrane? (Please sketch at
scale	. .
roof connection at eaves drawn in image For | |ead strjPj 2mm thick, was used 1. onJ cornice coping. The lead strip Joins 10 for ;n| the concrete finish and lays in-between «0int0 uyers of tar paper. The lattice bars are ^a'Twith 2mm thick lead strips and pressed on 9'r° lamp- The roof drawn in my next image is W 3 c sa| to avoid zinc-sheets at the connec-3 Awards the brickwork. The actual roof finish f heroid or tar paper) is glued 30cm up the wall nd held in place by a zinc cover...
Question 4
What type of water drainage on roofs and balconies surrounded by a closed
cornice do you consider most effective? (Drawing please^W a scale of 1:10)
The balcony ceiling shown In the second Image received for the water drainage at the balustrade, perpendicular to the slope direction, a trench of molded brick. The water drainage downwards is happening by means of connection into a cast iron pipe towards the house drain.
Question 5
What form of heat insulation of a horizontal roof directly over inhabited rooms is most effective?
The earlier discussed 4 cm thick torfoleum sheets (images 1, 2, 4) are very suitable for msui^M^M over living spaces.
In our view, zinc-
sheets can be avoided for water See sketches.
' ;nage from horizontal roofs, at connections •fh vertical masonry and vertical penetrations Wf the roof membrane. It is advisable even to use the same material for the skirt, since it is neither attacked by soot or other acids.
Torfisol or Thermos.
The water is functionally discharged inwards. The position of the drainage pipes is determined by the floor plan. Zinc-sheets must be avoided. Near the connection between the roof and the wall the Isolation has to be maximal covering the entire section. When connecting to masonry, the insulation must be conducted high-up accordingly and most Importantly cover the entire cross section of the masonry be covered with a grated piece of metal to avoid blockage.
Zinc-sheets can be avoided when the eaves together with the massive cornice are constructed as a concrete trench and sealed with "Durumflx" covering.
For the drainage of sewage one uses clay - or cast iron pipes, their sleeve allows for a proper connection of the Insulation. Image 4. The opening has to be covered with a mesh to avoid the drop of congesting objects.
Drainage is preferably conducted through short pipes from balconies or terraces directly into the open, if not permissible, through pipes inside or outside of the wall towards the sewerage.
For isolation of inhabited spaces Immediately beneath a flat roof torfoleum is recommended. The absolute costs of a properly functioning flat roof are higher than those of the common pitched roof. However the relative cost Is less, since It allows the full utilization of space, the orthogonality of spaces retained. As the dysfunctional diagonal spaces are avoided, the cost of the total usable space reduces.
A quite useful heat Insulation on the underside of the horizontal coverage is "Torfoleum" and cork sheets in various thicknesses. This measure is supported by the implementation of solid slabs in hollow blocks.
It Is also important that this wall is at least 15 cm above the roof continuously isolated with cardboard (in case of a wood cement roof at least 25 cm).... I break parapets of roofs and balconies at the appropriate place for drainage In order to derive the water through arranged channels and gutters, as water drainage inside of exterior walls is yet due to potential frost not trustworthy enough to me. ... It is to be expected that with increasing knowledge within the professional and lay world the horizontally covered - short the flat roof - will be sought after, because It meets the requirements and the attitude of our time more than the previous pitched roofs. Besides the fact that the flat roof allows the clearest and economically best fitted implementation of a building program, the so-called penthouses, which previously with the pitched roof had to be taken into account for structural and economic reasons, will cease to exist. The dimensions of the attic rooms in building with a flat roof are not dependent on the randomness of the roof form and usually In regards to an exploitation highly debilitating construction; rather they can be better adapted to the real needs and offer significant advantages In regards to cleanliness and ventilation, as well as in relation to occasional expandability. Such floor space, in conjunction with the resulting platforms of a flat covered house, can very effectively be made use of for the health of its inhabitants; because it is easy, to design platforms and floor space not only for occasional drying clothes, but also as a lounge deck space. Increasing traffic, also in residential streets, will lead to stays on flat roofs with free outlook and utmost tranquility. The fact that the flat roof comes into consideration as a suitable landing place for small aircraft, can no longer be referred to as a utopia today. If one considers, however, which spasmodic attempts are made in all areas to wretch space from pitched roofs by expansion, and if we compare these insufficient practical results and these even less satisfactory external solutions and aesthetic effects, here reason will finally prevail and new forms will be created, which will correspond to the respective contemporary popular feeling, no less than the forms of earlier times.
Zinc sheets cannot be avoided in my opinion; un- See house Michaelsen. Water collects in one less as done at the Goebel house.	Place and is released by a drain pipe.
■ • in Eisleben, which led the execution, and will surely provide information on request. ... In particular, I consider careful zinc seal at all penetrations and sewect'0ns necessary. Even concrete covers from rising masonry with a fine layer are not sufficient, since one Is always afraid for the exact crack-free r9 Drocess by sun exposure. From closed fields you best guide the water inwards into the drain pipes of the water line. Incidentally, there is also a ;a|3c,l0('.wf|ich wants to revive the expression of the building with waste pipes that are protruding, I see this as quite a possibilities a heat insulation a ® cetling with a nonchalant vented cavity, is always the simplest and cheapest, most effective and the most common to crafts
hrens, Vienna
For a long time, flat roofs have been executed and are of course also contrivable today. The choice of construction depends on: 1. The function the roof should fulfill, whereas a decisive factor is the use as a terrace, or simply the covering of the house. 2. The available financial resources.
To answer your second question, I will answer by quoting buildings that v
produced some time ago in Vienna. These are the buildings of Otto vi/a Were from the years 1905 to 1911. The roofs of these buildings were carried ^
the
company Posnansky and Strelitz, who gave me the following inform"!*^ e roof of the Post Office Savinas Bank buildina in Vienna.	,:101':
"The roof of the Post Office Savings Bank building in Vienna, completed in
1906, is a wood-cement roof on concrete base, a layer of roofing felt th ers of paper painted with wood cement paste, on top of this 4 cm soft e nk ment and 4 cm of gravel. Seam lining and gutters are made of galvanized °ar*' sheet. The roofing has functioned without repairs for 20 years, then defe tS'eel seams and gutters needed to be replaced, at the same time in such p|ace IVe the wood cement cover on paper stripes (width = 1 m) has been renewed^’
Oberbaurat Prof. Josef Hoffman, Vienna
The experience that we made in Vienna with flat wood cement roofs that were constructed about 15 years ago, are very bad-not so much because of wood rot that can be prevented by good ventilation, but because of insufficient durability of the paper layers and poor possibilities to detect the leaks. For these reasons, a large number of such roofs In Vienna had to be replaced i their entirety. The best solution for flat roofs is the press gravel roof, on a reinforced concrete structure, with two or three layers of 100er or 90er tarpaper. Such roof Is accessible and also in our climate preferable compared to the pitched tile or slate roof as provided good execution no repairs will be needed in the first 15 to 20 years and In case of greater damage, the overlay of’ a new layer of tar paper can simply be added. Zinc-sheet connections near the wall cannot be avoided. The avoidance of zinc
Prof. dr. Josef Frans, Yes.	I think the best solution is the roof made of sheet lead, which has been
Vienna	used slnce the ancient times ... it can be made accessible by an added
wood grate, which I also recommend for accessible wood cement roofs. In addition to the usual wood cement sheet roof with gravel I have made good experiences with the covers as shown In Images 1-5. Both are installed since 1914, covering terraces, which are 2 m wide.
Architect J.B. van Loghem, Haarlem
Given the current state of technology, it Is possible to make a fully flat roof.
The roofs I have built, have for the last 12-14 years, which includes the construction period, met all required demands completely. Similar constructions exist in Holland for over 30 years and are still perfectly fine. I never give a slope to the roofs, they are quite horizontal. Through this occasionally a little water remains on the rooftops, which I consider to be an advantage In regards to the building material conservation, rather than a disadvantage. In most cases, my observations are mounted on wooden cladding over wooden beams. Only exceptionally on concrete. On the wood cladding a layer of gray paper is placed to avoid that to the actual roof covering is sticking on the wood. Onto this paper support are added three layers (two are not recommended) of roofing (asphalt-grint-vilt, Asphaltsandfilz) or Ruberoid (Asphaltraagselvilt, Asphalthaarfilz). Each layer is laid half over the previous and glued together with hot mastic. Finally, the roof is spread on with approximately 3-5 cm sand. An ordinary stucco ceiling in my view is sufficiently porous to ensure adequate ventilation.
City architect J.J.P. Oud, Rotterdam
e
Architecten Jeanneret and Le Corbusier, Paris
horizontally covered roof practicable?
Which solutions are in fro^pinion technically preferable^rowlong have the roofs in question Wenin use? (Please specify the material and laying method, enclosing a cross-section of the cornice with water drainage on a scale of 1:10)
In my opinion the case is this: one should not really make cheap constructions for flat roofs (unless it was worth renewing the coverage after 30 or 40 years, rather than to use a more expensive structure from the start). If you have the means, do it properly from the start: there are no technical difficulties at all, if you choose a well isolated - on its downside sufficiently porous - concrete ceiling. Aesthetic concerns are ridiculous; what practically is good can also aesthetically be well resolved; everybody is convinced of that nowadays. Apart from that: the Renaissance has brought us long ago what from an external view seemed to be a horizontal roof (the tiles were mostly hidden), and that for example the "Petit Trianon" between the trees should look bad as the slant-roofed English country houses, can only be claimed by one who Is biased because he does not feel like or is unable Since 1906 I have built three pitched roofs, those were the first three I built. Each time the walls were so high up that the gable should be placed, I was struck by the beauty of the pure form of the surface, which confined the building: Everything was well laid out before me, the sky arched infinite, the air was quiet; far away from the road, you had a sense of safety and well-being. The next morning the gable was placed; everything was destroyed, everything was gone. Then I thoroughly dealt with roofs and mansards, which seemed to me so stupid that I was determined to create a change. These roofs required an enormous cost in maintenance. Tiles broke, leaks took place. It was a country with heavy snowfalls and very severe winter climate (1000 m altitude). In 1916 I built a larger cottage with a flat roof (Esprit Nouveau No. 6). This roof has never been renewed, It has withstood outside temperature of up to -25 degrees Celsius, while the central heating created a pleasant 20 degree temperature inside.
I made use of an experience I had won in the previous winter with a smaller expanded terrace, and the result of which was the realization that the horizontal roof must be concave, with the water runoff towards the middle of the house and not convex with the runoff towards the edges. The snow melted under the influence of central heating and froze at night. The external eaves were completely iced over and no water could discharge any more. So I am convinced, that the horizontal roofs must have the water drain located in the center of their surface and inside the house, where the water never freezes. The slope of the roof, however, was just the reverse, about 11/2—2 cm Inclination on the meter. In the pictures you can see the behavior of the ordinary tile or sla roof in harsher climate since the introduction of central heating. Earlier, when people still heated with stoves, the question was So serious, and you could safely construct pitched roofs.	,
The central heating, however, Is Indispensable, especially in harsh climates, overthrows century-old customs. The hearths hau SinRct on the roof skin and snow stayed on the roof, and It even created an excellent isolation layer. But if you replace the nea j L^^^itral heating systems, the following happens: The heat rises up to the top, and the snow in contact with the roof starts ^^^Rhe water trickles on the surface of the tiles, following the slope of the roof and passes to the rain drain, which it fills- j ,J tl®ce forms, consequently icicles grow, 50-100 kg heavy, that bend or tear down the rain drain; but the flowing water has <3 more: it has soaked the snow, and the following night, the wet snow is frozen. In addition, as water seeps into the roof itself l- 1 J
PAGE 109
■i in y°ur opinion zinc sheetingTP C*n d for water drainage from the aV01 ntal roof, connections to vertical JË. ^ and vertical penetrations of (I,aS° f membrane? (Please sketch at the '¡mi scale 1:1 °)
•nq water drainage and the construe -Qoncer ^ connectjon to the masonry, in above .¡oh 0 ne£j buildings the seams and gutters have ^efidoH mac|e from zinc plate or galvanized always nee
sheetiron.
Question 4
What type of water drainage on roofs and balconies surrounded by a closed
cornice do you consider most effective? (Drawing please^W a scale of 1:10)
See answer to question 3.
Question 5
What form of heat insulation of a horizontal roof directly over inhabited rooms is most effective?
For thermal Insulation Otto Wagner“as used cork-stoneplates In his flat roofs, and as I coTmcP experience at the Lupushellstatte, with great results.
^KLat eaves and wall connections seems impossible to us. For heat insulation we have had good experiences with cork-stone plates between the roof aid concrete construction.
I don't know a solution without using zinc plate.
Commonly, lead Is used to seal the upward bent roofing felt, although zinc seems to adhere less firmly to the asphalt than lead, so that there is less risk that air voids form between the metal and roofing felt. In this case, capillarity would suck in water. In all cases a layer of hard lead must be laid over a zinc cover, since this binds better to the masonry (see image). Building materials other than zinc and lead seem to be less durable to seal against masonry. With the use of poured asphalt, lead and zinc can be omitted, provided that you are embedding asphalt sheets in the masonry, about 20 cm high above the roof, and the poured asphalt is lead up to the asphalt sheets.
Whether the water drainage is accomplished through a hole In the wall sill or In the ground, appears indifferent. But I have had the experience with such terraces that when the snow melts, a time occurs when the snow lying on the roof already melts, while the drain holes are still icy and therefore water collects within the parapet.
I think it is recommended to make multiple drain holes large in size.
For drainage of the roof, it Is advisable to embed zinc or lead sheets in between the asphalt roofing layers or in the poured asphalt, about 40 to 50 cm tall, with upstanding protuberances that are connected to the zinc or leaden wall guide. On exterior walls I do not apply sunken gutters (see image).
Over large spaces I have only applied air insulation and with good results. But also cork or stone wood panels are suggested as being sufficient.
If bedrooms are located under the flat roof, and in case an economic construction is desired, there Is no need to arrange isolation devices. Sand fill, asphalt felt layers, wood paneling and stucco celling are to be regarded sufficient. If however, living spaces are planned under the roof, then in my view a second layer of air is necessary, which furthermore must be vented. In my buildings, I applied the following construction with success: On the structural beams, a thin wood cladding is placed, on this thin wood fins and then the firing. The cavities between the fins communicate through openings in the fins, and ventilation hoods are distributed on the roof.
to overcome a certain position. There as here It Is a matter of the 'how' not the 'what.' I don't think (your survey proves it by the way) that the horizontal roof was 'a result of the progress of technology.' In my opinion it's firstly a matter of 'purpose,' and secondly (if not in the first place?) a purely aestheti-cal matter, for which only later people started to search proper technical solutions. Nowadays, there Is in any case a strong idealistic will (I don't think this Is a bad thing) that directs (and has to direct) technology: actually more than technical knowledge, which corresponds to this will. It is a mistake to assert In general that the technology has progressed far; with retail products this is the case: on construction sites (like me you have experienced this in practice) the technology proves to be completely out-of-date, to execute what we would like to do. The flat roof will - I am convinced of this - be a success (and without much dispute, as its practical usefulness will be apparent to all).
and this now forms together with the frozen snow that covers it, a solid ice mass (M). The whole of the frozen snow water (M), which is located outside the wall AB, is now a unitary ice block which prevents runoff of water. Part of the water is now trying to penetrate through the surface of the roof in the shortest way possible. That's the point N, where the bricks begin and where they are under the influence of the central heating. The water, since it could not pass at H will seep into the interior of the house at N. So this is the phenomenon which cancelled the central heating in cold climates. Conclusion: Countries with heavy snowfall have to build flat roofs with an inward water runoff. If a flat roof is the optimal solution in cold climates, it is arguably permissible in moderate climates. Therefore, important reasons urge us to apply the flat roof. Ever since man has climbed his house, given he had the opportunity, i.e. in Africa, Southern Italy, Egypt and Assyria. Only rain stopped him from doing so, because he didn't have the materials yet, that were suitable for the production of a proper functioning roof. The heterogeneous qualities of building materials as used up to now (wood, calk, iron, cement, etc.) brought about, that water j-ould always seep through. Whereas the reinforced concrete due to its construction enables a homogenous surface. A pitched roof nowadays is nothing out a makeshift; the rooms underneath have pitched ceilings, the windows can't open properly and hardly give light. You give this room mostly to servants r use as a supply room: by far the most beautiful part of the house is used for side purposes. Today we hardly need these chambers anymore. You buy to stock in shops. Within the city the roof is the place furthest away from the sound and smell of the street. In the countryside a special upbringing cre-awareness for the beauties of nature. From the roof of the house you can see the sky, and the land stretches out in front of you. Conclusion: Motives Th^fl Ct'Ca' anc* ernot'onal nature guide us towards an application of the flat roof. Further: The pitched roof is expensive and requires a lot of maintenance, ^lat iooi's much cheaper and doesn't require any maintenance. You can turn the spatial organization of the house completely upside down, you can point- TlT re?ePt'on areas upward and turn the roof into a garden, you can grow garden plants on a flat roof. From an aesthetic jMfearcjvMB^I standing, .'J16 Pitched roof, placed on the wall (brick or wood), is a heterogeneous connection, therefore less beautiful than a construction	sTHilar ■Haing
Husa | A natural endeavour motivates us to search for pure forms. The flat roofs give us a pure form, the house, which cont^Ft^fcai^^h^By offers neCeC6ar to*6 ■■■• The disturbing sight of structural components, like the gutter, the drainpipe and the chimney with their ugly ¡rfersfctions become ™ bore SarT'.^b architectonic aspiration, from today back to the early middle-ages, have been directed towards hiding the pitr^W^^Pm^lto^Bpl^fiize^B «¡¡S™1 line, that limits the sky horizontally. The goal is a simple cubic prism, which can satisfy the three dimensional sense muc|ett^^^PsevlB^H pi. |E'ca,c(i prism shapes. From an urban planning perspective, it is obvious that we regain the entire built surface of the city at roof height for use in fresh I 0 can doubt at such a startling proof at all?

Mendelsohn’s answer to question 2: roof garden detail.
Mendelsohn's answer to question 4: double papered roof with wall connection detail.
PAGE 111
Josef Franz's answers to question 2 and 3:
roof corner connection and water drainage details.
2iHKPU«TTB 4o»5oc>M*
!an Loghem's answer to question 2: a roof wall connection detail.
with °r^us'er s answers (top to bottom): condition of the roof in winter central heating; with central heating; solution for water drainage rrs the interior of the building; detail explaining interior water drainage.
PAGE 112
Trot. Dr. Paul Schultze-Naumburg
FLAT OR PITCHED ROOF
?
With a survey of German architects and their answers Berlin, 1927, Publisher Seger & Cramer GmbH
Preface
In all my books on architectural problems in the past thirty years I have taken the view that the roof is one of the essential components of the occidental house, and that the omission of the same would usually result in an ugly and structurally questionable entity. Recently I wrote various essays on the temporary fashion that recognizes the flat roof as the only shape with a raison d'être and seeks to banish the sloping roof. The invitation of the publishing house of Prof. Dr. H. Seger & E. Cramer was thus very welcome. I was asked to further elaborate on these remarks in a special issue, and provide evidence that the flat roof does not fulfill the criteria of increased economy often attributed to it and to seek the opinion of a selection of distinguished colleagues, in particular from among the university professors.
Even if the objective opposition would like to banish any form of roof today, we do not want to make the same mistake and claim that it is not possible to build an attractive house without a roof. There are plenty of examples of houses without a roof, in particular a number of castles, as demonstrated by Marien-lyst Castle in the following. Admittedly, these buildings are exceptions, as they are not subject to the iron-cast laws of economics that apply to our residential building sector, where quite different forms have emerged. The assertion that these are 'outdated' will be exhaustively disproved in the following.
Generally it can be assumed that this question will be finally resolved under the bottom line of cost-effectiveness. Even the grandest and most ingenious advertisement for an article will not succeed in preserving its viability in the long term. It is not only my private opinion that the flat roof does not bring sufficient benefits to qualify it as a substitute for the sloped roof covered with hard material in residential construction, but also that of appraisers composed of the best experts. At this point special thanks go to the gentlemen who were so kind as to take part in my survey.
Survey Questions
1.	Do you see a reason for buildings, primarily single houses, based on the existing building structures to fundamentally switch from a more or less sloped/ pitched roof to a flat roof?
2.	Do you see a fundamental advantage to construct a carefully built and isolated flat roof in single houses, if you can build for the same price a pitched roof with a hard cover and roof tiles with the benefit of creating extra space?
3.	Do you agree with the observation, that even properly built (even massive) flat roofs have leaks when the building sets?
4.	Do you share in the opinion that leaks are generally less easy to detect and fix in a flat roof compared to a properly built tile roof?
5.	Would you without a special reason refrain from building a watercourse at the edges of the roof with pipes outside of the wall, and instead lead water through closed wall parts?
Summary
In the
following the advantages of the pitched roof and the disadvantages of the flat roof are set out to each other.
AH rain water's immediately directed to the ground nd can with an effective drain cause no damage to the building- Snow will remain on moderately Inclined roofs, defrosted water will not stay on. Sudden ice formations ¡{they would In worst case occur will also damage small perts of the roof and never damage the building as a whole.
2,	Checking the waterproofness of the roof Is very easy: every leak will immediately create a wet spot on the floor and can be fixed before it creates any additional damage. The damage will be retained to the floor and even with larger leaks will however with proper regular inspection not damage the structure of the house. Being able to quickly eplace specific roof tiles also reduces the amount of damage that can be done.
Cons
1.	No immediate removal of rain and hence a lasting concern for water entering the building. Icing of the roof which will lead to a quick 'zermuesung' In all the layers.
The proposal by Le Corbusier to drain the water through the center of the house tastes much like dilettantism. Apart from the fact that he enters a point of concern inside the house which Is better placed outside, It Is not like snow and ice will just thaw away because of the central heating system as to thaw so many kilos of ice and snow you need ever more fuel for the heater. The forceful removal of Ice and snow Is also perhaps not to everyone's taste. And what happens when for some reason the central heating doesn't work?
2.	Impossible detection of leakages, which will only appear when they have already entered Into the ceiling and other parts of the building. This can lead to year long searches for a leak - even worse you will only find It when the celling Is destroyed already.
3,	Extremely high durability of the wooden pitched roof structure, If kept dry and ventilated properly, creates an almost endless long life cycle.
4.	The pitched roof creates a natural Isolation space against the cold In the winter and heat In the summer.
3.	As the flat roof has many potential difficulties, It will never have the same lifetime as a pitched roof.
4.	For the Isolation against heat and cold you require costly and difficult solutions. In Its most primitive form this is only an Imitation of the properties of attic spaces.
5.	The pitched roof gives practically every family necessary space to dry laundry, to store equipment and other stuff. You can hardly find a family who could do without one. You don't have to focus on the disorganized families who use it to only store junk - even the best households need storage space.
The pitched roof gives the opportunity with small n'eans to make create an extra fully Inhabitable space.
'• The pitched roofs gives enough space to build proper chimneys.
5.	As the attic spaces are absent they will need to be compensated in the building volume which Is not economical and also doesn't serve the requirements as in the example of the laundry drying the attic has better properties for ventilation and water damp removal - which is hardly the case In the so called 'laundry rooms' - creating extra facilities for this Is largely more costly than having attic space.
6.	An extra space Is not possible with a flat roof, or will be more costly to build. If a so-called 'drempel sotckwerk' Is built you have to create a new floor and the entire game starts all over again.
“• The esthetlcal appearance I will address lastly. Any dls-advantages of the pitched roof cannot even be considered when you think that a better product with a longer lifetime 'siiore expensive though on the long run will appear to De cheaper.
7.	The chimneys are directly on top of the flat roof and create poor airflow. If the chimney does reach higher it has to be able to resist higher wind
increased issue with cooling in the cMU e'jBidBlI rlqure costly additional isolation.	^B^B ^B^B
8.	Concerning or weird-looking house.
PAGE 114
Architect
Question 1
Do you see a reason for buildings, primarily single houses, based on the existing building structures to fundamentally switch from a more o^| less sloped/pitcfW^of to a flat roof?
München
Fundamentally no: however there could be instances In which either for technical or aesthetlcal reasons a flat roof can make sense.
Prof. Dr. Blunck, Berlin No.
Prof. dr. Paul Bonatz,
No.
Stuttgart Baurat Bräuning, Berlin-Tempelhof
No. The search for flat roofs has Its origins In the formalist hobby of cubistic shapes for the house.
Prof. A. Breslauer, Berlin
There is no reason for me to prefer the flat roof over more or less pitched roofs. There can be single cases, where I have to resort to flat roofs, but In principle I try to avoid this. Our northern-Euro-pean climate due to formal and practical concerns Is not specifically appropriate for flat roofs.
Architekt Brurein, Hamburg
No. I think despite the oriental-oriented circles promoting the 'cubistic way of building' as a northern German style, It remains a foreign style. Not all too long from now it will have had Its time, as the earthiness, the connection to the 'northern landscape' and with people is lacking.
Prof. dr. Caesar, Karlsruhe
Prof. Dernburg, Berlin Fundamentally? No.
Prof. Dr. Th. Fischer, München
If the flat roof is more economical, yes.
Prof. Geßner, Berlin
There Is no reason to fundamentally switch to the flat roof, if you, as I have always done, observe contemporary life and build in a traditional local style.
Prof. Geßner, Berlin
Question 2
Do you see a fundamental advantage to constru^^^arefully built and Hated flat roof in single houses, if you can build a pitched roof with a hard cover with roof tiles with the benefit of creating extra space at the same price?
Surely notl Moreover that for the Image of our landscape such a way of working could be really dlsruptive/dlsturblng.
No.
No.
No. I don't see any advantage In fundamentally using a flat roof solution. A flat roof can be artistically used for example In areas with only flat roofed buildings, If the technical and economic difficulties are solved.
See answer to question 1.
No.
No. The fight for the flat roof is only being lead by formalists, who are not Interested In technical sophistication, economics. When it comes down to such beautiful matters, they are only Interested In form. There are some, who consider these shapes beautiful and justified, but also others who only see It as a way of personal advertisement, even if - It's not clear even If they do - commit to It. Against these types of people you can't really talk about sophistication. They will not be persuaded. As they are forced to use fallacies about sophistication, we are equally forced to fight back with matters of sophistication.
No, to the contrary. There are only a few Instances In certain conditions which really ask for flat roofs. There are some cases In which the building would be so deep that it would lead to Impossible uneconomical solutions.
Fundamentally? No.
See answer to question 1.
I don't see any advantage In preferring a flat roof over a pitched roof and can only in very specific circumstances think of buildings In which a flat roof would make sense. I know how costly it is to make a carefully built one.
I don't see any advantage, only disadvantages, which I suggested in the previous question.
I
Flat roofs with less than 30 degree angle are not suitable for areas with heavy snowfall. In residential construction flat roofs hardly allow for the construction of roof houses or storage rooms for suitcases, boxes, and other appliances. Also as ^■roace for drying laundry in winter will be lost. In ^^«ity parts with high pitched roofs flat roofs are airland heavily influences the image of the city.
I (I t see any reason to fundamentally change l tcBe flat roof, perhaps excluding factory build-■pffor which attic space is not necessary and it would increase the fire hazard.
Prof. dr. Bestelmeyer,
PAGE 115
agtlOP
fl®® agree with the observation^^ 0° ^en properly built (even massive) thatro0fs ^ave leaks when the building
!£?
Question 4
Do you share in the opinion that leaks are generally less easy to detect and
fix in a flat roof compared to a properly
built tile roof?
Question 5
Would you without a special reason refrain from building a watercourse at the edges of the roof with pipes outside of the wall, and instead lead water through closed wall parts?
■L roofs are more prone to leak. Main-fti3* 0f roofs is a matter of experience.
■snanC atical asking building supervisors about Sys,er" riences would be best, as the upkeep of tiding5 js a significant part of their job.
Yes.
yes.
eobserved, that the connection between the lujoof and the load bearing wall are the most iatous places of the house in terms of leakages.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
No.
No.
No.
. have not had the opportunity to build entire Lises with flat roofs, at least not in Germany.
Fora very respectable house in Madrid, based on Jllgicleration of local traditions, I built a flat massive roof, which has weathered well. I would like to note that construction and materials which I used ¡here, wouldn't be feasible here.
Yes.
I have repeatedly built flat verandas with a massive roof construction. Only with great care and at great expense have I been able to really make them waterproof. After more than 30 years of experience I use rolled lead.
I think the elimination of rainwater in the inside of the building is only possible when using heavy cast- iron pipes. To avoid problems of icing, the tube openings in our northern construction should be large and frequently checked in these construction at all time.
Yes.
No.
Yes. With every building, with uneven settling.
My observation is that flat roofs, where for some reason they were necessary, can be made waterproof. Whether due to uneven settling of the building leaks occur, depends on the scale of the settling. I have is nothing against a properly built end maintained flat roof.
Mo, I haven’t had the opportunity.
n the terraces I built, I experienced that even if TO construction is done properly and with little TOintenance requirements, there would be leaks, •one house I built I made a wood cement flat r°of and experienced only problems.
Joant remember any case from my own practice jrore leaks occurred due to settling. However I flat ™n**^at ^ea^s are more prone to appear in .^compared to pitched roofs due to the to a 'l?^'ct'on 'n flat roofs is higher compared ^JSjterpinned pitched roofs. Also from experi-e know that leaks in pitched roofs often se less damage than flat roofs.
Yes. To the extent, that a complete make-over is necessary, even when then punctures only cover a small part. On the Karlsruhe college campus there are to equally old buildings: the electro faculty building with a slate roof (only 30 degree), and the chemistry building which has a wood-cement flat roof. Both are 30-40 years old. The first hasn't had any costs for upkeep and is still in good condition. The other one, which has been repaired often, now had to be entirely replaced for 8000 Marks.
Finding leaks obviously is much more difficult in a flat roof than in a pitched roof. For flat roofs it requires repairs to the entire roof. For a flat roof made of tar, this is somewhat easier as the leak will be visible.
The finding of and fixing of leaks in flat roofs is much more difficult than with pitched tiled roofs. With wood-cement if even one nail or lumber piece has a defect, it will lead to enormous damage of which the source will be hard to find. It can only be done by removing a large section of the roof. The flat roof requires, at least the asphalt type, an asphalt pot, making asphalt and such - a complicated large machine which for small repairs will be far too expensive.
No. That would be just as foolish as collecting and draining rainwater at the center of their construction.
No
No
I don't see how drainage in our normal housing construction could be done differently than by using the edges of the roof. The Bauhaus building in Dessau which has drainage cover inside of the wall will either in the short or long run be damaged.
Yes.
Of course.
PAGE 116 Architect

eh. Baurat Ludwig Hoffmann, Berlin
Question 1
Do you see a reason for buildings, primarily single houses, based on the existing building structures to fundamentally switch from a more or less sloped/pitdf^roof to a flat roof?
No.
Question 2
Do you see a fundamental advantage
to construrW^arefully built and ^rotated flat roof in single houses, if you can build a pitched roof with a hard cover with roof tiles with the benefit of creating extra space at the same price?
No.
Prof. Dr. E. Hogg,	No, I don't see any fundamental reasons, whether
Technische Hochschule commercial or not, to adhere to the newest fash-Dresden	Ion. That doesn't mean, that the flat roof, meaning
the invisible roof, for specific purposes or artistic reasons, can't be justified. Since the second half of the 19th century there have been many country houses in Italian renaissance style, uncountable factories and urban mass housing, but also monumental buildings like the Reichstag building, with flat roofs, in which this was a problem.
Hans Mühlfeld, Bau- u. Reg Rat, Gotha, Direktor der Baufew.-Sch.
A reason to switch from the pitched roof to the flat roof for the majority of buildings, doesn't exist in my opinion. The extra space generated by the pitched roof, can always be used in an economic way. It's also good for heat and cold protection. Flat roofs are expensive in upkeep, and when executed expensive in construction.
Geheimrat Muthensius No. Berlin
Prof. Carl Sattler, München, Kunstgewerbeschule
If you emphasize the word 'fundamental' in your question, than I have to answer in a negative. Everything is depending on the context and a case by case analysis. I could imagine that in densely populated quarters, as they so ugly surround our cities, the absence of all possible roof shapes and roof constructions could be a blessing; provided that all houses fit well together.
Prof. Paul Schmitthen- No ner, Techn. Hochschule Stuttgart
No, to the contrary, it is the German resident of roofless houses who now had to adapt to the way of living in Western Europe, but I hope this process will take time. Le Corbusier is complaining that the European man is not mature enough for living in his roofless mass housing.
Of course not, also because even the most carefully concealed flat roof will always remain a point of care, especially in the connecting points and will never be a reliable as a pitched roof.
No.
This also needs case by case consideration. Even here in Upper Bavaria, where we have to deal with a lot of snowfall, the question can be answered in different ways. In some cases you will have to shovel off the snow from the roof, in other cases you would be happy the snow doesn't slide down the roof. We have had some winter seasons with bad experiences with pitched roofs in which we even had to install snow fences on the roof. The result was that in the afternoons the snow would melt and later turned to ice, freezing the roofplates. Surely a pitched roof will provide storage space which is a common necessity in Germany. Because I live in Italy, I can imagine a comfortable life without one though. As I said in my answer to the first question, it should be avoided to build all kind of things on top of the roof. I think this was probably the instigator for the enthusiasm for the flat roof. I have to confess that the many of the most pleasant and beautiful times I had, were on terrace roofs.
No
Architekt Dr. Steinmetz, No. There are no professional grounds for this. No. A pitched roofs creates useful floor space. Berlin-Charlottenburg I I
Prof. Heinrich Straumer, For me there is no reason to venture into such Berlin	a fundamental change. There could be cases in
which I could see myself forced to use a flat roof, to achieve a certain result. These would not be technical concerns, but architectural ones.
I also answer this question with a fundamental concern that I can't see a clear advantage if only with the wish to express the shape of the house. In the houses I have done with a flat roof, I have reluctantly installed unfinished terraces and they will sooner or later always have leaks. It requires a lot of skill and attention to create a waterproof flat roof.
PAGE 117
stion 3
0ue , agree with the observation^
poy°u
flatr0' sets?
/even properly built (even massive) vr Qfs p,ave leaks when the building
Question 4
Do you share in the opinion that leaks are generally less easy to detect and
fix in a flat roof compared to a properly
built tile roof?
Question 5
Would you without a special reason refrain from building a watercourse at the edges of the roof with pipes outside of the wall, and instead lead water through closed wall parts?
^RILnly done one building, the federal court It'a'f jjjy first built work, with a flat roof and I Sorft know what happened to It.
Yes.
No. I am of the opinion that when there Is no spe^ cial need for a flat roof, it should be avoided due to our climatic and weathering condition which demand that rain, snow and dirt are removed as fast a possible, which Is obviously done best by using a pitched roof.
Shut not only with settling of the walls. They ieS‘ Iso created by other means, for example 3,6 uah expansion and contraction through heat H cold at the wall connections, small tears and an tures which will lead to massive damages. I PUJe always observed this with the terraces, lighted sun baths etc. of my own buildings.
Yes, the leaks will only become visible after significant time, through spots on the ceiling and walls. It's not easy to trace to their place of origin. Most often large pieces of roof have to be torn open and repaired, which compared to the easy of maintenance of the pitched roof, leads to considerable extra costs.
Never! The most natural and obvious way of dealing with rainwater is outside of the wall. Drainage through the inside of the building, which the flat roof requires, is an emergency measure.
Every craftsman with experience In building maintenance, knows that flat roofs are never really waterproof. (Every geologist knows that water can also penetrate through the hardest stones) In our climate it is obvious that the only way for real water protection Is that you chose for the fastest and best water drain possible.
Yes.
The finding not so much as the repairing. With a pitched roof, both are quite easy.
Of course it can happen, that in a specific case a roof can be de-watered through the inside of the house. But no specialist will recommend this without a very good reason. This is obvious as with the simplest clog could have a disastrous effect, realizing that doing this In the outside of the building would surely be less damaging. (Apart from the difficulty of proofing and costs)
No.
Yes.
I have to answer with a yes to this question.
Despite great care in construction, tears and cuts can occur.
Here I have to say that in Italy, specifically in Tuscany, even during the most terrible instant rain showers, people manage to find the leak really quickly.
I definitely answer no to this questions. In principle I would like to see that we could continue as in the old days with beautiful and tranquil roofs, which fit in the landscape and represent a pleasing development of our homes. If It's about new city parts, which are under a collective artistic leadership, I would leave it to the artists confronted with the problem.
I don't have any experiences required to answer this question, but it is clear to me, that uneven settling will have worse effects for a flat roof compared to a pitched roof.
^s. Leaks due to the settling of the building are “"avoidable.
^answered at question 2, flat roofs are vulner-? if)0 leaks also by uneven settling of the “Wing. This occurs less with pitched roofs as is 0Wn in older constructions.
Finding leaks is more difficult with a flat roof surface, compared to the completely clear underside of a tiled roof.
A leak in a flat roof is more difficult to detect and has huge repercussions. (As was shown at the collapse of the roof at the villa In the west of Berlin.)
I have found finding and repairing leaks in flat roofs equally unpleasant as when looking for leaks in pitched tiled roofs in the case that doesn't concern a broken tile.
I think using the Inside of the wall for water drainage is almost always wrong. There has to be a really important reason.
No. The pitched roof construction is the given construction type for residential housing in our climate.
Only under very special conditions would I recommend to drain the water towards the Inside of the building. Having a pipe inside of the wall is always a difficult issue. It can however be done if you use the best construction materials and handicraft.
PAGE 118
MASTERS OF THE CONCRETE SHELL
150 km from the trenches of Dessau Bauhaus (flat roof), and 400 km from those in Munich (pitched roof) the next step in roof development is being developed in‘fena by a circle of engineers at the Carl Zeiss factory and research center for optics. While architectural circles are stuck in their debate of flat roofs vs. pitched roofs, a new generation of civil engineers will define the roof of the 21st century.
Developed as a side-product - a projection canvas for a newly developed planetarium lens - the concrete shell dome makes its debut in 1923 on the roof of the Jena factories. It sparks two generations of engineers, architects, contractors to spread over the world to develop the concrete shell - arguably the most elegant roof to date -to its extremes...
Robert Maillart (1872-1940).
Eugene Freyssinet (1879-1962).
Eduardo Torroja (1899-1961).


PAGE 119
Dischinger (1887-1953)
Ulrich Fmsterwalder (1897-1988).
Pier Luigi Nervi (1891-1979).
Heinz Isler (1926-2009).
505
Felix Candela (1910-1997).
PAGE 120
1935 Torroja's Hippodrome in Madrid. Overhang: 12.8m Shell thickness: 5.1cm
1939 Cement Hall by Maillart.
Height: 10.7m Shell thickness: 6cm
1930 Market hall in Leipzig by Dischinger and Finsterwalder. Span: 75m
Shell thickness: 9-11cm
SHELLS: THIN, THINNER, THINNEST
The engineers share a common goal: building a roof with the thinnest possible shell for the largest possible span.
nyzo Airplane nangars in Paris Orly by Freyssinet.
Span: 90m Shell thickness: 9cm
1968 Rest stop, Deitingen south by Span: 30m Shell thickness: 1CP
1959 May D&F Entrance Canopy Denver, Colorado by Tedesko. Span: 40m
Shell thickness: 7.6cm
1957 Palazzetto dello Sport by Nervi.
Span: 61m
Shell thickness: 5-10cm

PAGE 122
LIVES OF THE ARCHITECTS
The development of the concrete shell is the result of the relative autonomy of its authors bound through biographical commonalities, which seem to have had a decisive effect:
War The first liberation (Maillart,
STnet, Dischinger, Nervi) are all involved in the First World War, and many play a role in the Spanish Civil War and the Second World War. Their concrete inventions are partly the result of the material shortages plus the need for a new typology of the aircraft hangar.
Opposing ideas about invention
Where the French and Swiss focus on experimental testing, Dischinger and Finsterwalder are rooted in a strong Germanic belief in theory as the basis for invention - an opposition which meets and forms a successful balance.
1956 as high point Torroja writes Philosophy of Structure, Candela's career is blossoming, Nervi is established and famed, Tedesko works with IM Pei...
1959 signals end of the concrete shell
Isler emphasizes the artistic qualities of the concrete shell over the practical benefits in a famous drawing of an endless array of shapes which provokes the ire of his colleagues. At the same time, due to labor costs in the production of formwork, irritation grows with architects' extravagant demands, the once economical shell starts to crack...
ROBERT MAILLART (1872-1940)
1894 Graduates i
^^BPP^^ineering le Eldgenosslchen Polytechnikum (ETH) in Zurich.
1908 Tests concrete mushroom column structure. Sets up offices throughout Europe and In Russia.
1914 Gets stuck In Russia at the outbreak of the First World War.
1918 Returns to Switzerland and starts engineering firms in Geneva, Bern and Zurich.
1921 Starts publishing work on theories of concrete in Schweizerischen Bauzeitung.
1923 Focuses on publishing and mostly bridge constructions.
EUGÈNE FREYSSINET (1879-1 i
1903 Attends Charles Rabut lectures, Inspiring Ideas on prestressing. 1905 Graduates In engineering In Paris, moves to the south of France and builds small bridges.
1914 Serves In First World War. Builds airplane hangars In Igres.
FRANZ
UNGER (1887-1953)
PIER LUIGI
(1891-1979)
NERV|
1936 Receives RIBA Award.
1938 Builds Cement Hall at Swiss National Exposition, his concrete shell masterpiece.
1940 RIP
1949 Gledion publishes
extra chapter in Space, Time and Architecture emphasizing Malllart's work; becomes emblematic for new generation of architects.
1911 Graduates in Engineering at the Technical University of Karlsruhe with high pass.
1913 Starts working at Dyckerhoff & Wldmann. 1914-18 Fights In First World War, wounded three times.
1923 Orly Aircraft Hangars.
1928 Les procédés de fabrication de pièces en béton armé - applies for concrete pre-stressing patent.
1934 Saves sinking bridge construction in Le Havre using prestressing - proving his theory.
1937 Receives honorary membership RIBA.
1945	Builds bridge over
the Marne.
1946	After the war Is exclusively Involved In bridge construction throughout France.
1956 Between 1926 and 1956 applies for more than 75 patents, mostly Involving prestressing.
1923 Start of thin-concrete shell roof research with Bauersfeld, Finsterwalder, Ruesch. Publishes and patents shell experiments in Jena.
1931	Receives award for theory on concrete shell.
1932	Becomes Professor of reinforced concrete in Berlin.
1937	Publishes on "creep" In concrete construction.
1938	Awarded the Edward-Longstreath medal with Flnster Walder.
1942 With others, designs concrete shell dome for Albert
Speer's Congress Hall In Nuremburg. Span of 250 meters with a 3.5 meter thick double vaulted concrete shell. 1946-1951 Becomes Professor In reinforced concrete and steel In Darmstadt.
1953 RIP
1913 Graduates fron,
University of Bologna 1915 Serves In the
Italian Navy In First World War.
1962 RIP
1932 Completes his first major structure-the football stadium of Florence.
1939 Completes eight aircraft hangars.
1943 Patents a number of Inventions Including ferro-cement, concrete boat hulls and concrete
torpédos.
1948 Agnelli Exhibition hall In Turin-tests a new means of pre-cast-Ing concrete developed in the winter of 1944. 1950 Builds auditorium for UNESCO headquarters, Paris.
1957 Small sports dome, completed. Nervi In Time magazine. "Poetry in Concrete, j 1960 Large sports
dome completed.
1979 RIP
PAGE 123
ANTON TEDESKO FELIX CANDELA (1903-1994)	(1910-1997)
HEINZ ISLER (1926-2009)
1923 Graduates from
-i department
atXU Munich, starts
w¡th Dischinger at Dyckerhoff.
1928 First conflict with
Dischinger.
1930	Finishes PhD on deformation in circular segment shells.
1933	Publishes membrane theory.
1934	Finsterwald becomes director at Dywidag. Until the end of the Second World War Dywidag builds factories and aircraft hangars.
1942 Builds and tests concrete shell boats for the German Navy.
1948 Remains as a principal at Dywidag.
1953 Builds Schwart-tvrald Halle in Bavaria, one of the largest shells in Germany.
'963 Receives Order °f Merit of the Federal 1 ©public of Germany. I973 Retires from dywidag.
1923 Graduates from the School of Civil Engineering in Madrid. Employed by his teacher Ribera.
1927 Sets up his studio. 1933 Builds his first dome, in Algeciras, Spain.
1935	Builds major works: Fronton Recole-tos, Villaverde Church, Madrid Hippodrome.
1936	Allies with Spanish nationalist regime. Fronton Recoletos, the largest concrete shell in the world, is destroyed. 1939 End of civil war
- Torroja gets a post in the Public Works department of postwar reconstruction. 1942-1945 Hangars at Torrejon and Barajas Airport, Las Carts, Barcelona.
1956	Due to high cost of formwork starts
to use closed design systems.
1957	Publishes Philosophy of Structure. Tachira Club 'special' roof - mimicking Candela's designs, which do not get built.
1959 Founds the International Association for Shell and Spatial Structures (IASS)
1961 RIP
1988 Rip

1926 Graduates at the Technological Institute in Vienna in civil engineering.
1930 Joined Dyckerhoff and Wildman A.G. in Wiesbaden.
1932 Sent by Dyckerhoff and Wilcfman to the US to introduce the concrete shell.
1934	Builds first concrete shell dome in US. 1936 Builds ice hockey arena for Hershey Chocolate in reinforced concrete - exemplary for concrete construction in the US.
1941 Designs military hangars with minimal use of concrete. Continues to work for US Air Force and NASA after the war.
1953 Starts working with Hellmuth, Yamasaki and Leinweer on Lamertfield terminal building.
1959 Improves oast-inplace ribless shell roofs for the Air Force.
1959 Builds with IM Pei the May D&F Entrance Canopy in Denver - the world's longest span hyperbolic paraboloid thin-shell.
1967 Leaves Roberts & Schaefer
1976 Starts to doubt tendencies in shell design after seeing Montreal Olympics' "ill-conceived and lacking in simplicity, grace and without finesse - they are an argument against the use of concrete." 1994 RIP
1932 Publishes "Resistencia de Materiales," a teaching aid for structural analysis. Graduates.
1935	Inspired by and meets Torroja in Madrid.
1936	Introduced to Hypars through reading F. Aimond.
1937	Member of Engineer Republicans in Spanish civil war.
1939 Captured and sent to Mexico, architect of an agricultural colony. 1945 Starts to subscribe again to international journals. Finds Hypar article again.
1948 Wins the lottery.
All spent on movie making. Becomes critical of established theories and the theory of elasticity. Reads Giedion.
1950	First Experimental conoid, founds company - prepares 30 bids, eleven built.
1951	70 bids, 21 get built. First paper rejected by the Journal of American Concrete Institute - becomes famous.
1964 Rejects report Concrete Shell Structures: Practice and Commentary, "it supports extravagant architect's dreams mostly based on waste." Remains active as a professor in Mexico and the US.
1997 RIP
WWII
1950 Graduates in engineering at ETH Zurich. Becomes assistant to Pierre Lardy and directs his model shop.
1954 Discovers the non-geometric shell-shape through his studies of nature.
1959 Isler debuts his methods "Shapes for Shells" at IASS founding meeting. Challenges the mathematically underpinned Torroja and Ove Arup with more experimental model based analysis.
1962 Builds his first large scale shell: Wyss Seed and Plant pavilion in Zuchwil, Switzerland. 1967 Part of Behnisch & Partner team desigi^jm the tent construe:. >n nt the Munich Olympics. Builds more than 1,^^^^ shells throughout Europe.
2009 RIP
ulSeHrwalder TORRODA ^97-1988)	(1899-1961)
PAGE 124
ROOF
SHELL INVENTIONS
Collection of the most important achievements on paper, ranging from material development to gigantic structures...
1920s Maillairt's critique on theoretical understanding of concrete in the Schweizerische Bauzeitung which will be an important influence on Candela.
1926 First patented cylindrical shell roof. Patent DRP 431.629 by Dischinger and Finsterwalder will be used in Germany, but also in the US, to build military structures, among others.
Isza I neoreticai comronianon: SKetcn ot a doubly curved translation shell over rectangular plan with schematic space framework by Franz Dischinger. Dischinger proves it to be far more efficient than the single curved version proposed by Finster-walder.
n paraboloide hyperbolique
1936 The first appearance of the Hyperboljp Cylindrical shell in theory, by F. Aimond in | statique des voiles minces en paraboloide nyP boiique travaillant sans flexion, which inficen Candela's designs in the 1950s.
ent-gh^: Suspg^led roofs as hyperbolic-paraboloid shells, patented by Tatjana Makarova, tg^o descHW»is shape. Despite being the first to patent a hyperbolic-paraboloid,
> rlKHof aj®ter^fconal application of her theory.
1940 Dischinger s structural design scneme tor Albert Speer's Kongresshalle for post-war Berlin, with a diameter of almost 250 meters and a 3.5-meter thick concrete shell.
1943 Patent submitted by Nervi, for the"lmprovement in building of slabs, plates, and other reinforced concrete structures." Also known as the invention of Ferro-Cement: an alternative means of steel reinforcement for concrete using less steel. During the Second World War he also patents concrete shell boats and torpedos.
Candela's notes on a text by Finsterwalder, ,ast,^d lead to his objections against the
1959 Isler's sketch "Shapes for Shells" presented^ at the first IASS meeting. Immediately gets ch^^l lenged by the mathematically underpinned To Jia and Ove Arup.	H| ^
PAGE 126
ROOF
1959 Torroja testing a concrete rib based pre-fab roof system in Costilares, Spain.
1906 Flat slab load test of reinforced concrete, in Zurich, by Maillart.
1925 Dischinger and Finsterwalder sitting together on their first cylindrical test shell, which they patented the year before, at the Dywidag factory in Biebrich. A 3.2-ton load test confirms the assumption that the weight of the edge elements causes only minor bending moments.
lazs hirst concrete sneu aome on top or tne ¿eiss i-actory. inventor Bauersfelder needed a space for his new projector and gets in touch with Dywidag; Dischinger is assigned to the case to suggest the construction technology. Finsterwalder joins in.
1931 The Dywidag staff standing on Dischlnger's double curved shell in Wiesbaden, including Finsterwalder, Dischinger and Tedesko (fourth, fifth, and sixth from left). With the load test, the entire roof is covered with 300kg/m2 sand bags.
SHELL TESTING
Despite a deep conflict over theory vs. practice, a collection of proud rooftop testing celebrations shows the importance of physical testing.
lW5T^»a's first test for the Hippodrome g
jafetoillarts Golden Arch: designed to demonstrate that light and temporary concrete structures are hard to destroy. The pavilion survived ta full collapse load test because of 'unexpected buckling strength.' Explosives are brought in the day after (middle): a shock broke all «Lug in a 100 meter radius, yet leaving the structure still intact. The day after a demo crew uses hooks to finally destroy the structure -| st photo shows Maillart inspecting the "cadaver" proud that "the back of the elephant had lived."
1949 Candela's first test of a funicular vault oased on the theories absorbed from Dischinger, Finsterwalder, Aigon and Mailart.
1950 Candela's experiments progress with a conoid, giving him confidence that Mailart's stratgegy could be both elegant and cost-effective.
^.Candela testing umbrellas based on a 1936 sketch by Almond: "as a lesson to find the optimum rise,
(|jB'"ePends on the area covered by the umbrellas. On this simple proportion depends the success in the design 3bou* structures, since the necessary calculations are elementary." The cost of the umbrellas was said to be ■Pne half of that of typical industrial metal and corrugated sheets.
¡¡1970 Bia Roof ajExpo '70, Osaka, conceived by Kenzo Tange and Mrata IsAaki, «ecuted by Koji Kamiya and structural engineer Mamoru Kawagucni. It «he largest |pace frame in the world, 30 meters tall,
108 x 295 met«, 4,800 tops, bearing loads 10 times bigger than a conjgiti^n|r?|%ce frame, Jijpported on six pillars.
PAGE 130

SHELLS IN THE MEDIA
By the 1960s, shell engineers are heralded as the heroes of modernity by mainstream media. By the mid 1960s, they fall off the radar, leaving only increasingly disconnected collection of obituaries...
DRAMA IN BUILDING
The Museum of Modem Art Sets Forth Impressive Latin-American Show
By AUNE B. SAARINEN
1955 "I would argue with Mr. Hitchcock for paying scant attention to engineering in Latin America, for that has had potent influence here already. It is true that architecture and engineering are usually separate there and many Latin-American architects simply make dashing drawings, leaving to others the solutions of the structural problems which will transform them into three-dimensional realities. But not only does engineering frequently become architecture in Latin America (as in Italy)
-	younger men are deeply concerned with it. Such
a man as Felix Candela is not only important in Mexico but is already high in the pantheon of architectural students throughout the United States. His marvelous expressionist chapel is as much cribbed as buildings by Wright and Mies. Yet this chapel is not included and Candela is represented only in one collaborative scheme.
Mr Hitchcock finds much of his work 'unarchitectural in nature.' But if Candela fails to quality as 'architectural' how then did O'Gorman make the grade?"
—	Aline B. Saarinen, Drama in Building, New York Times, November 27, 1955
1957 "He is not an architect (though he holds honorary degrees as such), but an engineer. He is restless, wrinkled, grey Pier Luigi Nervi, 66, whose soaring exhibition halls, breath-taking airplane hangars, utilitarian salt depots and tobacco warehouses are hauled by many as amongst the handsomest structures built in this century. Pier Nervi at work with concrete (he calls it 'stone in motion') is like an Indian fakir with a rope - he makes it twirls and gyrate of itself. One Italian critic has found an apt phrase to describe Nervi's work: Poetry in concrete."
— "Poetry in Concrete," Time, November 11, 1957.
1959 "Until recently, there seemed no end to the relentless parade of slick slabs marching in monotonous array down the main streets of U.S. cities. But now there is a slow-gathering revolt against the tyranny of the grid with its curtain wall, which can make an office building look like a library, a courthouse like a morgue. Turning to engineering for a new excitement, architects are trying their hands at long-span, wafer-thin
concrete shells. As more and more unfamiliar shells set their concrete sails to the wind, they may well provide the 20th century with the focal points it has long needed to accent and offset the grid's severities. ... Playing with a whole new world of conoids, cylinders and spheres, in single, double and compound curvatures, shellman think the future is unlimited: 'We are in a period like the Gothic when it first discovered its arch and buttress. Now we have to find a way to do justice to both creative engineering and fine architecture."' — "New World of Shells," Time, March 9, 1959.
1961 "No doubt that the death Eduardo Torroja has been deeply felt in the technical field and scientists not only from Spain, but the world. Torroja put us at the forefront of the world in field of reinforced concrete, prestressed concrete, computational and structures, laminated membranes, etc." — "Eduardo Torroja, Una Perdida Irreparable," ABC, Dune 28, 1961.
TOUR or INSPECT»»-
engineer, photographed ■ now under conetnichoa h
1962 Nervi on a site-inspection in New York "Since the 'form-givers have moved into the ambiguous public wo™ of real and synthetic celebrities, the press was present. Although he courts anonymity and cultivates a kind o median grayness-con-
servative gray suit, oa tie, neutral complex'“"' ; white hair and a total lack of colorful eccen-tricities, his kind courteous face becomes firm and his eyesf'as quietly when he sp88 of the beliefs that ha j guided his fifty-year
J
ay ajljjhg is. SAAIUNGN
HANDSOME and eye-filling in lyricism, but they far surpass is the exhibition of Latin- him in site planning;, interior American architecture planning, spatial relations, de-which Just opened—with tailing;, logic, restraint and appropriate Good Neighbor pomp imaginative use of color.
—at the Museum of Modem Art. Moreira's apartment house, Under a luminous ceiling in with its careful plan, elegancd in the white gallery, the installs- scale and in sun-griUes and dis-tion, designed by Arthur Drex- creet use of color, is a distin-ler. is a three-part fugue of guished and personal work. So eight-foot-high blow-ups, photo- is his Child Research Clinic at graphs set flush in dramatic the new University City—its brown walla of insulating cork color gay and refreshing, the (like some rich Mexican organic curves of its shell-roofs related decorative material) and groups to structure, its scale-and plan-of stereopticon views.	ning expertly handled.
The photographs, mostly spe- Moreira is, moreover, one of . cially taken by Roliie McKenna, the few Latin-American archi- ■ are good, often spectacular. But tects who care about mainte- 1 it would have been hard to miss nance-proof qualities (there is a j on that score, for in curves and shocking number of buildings in color what Marilyn Monrod is to Latin America which have the Hollywood camera man, Latin weathered badly, have tiles out American buildings are to the like missing teeth, paint fading architectural photographer. unevenly, etc.). He is also almost By its very nature, Latin- uniquely concerned with careful American architecture Is the detailing, which, so Important in most photogenic in the world, our architectural esthetic, is too Note, for instance, four of too often disregarded .in Latin its special characteristics: one. America. (Brazilian architects gleaming whits concrete or told me they were astonished iq stucco-covered buildings against the Harrison & Abramovitz U. S. Technicolor-vivid blue sky and Legation Building in Rio at the greenery: two, the extensive use precision and the well-made of color In buildings, from pastel look which we take for granted hues and primaries in tiles to at home.) earthy tones in rack mosaics; Over-All Plan three, voluptuous carve, i„ plan., „	p„„et „
anh paraboll. vaaittns ayatama; . and tear, „a«,native lamer.
and rrtllea of concrete and tile ,p.rtm„t hou,„ „„t’a. section, toe eon control that	lh,
make maraMue geometric pat- c0,.v,
-erne of sharp light and shade and eonn,eted aehooi“ , contrasts.	with delightful enlivening color
Huge Building Boom	and tiles.
Handsome the exhibition • iS. In drastic contrast to these and engrossing, too. For as works, which use the dramatic Henry-Russell Hitchcock, who Latin-American vocabulary of selected and catalogued it, concrete and color and curves points out, architecture in this with coherence and restraint, are huge continent and a half—big the buildings of the Mexico City ‘as all Europe and Anglo-Saxon University.
North America combined, has Despite the publicity they had a fantastic building boom in have received and the unques-the past decade and has pro- tionable exuberance and intensity duced. especially, staggeringly of their expression, the buildings ambitious university cities, hun- seem to me badly related and dreds of public buildings and more amazing than admirable, housing projects.	¡One might even label such evl-
Any architecture is determined Idences as the Juan O'Gorman largely by Its climate, its struc- library slack, with Us rough en-tural materials, the tempera- cruslatlons of rocks, the "Mex-ment of	its	people	and the	icolino" style, for, like Manuclino
stage of its esthetic development, in Portugal, it seems essentially I Nature	was	kind	to Latin	a pictorial one. Entertaining and
I American architects. The climate curious, like most eccentricities requires basically only shelters and most unarchitectural archi-with control for sun and glare, tecture, it seems lacking in This allows, in turn, a greater esthetic endurance, freedom than when the demand Because all our conditions are is foe enclosures against un- so different, I believe this friendly elements.	exhibition will stimulate rather
In the	absence of	steel, and	than influence our architects,
with plentifqj	labor	for form-	But I think It may happily
work and the sympathetic cli- stimulate them in two areas mate, ferro-concrete is the in- where oiir vocabulary could well I evitable building «material. It is be expanded, a material which, in contrast to The revelation of'color as a Ithe linear and rectangular im-wonderfully enriching factor 'plications of steel, leads to plas- could have a really therapeutic tic or sculptural forms and effect here, for there are only curves. . Its nature encourages a few significant buildings in boldness in forms, daring canti- the United States where color levers and astonishlnly thin shell has been used grandly as an spans.	architectural element.
Finally there is in Latin Effectjve Contrast(,
America the excitement of coun- ....	.	_
tries suddenly awakened, through And	forceful proof,
arteries of airlines, to communl- "ere- 'vh,ch °ur architects have cation with the rest of the world bee|l slow in Earning despite the and quickly thrust into the varloUs lessons of Le Corbusier modern age. Modern architec- and Frank Lloyd Wright, that tine there, for instance, sprang architecture does not have to be : into being, without the birth viha‘ ?"r-	calls “flat-
pangs which accompanied its Rested. Sculptural forms, re-development in Europe and the	t°stCi<LtU,e’ "nd drRmatic '
United States, only twenty years “ght-and-shade contrasts can be ago, with the concrete-architec- beaUtlful.
lure of France (especially Le I would argu. with Mr. Hitch-Corbusier) and Italy as its cock fdr Pay|n8 scant attention fountainheads.	to engineering in Latin America,
Virtues end Vice,	iF’lXJ’S
Its .youthlulness has ted troth	^
Shi \r TroVit", “t?"S ^¿££2 “3“? to the lack of disciplines and the ,	-a.-hi-,,
ev.rst.t.meuts wide» era serous	„luHon «
its Vices.	the Btructural problems which
.	Mh,"k' .{J* will transform them Into three-
bestseenmthe show m the dimensional reallUes. But. not tHSBMHHBME and eJSSlng in lyg8$^ ,n6t^!-hrine frequently _	^xhihilrcl^ . ?i:r-	»f«hlt«C n‘ re in Latin
lean _	*ly)—younger
UClt whlch just pRh^^nth	logic, fincerned with
Neighb^^Bmp	ol
enezue	oi	rt luch a man -ikj Felix Candela
in	•Pcar?*P«Vant In Mexico
the whlte^Hiry, the |V®l!a- set Is *id in^^Bh in the pan-Uon, desig*PTl,by Arthi.iya* ex- crtOn Ose of liUCtural students!
‘ suUUghOanrith* United States, is h. marvelou|8ci expressionist Lthet-hl^^Pny.WJh cribbed as buildings by Wright and Mies.
ROOF
career. 'Our way of life is changing. Its scale is becoming grander; its problems are greater, its structural needs are expanding. It [architecture] must be reale, sustanziale, economien. Injs is my faith- la mia "ducla...1"
-Ada Louise Huxtable, , * York Times, Dune 3,1962.
1963 Prisoner of Geometry. Despite building more than 325 structures, according to his own estimates at least 20 percent cheaper than regular buildings - according to time magazine he remains the most unassuming architect of his time - as popular with time magazine as within Mexico. The article is the last of a 5 year focus in mainstream media on the engineers of shells... Dune 28. 1963, "Prisoner of Geometry " Time Magazine
Lyriker des Stahlbetons
Zum Tod Pier Luigi Nervis
einzigen Baustoff und seinen Möglichkeiten ver-hrieben: dem Stahlbeton, dem er sich fast physisch vertraut fühlen mußte. Denn er entwickelte mit ihm eine ganz neue Formensprache, er
spürte in ihm technischel^gllchkeiten auf, aus denen er ein eigenes, elegantes stilistisches Alphabet ableiten konnte. Man könnte sageriT hat den Stahlbeton von seiner brutalistischen Körperlichkeit erlöst, er hat seine Seele entdeckt und ihr Flügel verliehen. Die fast schwerelos über Flugzeughallen, Sportpaläste, Warenhäuser, Bahnhöfe und Ausstellungspavillons sich hinwegschwingenden Gewölbeschalen, die sich in ihrer tektonischen Struktur oft wie leichtes Flechtwerk ausnehmen und ihr Gewicht über wenige, monumental konzentrierte und doch elegant rhythmisierte Stützen auf die Erde übertragen, sind nicht nur die wichtigsten Beiträge Italiens zur Architektur unseres Jahrhunderts, sie behalten als technische Pionier-Bauten, die ihre ästhetischen Reize aus den Notwendigkeiten der Konstruktion entwickeln, auch für die Zukunft exemplarischen Rang.
Zu den berühmtesten Bauwerken, die er selber entworfen hat oder zu denen er als Berater zugezogen wurde, zählen die riesigen Ausstellungshallen von Turin (1949), die olympischen Sportpaläste von Rom (1959/60),	UNESCO-Gebäude von
Paris und die neue Aula im Vatikan (1971), deren gerippte Deckenwölbung wir hier abbilden. ^ GOTTFRIED KNAPP
PAGE 131
1979 "Poet of Reinforced Concrete. His engineering works ever since the 1930 persevered - where now concrete is heavily criticized - with sovereign sense of certainty. Artistic, while remaining technically obedient, considered in the current momen^Wrealized utopian ambitions whic^ were praised around the globe."
— Gottfried Knapp, Sueddeutsche Zeitung, Danuary 11, 1979.
AX
Anton Tedesko, 90, an Expert In Uses of Reinforced Concrete
Ulrich Finsterwalder,
A. Bridge Designer, 90
Ulrich Finsterwalder, a widely known West German bridge designer, died Dec. 5 in a Munich hospital. He was 90 years old and lived in Munich.
Dr. Finsterwalder designed hundreds of bridges that were built in dozens of countries, mostly in Scandinavia and central and southern Europe. He served as a consultant in the design and construction of bridges in the United States.
For half a century beginning in the 1920’s, he was connected with a Munich-based construction concern, Dyckerhoff and Widmann A.G., known as Dywidag, long serving as its chief engineer. In recent years he had been an independent consultant.
Dr. Finsterwalder added his voice to: an international controversy earlier this year, contending that the configuration of structures known as cable-stayed bridges could lead to their cables’ suffering undue vibration. That, he said, could lead to metal fatigue and other problems. Other experts disputed his contentions.
He was bom in Munich and earned a doctorate in engineering from the University of Munich.
He is survived by his wife, Eva; three sons; two daughters, and 12 grandchildren.
. By ERIC PACE
Anton Tedesko, a consulting engineer who was an expert in sophisticated uses of reinforced concrete in the construction industry, died yesterday at Northwest Hospital in Seattle. He was 90 and had moved to Seattle In 1993 from Bronxvllle, N.Y.
The cause of death was myelofibrosis, a bone marrow disorder, said his wife, Sally.
Mr. Tedesko was an expert in construction involving what are known in the industry as thin shells, made of reinforced concrete. These are large thin slabs that are given a variety of curved shapes and are used to form strong, light, graceful roofs and for other purposes.
His work largely involved industrial, institutional and government construction projects. He collaborated with I.M. Pei and other architects, was a consultant to the Air Force from 1955 to 1970 and worked on rocket-launching operations at Cape Canaveral.
The other projects that he was involved with ranged from ice arenas in Canada to a coliseum in Denver and airplane hangars in San Diego and Buenos Aires.
Germany to Chicago
Mr. Tedesko grew up in Austria. Early In his career he worked in Austria and the United States and, from 1930 to 1932, in Germany, where he was with Dyckerhoff & Widmann, a German firm that pioneered in reinforced concrete thin-shell construction.
In 1932, he joined Roberts & Schaefer, a Chicago-based engineering firm that was working with Dyckerhoff & Widmann to develop new markets for thin-shell construction.
In 1943 and 1944, Mr. Tedesko, who had become an American citizen In 1938, was an executive in Roberts & Schaefer’s Washington office, which
IB7«
Anton Tedesko
designed shells for buildings that were to be used by the United States armed forces.
He then spent a decade as an executive with the .firm in Chicago and. was a New York-based vice president from 1956 to 1967. He was self-employed after 1967.
Mr. Tedesko lived in Vienna as a boy and studied engineering there and in Berlin. He went on to be elected to the National Academy of Engineering in the United States.
He is survived by his wife, the former Sally Murray, to whom he was married in 1938; a daughter, Suzanne Affolter of Seattle; a son, Peter, of Sewickley, Pa., and four grandchildren.
1988	"Dr. Finsterwalder added his voice to an international controversy earlier this year, contending that the configuration of structures known as cable stayed bridges could lead to their cables' suffering undue vibration. That, he said, could lead to metal fatigue and other problems."
— "Finsterwalder, a bridge designer, dies at 90," New York Times, December 14, 1988.
1994 "Mr. Tedesko was an expert in construction involving what are known in the industry as thin shells, made of reinforced concrete. These are large thin slabs that are given a variety of curved sluggufid usegy# forg strong, light, graceful roofs and for other purl
— Eric Page, "Anton Tedesko, 90, an Expert iijftsasof RlffifRed Con-, Crete," New York Times, April 3, 1994.
PAGE 132
XITONG'S CAP
A conversation with the former and current presidents of the Beijing Institute of Architecture Design, He Yuru and Zhu Xiaodi, about the Chinese roof in the
1990s From Ding Shan Imperial Hill Garden. He Yuru: "The city used to look quite flat from there."
Xitong Chen (1930-2013), mayor of Beijing between 1983 and 1995.
1993 First manifesto: in a public discussion held by the city on "Recapturing Ancient Capital Style," Chen complains about the current "Majiang Style" in Beijing's new buildings: "The combination of traditions, locality and time spirits is not a whether-or-not question, but a how question ... Not only the main buildings in Beijing should present ancient capital style, but also the city as a whole should present national traditions ... Where are the ancient capital styles now? Building nowadays are just Majiang styles." Afterwards, the experts all agree on his point. (Gui Hua Shi, "Urbanist," 1993, vol. 4.)
I g, (191^J999) wltl^lang the go<$£therpf Chinese
1995 Reiteration: at an experts panel after the famous 1994 "Capital Architecture Reporting Exhibition," Chen speaks highly of a number of buildings that praise "national tradition, regional specialty, and contemporary fashion." Chen: "With 10 million square meters of new GFA each year for seven years, I feel that Beijing is developing too rapidly. What happened to the ancient capital style? Most of the buildings are Tofu / Majlng style. If we don't take care of our city, our direction will fall... By saying 'recapturing,' I mean, firstly, we should stop demonising our heritage. Secondly, new buildings should present national traditions and locality as much as possible. Thirdly, we should have more and more traditional buildings."
Koolhaas I am always impressed by how long the Re(11 > f Chinese roof has persisted into the 20th ' particularly I remember one Beijing mayor Chen » between 1983 and 1995, who had an interest in fating the Chinese roof even though in the rest world 0,°^. china that kind of roof is on the way to an° nearing. You were involved in this as state architects have always been impressed by these buildings, and ®. about the reasons behind them. I'm sure there will 91 eSthetic reasons and maybe also political reasons...
If Yuru Originally it was about aesthetics rather than lltics Chen Xitong had invited a group of important hitects in the end of 1980s including Zhang Bo and 7hana Kaiji as governmental consultants to look over g-jng's skyline from a high point, the Ding Shan Imperial Hill Garden. Based on his experience in foreign liaisons he also invited foreign guests. The city used to look quite flat from there. He concluded that almost all the buildings in the urban planning of Beijing were like tofu and majiang blocks. Ihe overall view of the city was dull and monotonous, not as beautiful as in the early 1950s or even earlier ancient ages. The modern buildings did not have an ethnic characteristic as much as the ancient architecture had. RKWhen did it happen? In 1985?
HYItwas after the massacre in 1989 and again in the early beginning of 90s.
RKSo the mayor invited all the architects to look over the city in 1989. Is that also the start of the roof policy?
HYThe policy was introduced in the late 1980s and the high point was in 1992.
RKWhat was the message you got when you looked over the city from this high point?
HYThe leadership asked us to consider the issue that the overall masterplan of Beijing was too boring. He hoped the experts could discuss how to improve the situation. This led to the introduction of the policy "Recapturing Ancient City Style." The original intent of this policy was good but as Chen was a politician he didn't know how to really improve the situation.
RKTo what extent did you receive political instructions to do a particular kind of architecture?
HY It started as a suggestion to study the issue. As a politician, Xitong believed the Chinese big roof was an 'mportant feature of the traditional architecture which he felt should be maintained. He involved the architect Zhang B°- Bo had expert knowledge of Chinese traditional architecture and together with the Society of Chinese iraditional Architecture Research, he had done surveys on ^ore than 300 palaces and other traditional structures.
0	r®capture the traditional characteristics, Zhang Bo Su9gested the first thing they could start with was to make Creases teach the roof tops. Making the roof accessible created the possibility of building a Chinese pavilion on °P-Therefore, mayor Chen soon received a nickname en Xiting ["Ting" is phonetically referred to pavilion in
Mandarin],
Zhu Xiaodi Zhang Bo was together with Liang Sicheng part of the early generation of architects who studied in the US
mmmW' v
TEN BIG ROOFS
RK So this actually starts in the 1930s. Istnfre a period that the Chinese roofs disappeared and then reappeared? ZX It started with Liang Sicheng in the early 1950s. When he came back to China from the US he proposed that Chinese modern architecture should have its own traditional Chinese characters. He started by adding Chinese big roofs on top of the buildings he designed.
So in 1953-1955 some buildings with Chinese big roofs emerged. However, he started to be criticized due to the cost for wasting money on the big roofs.
RK When did the criticism start? After the ten buildings for the 10th anniversary of the PRC?
HYThis criticism wasn't personal. The prime minister regarded it as an academic discussion rather than a political issue. The dismissal of traditional features in architecture started before 1956 and the ten buildings were different from case to case. The most typical one was the Office Building of the Discipline Inspection Commission by Zhang Kaiji. The first design had two roofs at both edges and during the process of criticism the roofs were eliminated. It was the first case against the Chinese roof. Most of the ten buildings don't have big roofs, except for the Art Gallery, Agricultural Exhibition Hall and Ethnic Palace. The Railway station only has a slope at the top.
RK Did the roofs of the 10 buildings become smaller or simplified?
HY Actually it was not simplification. It depends on the nature of the buildings. It's no coincidence that the People's Great Conference Hall doesn't have a Chinese big roof. Neither do the Historical museum and the Military museum.
RK In my eyes, the People's Great Hall has a Chinese-like roof but how is that not the Chinese roof? It's funny because in my false memory all the 10 buildings had a big Chinese roof...
ZX The Ethnic Palace has a Chinese roof since as it is about ethnicity. This building was one of the buildings designed by Zhang Bo.
RK Was he able to maintain the Chinese roof during all his career or he was also not designing Chinese roofs in the time of criticism?
ZX He did his entire career!
EVOLUTION
RK Would you always support the big roof or did the invitation by the mayor change your views? Compared with Zhang Bo, do you think the younger generation will maintain the Chinese roof?	H|
HYThe application of the Chinese rtt^epends on the nature of the buildings as well as th^^^Bxt. Nlfeybe under certain circumstances it's still OK tcduji^K Chinese roof.
PAGE 134
ROOF
1956 Friendship hotel by Zhang Bo.
1950s Office Building of the Discipline Inspection Commission, first design.
1959 The Ten Buildings, Beijing, celebrating the 10th anniversary of the People's Republic. From top left: Beijing Railway Station, Beijing Workers' Stadium, China National Agricultural Exhibition Center, Diaoyutai State Guesthouse Beijing, Great Flail of the People, Military Museum of the Chinese People's Revolution, National Culture Palace of Beijing, National Hotel, Prime Hotel Beijing, The Museum of the Chinese Revolution.
1970s Da Guanyuan Hotel. Hy: "I only made it half way and cut off the top part, leaving a flat section, which could accommodate ducts and eauiDment and become functional."
1970s Da Guanyuan Hotel, Beijing.
ROOF
PAGE 135
Lampl^ 1 design next w
Da Guanyuan Hotel in Beijing,
K:	the Da Guanyuan garderT^Wtin that context, I
k ¡t was right to build a Chines
^^brchitecture with real wood, you need to fully
a stand Chinese traditional architectural construction.
un° | did this roof I also introduced some evolution to at*
jjj^/hattype of evolution? Construction method, material,
fjycii-st I looked at the building typology and the properties f the building. For instance, the hotel I designed only had 0 floors. I think it is unsuitable for tall buildings or Tidings ¡n big scales to have a Chinese roof. Secondly as hotel is deep, we could not fully follow the traditional Chinese roof design. I only made it half way and cut off the top part, leaving a flat section, which could accommodate ducts and equipment and become functional. I don't think it's about the material.
rK Were you a new generation of innovators looking at the Chinese roof and willing to adapt that, or were you the first generation who did that? Did others also make evolutions to adapt new functions?
HYZhang Jinsheng, a student of Liang Sicheng, she also designed Chinese roof buildings in Xi'an. She was also part of this generation. Her architecture was more founded in Tang Dynasty style which has roofs with a gentler slope, compared to the roofs in Beijing which were mostly in Qing Dynasty style.
RK Did you ever build a Chinese roof on buildings that have more than three floors?
HYNo.
RKWhat about the Ethnic Palace building. Do you think it's awful?
HYIt'sa tall building but actually I think it is beautiful as it is more like a Chinese tower. A better example is the Friendship Hotel designed by Zhang Bo. Actually the architectural treatment of the roof is more like treating it as a single floor building.
RK This is the first hotel I lived in in Beijing and I really love it and I think it is beautiful.
SCIENCE
HY Actually the Chinese roof has scientific grounds. The slope at the lower part is gentler while the upper part is steeper, and thus the raindrops flow faster on the upper Part and then slow down and like a ski jumper as it reaches further from the building. There were many discussions on making the roofs with one same sloping angle. A typical case of making the effort in the 1970s was the Beijing Library. Five important architects had worked on it and discussed what would happen of the roof slope was in straight line. In the end, they found it was not successful.
RKWriy do you think it was not successful? Aesthetically,
°r for other reasons?
|i* Aesthetically it was too simple and lost the subtlety of ® Traditional look. Beside this, functionally it lost its scientific reason.
RK We have talked about 1980s, 90s and also 50s, now how about the 1960s and 70s?
HY I would like to make addition to the architecture of the 1950s. The 10 buildings were, in the eyes of the Japanese, Stalinist in style. Zhang Jianxin led a group of Japanese
visitors to visit the 10 buildings and in their views, those
buildings such as the PeopleT’Great Hall were Stalinist.
RK Do you think it was really influencecnsy the Stalinist style? Do you think the influence was literal?
HYYes, to a certain extent. There were some buildings under personal influence of the Soviet style. One of them is the Broadcasting building, and also the Military museum. RK Was that Soviet Chinese style a compromise in terms of aesthetics?
HE It started at beginning of 1960s, after the 10 buildings. Stalin was already dead at the time.
RK So do you think the Stalinism was compatible with Chinese style?
HY It's difficult to tell. In 1959 a big conference to discuss architectural style was held in Shanghai, and there were important meeting minutes which indicated China should develop in the direction of socialism + realism + nationalism. This combination was defined as the fixed conditions for all Chinese creative projects.
RK So the Chinese roof moment was stopped in the 1960s?
HY Basically it stopped somewhere between 1960 and 1962, when China was suffering from natural disasters and starvation. Therefore during this period the Chinese big roof was stopped.
CULTURAL REVOLUTION
RK Did the Cultural Revolution have any relationship with the Chinese roof, or impact on the credibility of the Chinese roof?
HYThe Cultural Revolution probably stopped architecture in general. During the Cultural Revolution and the later phase of the revolution period, architecture was strongly affected by political influences. The railway station of Changsha is a typical and important case. For the design of the railway station, a lot of famous Chinese architects, including Zhang Bo, had been invited to discuss the design. As it was the home town of Mao, it was necessary to reflect the political idea of "A little flame can bum a whole grassland." Therefore, torches were used as the symbolic element in the design for the project. According to political belief the wind from the east prevails over the wind from the west, and the flames on the torches should incline to the west. However, since the station faces west, it would look very awkward if the flames were inclining to the west in a gesture like they were blown from behind. And thus, because of political reasons, they made the flames go straight upwards. The political influence from the Cultural Revolution on architecture lasted ur^M^refatfttand opening up policy was introduced. B _	■ 11
RK So the Chinese roof died three iB^™etw^jrthe j 1950s and 80s and actually your m(MHen«i ttf^Chinese
I
PAGE 136
ROOF
2009 Wang Shu, Central Academy Building, New Art Academy, ] Hangzhou.
1954 Chinese Stalinism, by Liang Sichen after seeing the Soviet Palace of Culture91' and Science in Warsaw, under construe- ’ tion when he visited.
1978 Railway Station of Changsha: "A little flame can bum a whole grassland."
PAGE 137
WANG SHU
RK Would you say Wang Shu is influenced by any of this history, or do his references go back to earlier history?
ZXI think Wang Shu's roofs are not in the same context of our discussion on Chinese roof.
RKDo you think his roofs are a kind of fantasy?
ZX Actually I think he built the roofs as a small image and this reflects the Chinese architecture tradition in responding to the local environment and context. The key features of his design are not limited to the Chinese roof but also to walls, the building materials and such. The Chinese roof has a clear front side and the roofs in Wang Shu's design use the section side as the front. He borrowed the curves of the Chinese traditional roof in his roof design.
RKHow does your generation look at the Chinese roof now? Do you have sympathy for it, do you find it inspiring or you feel forced to do it?
HYI think given appropriate circumstances it could still be used. When we want to use the Chinese roof, we should study and develop it. We should not only copy the traditional. For example, on one Chinese roof I did, I replaced the traditional feudal metaphors with pigeons.
application of new Chineseness should adapt to the sew developed circumstances of China with new leanings and new metaphors. Architects should not simply copy the old form into the new architecture.
^ res, I agree it should be limited to certain appropriate conditions for the site location and for adaptability. When e site context is appropriate for the volume of the Reject and the stories of the building there are also Rations that should be respected. And the application traditional architecture should not happen anywhere. r example, maybe it could be meaningful to build uitional architecture within the 2nd Ring Road.
I arrie very 'ate w'^	kinds °f preceding
<0° tions. D° y°u think it felt like it wa^^illy original, neSI n radical and daring for mayor Chen to gettn^^^ Xse roof back?
Sating surely [laughs],
w | think modern China has been in the process of m.a [jack and forth between its own tradition and 5j tation to the West. Probably in these three phases the £ese roof prevailed!
ail think we cannot say if it's daring or not since it was ” an early stage of the opening period and there were 3 ous and different ideas happening at the same time, ^ink Liang Sicheng's exploration in the early 50s was liarinq as he was the one who proposed the Chinese roof. B Liang's proposal was not using the Chinese roof only. He actually developed a rating standard for architecture: eW+ Chinese architecture is top grade, Chinese + new rchitecture is second grade, Western + new is the third rade and western + traditional (Classic) architecture is fourth grade, the lowest level. Even Liang didn't propose the Chinese big roof as the only possible architecture for new China.
2013 Ise shrine rebuilding receives record crowds for its rebuilding, which happens every 30 years. This is the 62nd rebuilding.
PAGE 138
PROSPECT: NOSTALGIA, PATENTS, SUSTAINABILITY, AND THE DE-POLITICIZED ROOF
2012 Adoration of traditional roof structures.
Three interlocking conditions seem to determine the current status of the roof: a nostalgia-driven adoration of the old roof, an increased demand for roofs to become a tool for sustainability, and the new shapes offered by advanced geometry...
Ancient roofs are in high demand: around the globe they are studied, protected and reconstructed and increasingly sold. Formulated in capitals - "WITH ORIGINAL ROOF" -by real estate agents of purist countryside barns and houses, nothing can obscure the presence of the old rustic roof, even more persistently proclaimed than Naumberg-Schulz and his compatriots would have ever been able to... Farmers in the meantime rely on newly pre-fabricated steel barn roofs ordered through a form in which you only need to specify length, width and date of erection...
What is it that makes us so nostalgic? Compared to the non-presence of the roof in the city, traditional and ancient roofs demand space, and with it offer peace, tranquility, the possibility to touch the old, and that the steady oak purlin might give life a structural presence? Respectfully taking the temple apart and reassembling it has become a major international tourism event celebrated by architects - an event of soul searching? The ritual of the Ise Shrine as Burning Man festival for architects.
Apple denied to comment as part of their policy of not discussing any patents-related issues...
The urban roofscape is increasingly submitted to a regime of sustainability: green roofs (vegetated), white roofs (painted to reflect heat) and blue roofs (for storing water). The various attempts to reduce our carbon footprint rely on additions of adaptations to the flat roof, while structural innovation happens elsewhere...
A survey of recent built political headquarters reveals a spectrum of architectural expressions of the roof: the Chinese-built African Union building in Addis Ababa merges the tradition of the dome with advanced geometry through an egg shaped plenary room on top of a solid volume. Angola has a more classical conception of its political representation with the construction of the new parliament building topped by a 42-meter wide neoclassical dome made of prefabricated paneling. The new Residence Palace or 'Europa' building of the European Commission, located next to the existing Council and Commission HQ, will be an important addition to the political center. As an adaptation of a 1920s building a central glass covered courtyard is occupied by a glass gilded meeting "urn" topped by an "umbrella of solar panels"... A flimsy-feeling, mostly transparent roof will cover perhaps the most powerful place on earth...
As a counter moment to the flattening urban roofscape, the spectacular rock formation built on top of a Beijing skyscraper received massive media attention after residents were scared whether the structure would collapse because of the weight added to the top. International correspondents found in it a symbolic case proving corruption and decadence is rife in China. It turns out the rocks were mostly made of Styrofoam and the owner actually did receive most of the official approvals. However the Beijing authorities, pressured by the media attention, hurried to start dismantling the decorative innovation.

In the US, Apple has patents for the construction of curved glass roof structures. The first patent, with Steve Dobs as one of the registered inventors, approved in 2011, patents the light curving shape of the roof. The second, approved in 2012, is a more technical file for a glass structure "including struts, wherein utilities such as pipes and cables can be contained within the purlins, and can pass through openings in the struts, to thereby be retained by the
Sslruct»^es so as to be hidden from view" - in other 'Hat Wagna^mad already done at the Viennese rbajwhqfflflan 100 years ago, just like thousands ects after	our question why it had
:^^^Wiing ^generic as this particular roof,
ROOF
PAGE 139
2012 Apple patents the generic slightly sloped glass roof.
2013 Angola National Assembly, Luanda.
2016 EUROPA building, Brussels, HQ of the European Council and Council of the EU.
2014 Rockery removed.
' 'yrofoam rock rooftop by the Beijing mad hatter...
PAGE 140
ROOF RESERVES
Ethnoparks echo a worldwide desire to reproduce collections of ancient and folk buildings, sometimes including re-enactments of folk life. Though not exclusively limited to roofs, they seem to form the most dramatic part of the displays. The first ethnopark is a by-product of the Paris Exposition Universelle in 1899 - which also unveils the telephone, dy^MoTthe megaphone and phonograph. At 5oa Swedish farmhouse, a Norwegian loft house and a 1:1 diorama of folk life are displayed. One of the contributors to the expo, Swedish folklorist Arthur Hazelius, has his own outdoor museum near Stockholm. He transports 16th—18th century farm houses and other rural structures from all over Sweden and reassembles them in Stockholm. Norway (1904), Poland (1906), Netherlands (1912), Romania (1932), the US (1934), United Kingdom (1946), Estonia (1957), Belgium (1958), Germany (1960), and Austria (1962) follow Hazelius' example. In 1966, the Association for European Open Air Museums (AEOAM) is founded and its US counterpart the Association for Living History, Farm and Agricultural Museums (ALHFAM) appears in 1970. Together they set standards for reconstruction, use of materials, technology and scale differences (though life-size is preferred). What started as romanticism has led to a highly sophisticated discipline dedicated to "scientific collections in the open air of various types of structures, which as constructional and functional entities, illustrate settlement patterns, dwellings, economy and technology" (AEOAM).
1891 Stiftelsen Skansen National Open Air Museum, Stockholm, is the worlds oldest ethnopark. The Skansen park covers five centuries of Swedish history with 250 structures spread out over 75 acres now attracting 1.4 mj. lion visitors every year.
1970 The Little World Museum of Man near Inuyama, Japan, has the best collection of roofs in Asia. When entering from a "universal starting point for mankind" visitors are scattered over the globe with reconstructed pavilions ranging from Peruvian palaces, Alaskan huts, a Bavarian village, Samoan Houses, Alsace Farmhouses, to a complete compound from Burkina Faso.
2006 One of the latest ethnoparks is EtnoMIR in Russia's Kaluga region, specializing in Yakutian huts and Mongol architecture.
2012 Indonesia in the Netherlands: Florlade 2012, Venlo.
2014 India In China: China Ethnic Park, Dali, Yunan Province.
Mt rf&rmany in Germany: Freilichtmuseum Bad Sobernheim.	2014 Germany in Japan: Little World Museum of Man, Inuyama, Aichi.
PAGE 142
FLAT PACKED ANCIENTS: XIEGU CONSTRUCTIONS
Founded in 1999, Xiegu Constructions collects, restores, sells and installs ancient Chinese architecture. Based in Zuhou, in an area with a longstanding tradition in carpentry, they have three enormous warehouses full of ancient structures, dismantled and stacked up, complete with 3D renderings, like Ikea flatpacks, waiting to be restored and reused.
The structures are found in abandoned villages in the countryside - collected and restored by the 40 craftsmen employed by Xiegu. A qualitative survey identifies parts to be redeveloped: 80 percent of the reconstructed parts are made by hand, with only 20 percent of it machine made.
A small decorated lintel requires approximately two months works for one craftsmen.
Xiegu's clients are collectors and developers - Jackie Chan its most prominent, owning a collection of more than 20 ancient houses. The most popular are baroqueish Ming and Qing dynasty houses. For finishing, Xiegu offers its clients styles ranging from neo-classical to minimalist modern, refitted to accommodate a variety of programatic uses including gyms, wellness, house, Starbucks...
Basic construction price is around 20,000 RMB / m2 (2,200 Euros / m2), a 50 m2 pavilion is sold for around 1 million RMB (115,000 Euros). Fully furnished prices for a 420 m2 palace can reach 40 million RMB (4.7 million Euros). The increasing popularity of traditional Chinese culture, within and outside the country, has spiked demand -prompting Xiegu to start opening up to the rest of the world...
PAGE 144
ROOF
THE MODERNIZED BARN
ROOF
PAGE 145
PAGE 146
COLORED ROOFS
Sustainability demands have a massive effect on our roofscapes, turning them green (vegetation / urban farming), white (reflective painting), and blue (photovoltaics / water storage). Others continue to long for the archetypal quality of the r^^of...
BLUE ROOFS
1991 Germany passes the Renewable Energy Law, offering incentives for households and businesses to Invest in a variety of renewable energy sources, mostly solar panels. The "energy transition" policy introduced by the German government after the 2011 Fukushima nuclear disaster In Japan increases the ambitions: 80 percent of energy must be from renewable sources by 2050 - much of it to be attained by solar power. These successive policies have turned the traditional German countryside blue. Solar power production now doubles every 1.5 years. In 2012, the southern state of Bavaria, with 12.5 million inhabitants, has three photovoltaic panels per resident - more than the installed solar capacity of the entire United States...
1979 President Jimmy Carter dedicates the 32 solar panels he has installed on the White House roof: "In the year 2000, this solar water heater behind me, which is being dedicated today, will still be here supplying cheap, efficient energy ... A generation from now, this solar heater can either be a curiosity, a museum piece, an example of a road not taken or it can be just a small part of one of the greatest and most exciting adventures ever undertaken by the American people." Reagan immediately removes the solar roof upon taking office in 1981. They are reinstalled again by George W. Bush in 2002 and extended by Obama, who supports the US based solar panel producer Solyndra only for it to go bankrupt.
PAGE 147
¿¡¿Eco-friendly religion: the Poh Ern Shih Temple is Singapore's first ^Hfendly temple. While Chinese solar panel producers advertise their ¿¿¡illation of solar panels on Chinese ancient temples: the Vatican is solarized In 2012...
2011 Hut photovoltaics: for $1.50 a week, Azuri Technologies will Install solar panels In emerging but still off-the-grld markets to power four fixed highbrightness LED lights and a USB port for phone charging. Using scratch cards, customers pay as they go through their mobile phones. After 18 months, customers can upgrade their systems and access more energy to power items like a television, computer, and sewing machine.
2013 Flatpack photovoltaics: solar panels are introduced for sale at Ikea in the UK. For £5,700, Ikea will install solar panels to cover the roof of a small, semi-detached house, as well as maintain and monitor the equipment, potentially saving an average three-bedroom home up to £768 a year.
2013 Shades of blue: researchers at the German Frauenhofer Institute are developing a new type of solar cell which Is not necessarily a single shade of blue. By developing an inkjet printing process for the conductive TCO
layer on the silicon wafer, it enables the production of multi-colored cells, as well as the ability to integrate design elements into solar panels: "This opens up numerous possibilities to use a building to communicate information, displaying the name of a company or even artistic pictures." (Fraunhofer Institute Research News, Duly 2013.)
PAGE 148 WHITE ROOFS
u,uc in a sea ,
white-roofed houses in the arid climate of Palm Springs, Californitt Residences as well as commercial properties with flat roofs in Calif nia's five hottest zones are required to have white or light-colored roof! according to California's 2005 en ergy code, the Title 24 Building fn ergy Efficiency Standard. Because steep-sloped roofs are often visible from the ground, however, roofinq material manufacturers develop ° popular roof colors other than white that will still reflect or emit the sun's energy away from the building.
1973 The American budget hotel chain Red Roof, launched in 1973 and now with 345 hotels in 36 states, actually lack... a red roof. When asked why, the press department insists it is a figure of speech. Hotel buildings may feature a semi-pitched roof but not the traditional image evoked by the brand.
2009 Cool roofs: promoting the whitening of New York City's roofs by sending volunteers to apply reflective white paint to the roofs of targeted neighborhoods. The idea came from the US energy secretary and Nobel prize winner Dr. Steven Chu in 2009: making roofs reflect heat could dramatically reduce the energy needed for air conditioning. According to Chu, if all roofs today were white, and all pavements were cement, the reflection of sunlight back to space would be equivalent of removing all the automobiles from the world for 11 years.
2009 Temporary white roof: The temporary structure market relies on the white pavilion, which can be easily disassembled, and allows in plenty of light in the absence of glass. In a world increasingly dominated by temporality, the available typologies of temporary structures ranges from airport terminals to climate conferences...
RED ROOFS
Red is probably the most used color In roof finishes around the world. Beyond the built substance, red lives on In books, brands, childrens books as an archetypal shelter.
1935 La Priere des Petits, illustrated by Deanne Hebbelynck.
2000 The Lost Thing, written and illustrated by Shaun Tan.
1927 Tales Told in	1945 The Family at Red
Holland, edited by	Roofs, Enid Blyton.
Olive Beaupre Miiler, illustrated by Maud &
Miska Petersham.
1965 The Dolls House, illustrated by Josephine Wilkinson.
2000 The top hat: Chen Xitong, mayor of Beijing, is not the only Chinese mayor unhappy with his city's skyline in the 1990s. In 1999 the mayor of Shanghai, Huang Hu, looks from his airplane window and is unimpressed by the expanse of grey rooftops. To redeem the situation he launches the "Flat-to-Pitched Roof Project" in 2000: adding pitched roofs to social housing projects from the 1980s and 90s. More than 9,000 pitched corrugated-steel roofs with a red roof tile motif are added to Shanghai's social housing.
PAGE 149
green roofs
2015 Frank Gehry's design for the new Facebook headquarters in Menlo Park, Silicon Valley, features a green roof, which according to Gehry Partners, "from the outside will appear as if you're looking at a hill in nature."
1975 Green office: though not the first of its kind, the Willis Faber Dumas Building, designed by Norman Foster with "office gardens" on the flat roof of an otherwise perfectly sealed building, prove to be a harbinger of green roof construction worldwide.
2009 Dubai Food City by GLC imagines a completely green "off-the-grid, self-sufficient metropolis." Food City is made up of an artificial roof landscape that would use the entire toolbox of urban sustainability initiatives, including solar collectors, photovoltaic cells, piezoelectric pads, methane harvesting, atmospheric water harvesting, solar desalination, grey water recycling, and hydroponic sand.
2013 Locavore roof: In cities the roof offers a platform for a new generation of foodies to combine their dedication to both nature and urban life. Inspired by the book Hungry City by Carolyn Steel, which describes the complex logistics of food production, the locavore movement has spread into hundreds of small initiatives worldwide. In Rotterdam, a vegetable garden roof is established on the roof of the Schieblock, an empty office building reclaimed by start-ups, located next to the most polluted roundabout of the Netherlands...
PAGE 150
ADVANCED HUTS
Parametric 3D software and advanced milling capabilities enable ultimate freedom in designing roof shapes, leading to intricate structural systems that resonate with the "primitive hut"...
1999-2003 US
Walt Disney Opera Hall, Los Angeles, Frank Gehry.
2001-2014 FRANCE
Musee des Confluences, Lyon, Coop Hlmmelb(l)au.
2003-2008 CHINA
National Stadium, Beijing, Herzog & de Meuron
2004-2012 UNITED KINGDOM
London Aquatics Centre, Zaha Hadid Architects.
2004	AUSTRIA
Kunsthaus Graz, Peter Cook.
2005-2010 CHINA
Guangzhou Opera House, Zaha Hadid Architects.
2006-TAIWAN	2007-2017 GERMANY
Wei-Wu-Ying Center for the Arts, Kaohsiung,	Elbphilharmonie, Hamburg, Herzog & de Meuron.
Mecanoo.
2007-2011 UNITED KINGDOM
Riverside Museum, Glasgow, Zaha Hadid Architects.
Novartis, Basel, Gehry Partners.
Heydar Aliyev Center, Baku, Zaha Hadid Architects.
Shenzhen Bao'an International Airport, Shenzhen, Massimiliano and Doriana Fuksas.
2008-201 2 CHINA	2009-2013 TAIWAN	2010 NETHERLANDS
Dalian International Conference Center, Dalian,	Taichung Metropolitan Opera House, Toyo Ito. The Blob, Eindhoven, Massimiliano Fuksas.
Coop Himmelb(l)au.
2010 ABU DHABI
Ferrari World Benoy Architects.
2010 QATAR
Qatar National Museum, Doha, Dean Nouvel.
PAGE 152 bibliography
"Art: Poetry in Concrete." November 11, 1957.
Time,
I
Alberti, Leon Battista. The Architectu Leon Batista Alberti in Ten I Translation by Edwara Owen, London,
1755
Alcolea, Ruben, Beatriz Colomina, Kenneth Frampton, Hector Garcia-Diego, and Spyros Papapetros. Architects' Journeys: Building, Traveling, Thinking. New York: GSAPP Books, 2011.
Gwilt, Joseph (Trans.) Vitruvius' Architecture. London: Lockwood & Co, 1874.
History and Development of Ancient Sse Architecture. Beijing: Science Press, 1986.
History of Russian Architecture. Academy of Architecture, USSR Institute of History and Theory of Architecture, 1955.
Hoffsummer, P. (ed) Roof Frames from the 11th Century to the 19th Century. Turnhout: Brepols Publishers, 2002.
Necipoglu, Giilru. TFe Topkapi Scroll
Try and Ornament in Islamic Arok■
tecture. USA: Oxford University Press
1996.
Nute, Kevin. Frank Lloyd Wright and Ja_ The Role of Traditional Japanese Art and ^ Architecture in the Work of Frank Lloyd Wright. London: Routledge, 2000.
Oliver, Paul. Dwellings: The Vernacular House Worldwide. Revised Edition. London: Phaidon, 2002.
Ostendorf, Friedrich. Die Geschichte des Dachwerks. Leipzig, Berlin: B.G.Teubner 1908.
Bannister, Turpin C. "The Genealogy of the Dome of the United States Capitol" in Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians Vol. 7, No. 1-2, January-June, 1948. 1-31
Billington, David. Robert Maillart, Builder, Designer and Artist. Cambridge University Press, 1997. 241-242.
de Vries, Gerrit and Dorothee Höweler. Henri Maclaine Pont: Architect, Constructeur En Archeoloog. Rotterdam,
2009.
Feng, Jiren. Chinese Architecture and Metaphor: Song Culture in the Yingzao Fashi Building Manual. Hilo: Hawaii University Press, 2012.
Garlock, Maria. Felix Candela: Engineer, Builder, Structural Artist. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2008. 66.
Gropius, Walter. "Das flache Dach; Internationale Umfrage über die technische Durchführbarkeit horizontal abgedeckter Dächer und Balkone" in Bauwelt no. 8, 1926. 162-168.
Horiguchi, Sutemi. Gendai Oranda kenchiku (Contemporary Dutch Architecture). Iwanami Shoten, 1924.
"H. P. Berlage (1856-1934) travels to The Dutch East-Indies." http://de.slideshare. net/
bintphotobooks/h-p-berlage-18561934-travels-to-the-dutch-eastindies (accessed February 19, 2014).
Janse, H. Houten Kappen in Nederland 1000-1940. Delft: Delftse Universitaire Pers, 1989.
Jie, Li. Yingzao Fashi. Cathay Bookshop, 2006.
Kulkarni, Raghunath Purushottam. Präsäda Mandana Of Sütradhära Mandana. New Delhi: Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 2005.
Lu, Jiefeng, "Revealing the Cemetery of The New No.1 Army," Forum of China Expeditionary Army (Zhongguo Yuanzhengjun Luntan), www.yuanzhengjun. cn/ft/gonghua/gongmu.html (accessed 2 October, 2013).
Parent, M.N. The Roof in Japanese Buddhist
Architecture. New York, Tokyo: Weatherhill Kajima, 1983.
Pommer, Richard. "The Flat Roof: A Modernist Controversy in Germany" in Art' Journal; Vol. 43 Issue 2, June 1983. 158.
Ragette, Friedrich. Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region. Sharjah: American University of Sharjah, 2003.
Risebero, B., A.G. van Melle and W.J. van Melle-Meijer. Architectuur: vijftien eeuwen bouwkunst van de westerse beschaving. Amsterdam: Ploegsma 1981.
Rykwert, Joseph. On Adam's House in Paradise. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1981.
Saarinen, Aline B. "Drama in Building, The Museum of Modern Art Sets Forth Impressive Latin-American Show," The New York Times, November 27, 1955.
Saeftel, Friedrich. Krummolz-und cruck-Dachwerk in Nordwest-Europa. Eckernforde: J.C. Schwensen, 1970.
Guo, Qinghua. The Structure of Chinese Timber Structure: Twelfth Century Design Standards and Construction Principles. Minerva Press, 1999.
Guo, Yuanxi. "Reviews of Each Pavillion in the World Affair", The Chinese Architects (Zhongguo Jianzhu) Vol.2 02, 1934.
Guo, Yuanxi, "The Discussion of New Chinese Architecture ", The Builder (Jianzhu Yuekan) Vol.2, 06, 1934.
Marasinghe, E.W. (Trans.) Vastuvidyasastra Ascribed To Mahjusrf. Delhi: Publisher, 1989.
May, Roland. "Schalenkrieg, Ein Bauingenieur-Drama in neun Akten." Beton-und Stahlbetonbau Vol. 107, October 2012. 700-710.
Ming, Tong. Sienna, Tung Chuin Grand Tour Painting. Southeast University Press, 2012.
Moore, Jerry. The Prehistory of Home. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press,
2012.
Schultze-Naumburg, Paul. Flaches oder geneigtes Dach? Munich: Tonindustriezeitung Seger & Cramer, 1927.
Sicheng, Liang. A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1984.
Sicheng Liang. Liang Sicheng Completed Works - Volume 7. China Architecture and Building Press, 2001.
Sicheng, Liang. Qing Structural Regulation
Beijing, 1934.
Liang. Zhong gùojian zhu shi. literature and Art PublishingHOTB^i
gaihua u
2005.
., ßgidwin E. The Dome: A Study in Wïu'ctnrv of Ideas. Princeton: Princeton tl'eHlS "press, 1950.
University i
Wanken; Zur 100. Wiederkehr des r hurtstages von Franz Dischinger. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Verlag, 1987.
eht,
Manfred (Ed.) Spannweite der
K-ch'eng, U Wilma Fairbank. A Pictorial
R_____of Chinese Architecture.
Cambridge, MA: MIT, 1984.
Thrane, Susan W., Tom Patterson. State Houses: America's 50 State Capitol Buildings. Ontario: The Boston Mills Press, 2005.
T5sL Mohamad ben Mohamad Nasîr al-Dïn. Maçjmü'a. Recueil d'ouvrages d'astronomie etde mathématiques, 1501-1600 http:// gallica.bnf.fr/ark:/12148/btv1 b52503120k (Accessed 14 September, 2013).
Trachtenberg, Marvin. Architecture, From Prehistory to Post-Modernism: The Western Tradition. New York: H.N. Abrams, 1986.
Utzon, Dorn. "Platforms and Plateaus:
Ideas of a Danish Architect," in Zodiac n. 10, Milano, 1962.
Van Eyck, Aldo, Paul Parin, and Fritz Morgenthaler. "A Miracle of Moderation,"
Via 1,1968. 96.
Violet-le-Duc, Eugène. Dictionnaire raisonné de /'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle. Vol 3. Paris: B. Bance Éditeur, 1858.
Vitruvius Pollio, Marcus. De Architecture Decern Libri. Edited by Giovanni Giocondo. Venice: G. da Tridentino, 1511.
Wenzhao, Robert Fan. "Chinese Architecture", Culture Construction (Wenhua Dianshe), Vol.1 01, 1934.
Wenzhao, Robert Fan. "Diya Apartment, and Ximo Road Urban Housing", The Chinese Architects (Zhongguo Dianzhu) Vol. 24,
1934.
Wenzhao, Robert Fan. "Review of My Europe Travel," The Chinese Architects W'oi’Oguc Dianzhu) Vol. 24, 1934.
PAGE 154
image sources and courtesy
PO The trustees of the British Museum.
All rights reserved.
P6 Les dix livres d'architecture de Vitruve.
E. Tardieu, A. Coussin e.a., 1837.
P7 Trachtenberg, Marvin. Architecture, from prehistory i^!ost-modernism: the
™uadition. H.N. Abrams, 1986; ^Oliver, Paul. Dwellings: the vernacular house world wide. Phaidon, 2002; History and Development of Ancient Chinese Architecture. Science Press, 1986; Moore, Derry. The Prehistory of Home. University of California Press, 2012; B. Risebero, A.G. van Melle, WJ. van Melle-Meijer. Architectuur: vijftien eeuwen bouwkunst van de westerse beschaving. Ploegsma Amsterdam, 1981; Ragette, Friedrich. Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region. American University of Sharjah. Edition Axel Menges, 2003; Akademia Arhitektury Sssr Institut Istorii I Teorii Arhitektury. Istoria russkoj arhitektury. Gosudarstvennoe izdatel'stvo literatury po stroitel'stvu i arhitekture, 1956; Saeftel, Friedrich. Krummolz-und cruck-Dachwerk in Nordwest-Europe. Eckernforde. D.C. Schwensen, 1970; Vries, Gerrit de and Dorothee Howeler. Henri Maclaine Pont: Architect, Constructeur En Archeoloog. Stichting BONAS, 2009.
P9 Marasinghe, E. W. The Vastuvidya $astra, Vol. 1, Marijusri, Sri Satguru Publications, 1989; Qurra, Thabit B. Treatise on the mensuration of paraboloids. UNESCO Publishing, 2001.
P13-68 Die, Li. Yingzao Fashi, 1103. Photography of existing roofscapes in the PRD by Marieke van den Fleuvel.
P76-77 Copyright© 2012 All rights reserved University of Northern Iowa.
P85 Corbis.
P86 Photo by B.F. Upton.
P87 Photo by Manfred Leiter.
P88 The Gertrude Bell Collection at Newcastle University Library.
P89 Premier Composite Technologies LLC.
P90 Henry Davis Consulting, Inc; Polo, Marco. The Travels of Marco Polo: The Complete Yule-Cordier Edition, Vol.
Dover Publications, 1993; Foucher, A. and, Ecole française “xtreme-Orient. L'art
bouddhique du Gandhâra: étude sur les origines de l'influence classique dans l'art bouddhique de l'Inde et de l'Extrême-Orient. Nabu Press, 2011.
P91 Levi, Doro. Antioch Mosaic Pavements. L'Erma di Bretschneider, 1971; marquis de Vogüé, Melchior. Les églises de la Terre Sainte. Librairie de Victor Didron, 1860; Vincent, Louis Hugues and Abel, F.-M. (Félix-Marie). Jérusalem; recherches de topographie, d'archéologie et d'histoire. Gabalda, 1912.
P92 Thomas Ustick Walter.
P94 Legend Tours; WAM architecten;
Dari Mozaicdunia 2010; Mikhail Posokhin © Mnxann riocoxMH, 2008 r.
P95 SROSP -"Association of urban planning and design" Russia; Copyright © 2014 Tripologist All Rights Reserved; photo by Kukoq Nyoq; photo by A. De Cara 1996.
P97 Horiguchi, Sutemi. Gendai Oranda kenchiku. Contemporary Dutch Architecutre. Iwanami Shoten, 1924.
P98 Chuta Ito; Nute, Kevin. Frank Lloyd Wright and Japan: The Role of Traditional Japanese Art and Architecture in the Work of Frank Lloyd Wright. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group Ltd, 2000; photo by Ernst May; Ernst May War Sketch Book.
P99 Photo by Arpingstone.
P100 Berlage, H. P. Travels to The Dutch East-Indies, 1931; Eckhard, Herrel. Ernst May Architekt und Stadtplaner in Afrika 1934-1953. Deutschen Architektur-Museum, 2001.
P101 Utzon, Dorn. "Platforms and Plateaus; Ideas of a Danish Architect." Zodiac 10, 1962; Strauven, Francis. Aldo van Eyck: the shame of relativity. Architecture & Natura Press, 1998; Aldo Van Eyck: Writings. Sun Publishers, 2006; Liang Ssu-ch'eng and Wilma Fairbank (ed.) A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture: A Study of the Development of Its Structural System and the Evolution of Its Types. The MIT Press, 1984.
P106 Photo by Willy Römer; "Taut & Hoffmann" is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0; Bauhaus-Archiv Berlin/ Museum fur Gestaltung; Die Deutsche Bibliothek.
P108 BiographieflTOctionary Netherla
:^^lemet. Man Ray: Paris -Hollywood - Paris. Schirmer/Mosel, 20-|i *
P111 Fondation Le Corbusier.
P118 Eduardo Torroja I ietcc.csic.es.
P118—119 Gunter Guschel - Grosse Konstrukture.
P119 Fondazione MAXXI National Muset I of XXI Century Arts Architecture Archives1*)! Centre, Pier Luigi Nervi Fund; Princeton “■< University Tedesko Archive; Alvarez Bravo ’ Lola / Center for Creative Photography Th University of Arizona Foundation; Structural Version 6.1 © 1998-2014 Wilhelm Ernsjf Sohn Verlag.
P120 Professor David Billington; Professor Michael Hein;
P120-127 Addis, Bill. 3000 Yeas of Design Engineering and Construction. Phaidon Press, 2007.
P121 Felix Candela; Columbia University, Columbia Image Bank; STRUCTURE magazine.
P125 Heinz Isler Archive.
P126 Billington, David P. Robert Maillart: Builder, Designeand Artist. Cambridge University Press; STRUCTURE magazine; Eduardo Torroja Institute.
P127 School of Architecture McGill University.
P128-129 Official Report of the Japan World Exposition, Osaka, 1970 (Osaka: Commemprative Association for the Dapan World exposition 1970, 1972.)
P130 Copyright © DIARIO ABC, S.L., Madrid, 2008; Time Magazine.
P130-131 New York Times.
P131 Süddeutsche Zeitung,
TI Danuary 1977.
P138 Kyodo news.
P139 Ambassador Mohamed Osman Omar; Premier Composite Technologies LLC; Studio Valle Progettazioni; © ANP.
P139 Europa building, By Samynandpartners
(Own work) [CC BY-SA 4.0 (http://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0)],
via Wikimedia Commons.
P140 Skansen National Open Air Museum; Little World Museum of Man; ETNOMIR Russia.
PAGE 155
PB
p141 As/^admpelman/57591725637’
Irumedal / www.tripadvisor.com.mx/ ct'ion.Review-g325580-d553828-
^Hard Coenen / wwW.flickr.com/
Dhoto:
idra:
y3'
|^HP's-The_Little_World_Museum_of_
^Enuvama_AichLPrefecture_Chubu. ^LiGHTBOXVIEW; China Ethnic ht"Lum. All rights reserved by yellojkt; SilVAdventure Project; SurfaceTravel / virtualtourist.com/travel/Europe/ 5en/Stockholms_Laen/ «tnckholm-173634/Things_To_Do-Stockholm-Skansen-BR-1.html.
P■)42-143 XIEGU CONSTRUCTION.
<44 Cloggy Nook; © 1985-2014 William ^¡ller Architects Ltd; Copyright Period Restorations Ltd 2014 All rights reserved; Habitat Post & Beam, Inc; © 2009 Bespoke Oak Buildings; The Barn at Bury Court; Courtesy of Comae; David Griffin Interior Design' Matthew Hinchliffe / www.flickr. com/pliotos/37446911 @N06/3444813874; ACE-PLASTERING; jfish827 / www.houzz. com/ideabooks/458554/list/Contemporary-
Mediterranean.
P145 Don Frothingham; Sutton Suzuki Architects; Bozeman Interior Designers & Decorators Design Associates; OAKWRIGHTS; © 2012 My North Devon Holiday Cottage-The Byre; Maxwan Architects; Copyright Period Restorations Ltd 2014 All rights reserved; photo by Ricardo Barros; View Pictures Ltd / SuperStock; Brook Farm Barns.
P146 Harvey Georges/AP; Hans Rosendahl/ www.flickr.com/photos/solar4u/
4175999500/.
P147 Aldwin Teo; Azuri Technologies Ltd; PV Solar Solutions; © Fraunhofer IOF;
©Google.
P148 White Roof Project Helps NYC Beat The Heat; © 2014 Neptunus BV; Red Roof Inn; Godden, Rumer. The Dolls House. The Viking Press, Penguin Group, 1970. Tan, Shaun. The Lost thing. Lothian Books, 2000.
H49 Copyright @ 1996-2011 SINA Corporation, All Rights Reserved; foster + Partners; G C L A International ® 2008-2009; Gehry Partners, LLP;
®2001-2014 Kanzhongguo.com Rights Reserved; © 2013 - Interiorator -™l Rights Reserved.
DOOR
ca. 2014 The dilemma of the modern door: to be or not to be? Continuity has become the essence of our architecture: the door can only interrupt it. Its status has become a necessary hindrance, its identity a weaselly compromise.
DOOR
PAGE 1
traditional element once invested with physical heft and nography has turned into a dematerialized zone, a gradual isition between conditions registered by ephemeral tech-°9ies (biometric detectors, body scanners) rather than ysical barriers... the transformation took place concurrently ’ a transformation in society: whereas isolation was once desired condition, our professed aspirations now are Movement, flow, transparency, accessibility - while main-"ng the utmost security... a paradox that the door is rged with resolving...
door
2009 Panic Door: "The door shall be set in motion when subjected to a 30-pound (13uIV force. The door shall swing to a full-open position when subjected to a 15-pound (6/ force." (International Building Code, 1008.13
DOOR
PAGE 3
DOOR
The door promises you can have it every way: openness, entry, freedom; but also security, safety, privacy. To meet in private is "to meet behind closed doors." To be welcoming is to have "an open door policy." A part of the wall, and a necessary breach in it; as secure as you like, yet instantly penetrable with the right key... the door is always part of a self-cancelling dialectic...
Imposing fortress and city gates established the door as a guarantee of security. Yet since it must also allow passage to some, the door is a weak point. The result is that it attracts, like a magnet, a bristling array of compensatory devices to hamper unwanted intruders: the portcullis, the drawbridge, the murder hole... All this is brutal and practical security hardware but also part of a mythology of the door. The 14 impenetrable gates of Austria's Hochosterwitz castle, built in the 15th century to guard against the Ottomans, each come with their own battery of murderous defenses, while also standing for the 14 Stations of the Cross. The majority of the gates never saw battle.
As the point of first contact with the visitor, historically, the door must bear symbolism: on its surface, as in Ghiberti's Baptistery Doors (1425-1452), called the "Gates of Paradise," which transform the door itself into a sublime work of art; above it, proudly bearing the name of the resident; and also the door's embedded hardware, the hinges, knockers, and locks that were once vivid status symbols deliberately displayed to the world.
With industrialization, the door becomes standardized, safer, encrusted with technology, and correspondingly less a vehicle for elaborate symbolic identity. Thanks to the railway and the automobile, which establish their own routes and entries into the urban realm, city gates lose their importance as a first statement of civic identity. In homes, the doorbell displaces the knocker (and with it personalized behavior like the customized knock, able to suggest emotions ranging from sympathy to joy, depending on the situation within the house; a doorbell knows no such nuance); the intercom supplements the doorbell, and the mobile phone eliminates any possibility of a surprise knock or buzz. Instead of depending on the door's physical weight alone to block passage, closed-circuit cameras and ingenious alarms join the fray.
Our behavior around doors is inherently political. Theodor Adorno pointed this out in the 1950s, when "[0]ne no longer learns to close a door softly, discreetly and yet firmly." Instead, "Those of autos and frigidaires have to be slammed, others have the tendency to snap back by themselves and thus imposing on those who enter the incivility of not looking behind them, of not protecting the interior of the house which receives them." In the slam of a door, Adorno could even see "already that which is violent, crashing, propulsively unceasing in Fascist mistreatment."
(Minima Moralia, 1951, 40.)
As the late 20th century and early 21st embraces transparency and flow as virtues, the physical reality of the door becomes embarrassing, suspicious, even as the original, divisive impetus of the door grows stronger than ever. An awkward compromise emerges in the dematerialized door: no longer a hefty barrier politely opened upon the production of credentials, but a stretched zone of passive aggression, relentless checking conducted by a sequence of insidious devices. A proposed "tunnel of technology" could rationalize the obstacle course that is the contemporary airport, which has inherited the old city gate's ancient function of policing passage into and out of the urban center. "Safe citizens" are identified in advance via background checks, and travelers, using the key of their biometric data, may pass unimpeded through security, as if there were no door at all...
There are certain religious gates, like the Japanese torii, whose purpose is not to impede at all. Free-standing, they simply symbolize passage from one state to the next, to the beyond. They are symbolic doors, the physical framework exalted as a thing of beauty, and stripped of the function of security. We are embarking on the reverse: the door's physical structure becomes immaterial, its function of security, absolute.
PAGE 4
DOOR
DEMATERIALIZATION OF THE DOOR
Advancing technology allows an enhanced appearance of transparency and permeability while fortifying the door to the point that the "key" is the "right" person: with biometrics, certain people may never pass because of their intractable physical being...
Solid doors
(urban gates, castle gates)
PAGE 6
DOOR
SCALE COMPARISON:
NOTABLE DOORS VS. TYPICAL DOORS
DOOR
PAGE 7
I
Significant doors:
I	Number 10, Downing Street, London ■2 . -Classical door, Huangshan. China
3	Shoji sliding door, Japan
4	Supermarket sliding doors, US
'5 Boon Edam revolving door, Netherlands'
6	Mansion, Mombasa, Kenya
7	Regensburg, Germany
..8...Humayun's Torhb, Delhi..............
9	"Gates of Paradise," Battistero di San Giovanni, Florence
10	Columbus Doors, US Capitol, Washington, D.C.
II	Onderzeebootfoods, Rotterdam, Netherlands 12 Medinet Habu, Egypt
"Preferred Sizes" recommended by Neufert's Architects' Data, 2012
"Limit for use of term 'door'" Neufert's Architects' Data, 2012
PAGE 8
DOOR
GENDERED DOOR BEHAVIOR AND THE MISPLACED HANDLE
According to a 2007 study in Applied Ergonomics, the contact area used by men for opening a door is much larger than that used by women, especially for a right-hand opened door - meaning men are less selective about where they push and women are more precise. In general though, the authors of the study conclude: "People push doors between the center of the door and the free (swinging) edge, but closer to the center than handles are typically placed." They recommend: "Handle placement should be between about
1,000	and 1,500 mm above the floor and about 250-350 mm from the free edge of the door." (Shih-Kai Chang, Colin G. Drury, "Task demands and human capabilities in door use," Applied Ergonomics, April 7, 2007.)
Largest male door mark
Largest female door mark
Obvious male door mark
Obvious female door mark
2007 "Maximum extent of largest and most obvious touching areas for right- and left-hinged doors."
Left Hinge Door	Right Hinge Door
p = 0 %
0% <p<l %
1 % <P^10% 10% <p<20 %
20% <p£30% 30% <p«£40% 40% <p<50% p >50%
"Vertical touch positions for right- and left-hinged doors."
DOOR
PAGE 9
HOW TO OPEN A DOOR
The study continues with the revelation that the apparently simple task of opening a door involves a sequence of at least 20 instantaneous sub-decisions and calculations, each with implications for ergonomics and safety (the US Consumer Product Safety Commission estimates 300,000 door-based accidents in 2002). (From Shih-Kai Chang and Colin G. Drury, "Task Demands and Human Capabilities in Door Use," Applied Ergonomics 38, 2007, 325-335.)
"Midlevel hierarchical task analysis (HTA) of a hinged door": starting with the need=to "decide on operation plan."
PAGE 10
DOOR
the articulated door
A selection of moments when proportions, meanings, components, construction techniques, and representational methods of the door need to be captured in text - with varying degrees of authenticity and seriousness. A blatant historical trajectory emerges, from expertise and encrustations of symbolism, to personalization and connoisseurship, to simplicity and expedience...
til oka
iUikcivalana
undulatinci
miniature
niche-shrine
¡Supurante triad:
: visiva, brahma, visnu
kiitaœhâdyctà
awning of miniature ¡JltCfYltTg H	It ~U~T
shrine . . . .. .	----3
uccálaka attic Dillar
toranamâlâ « torana aarland
dolohin creature
bharana
fluted oortion of pillar
stombha
Dillar
pitha
base or socle
CLASSIC SOUTHERN CHINESE DOOR, 1929 / 1959
Described in the Yingzao Fuyuan, a manual of traditional southern Chinese building methods, by Yao Chenzu. The proper components and symbolism of the door include steps, columns, and roof. Written in 1929 but only published 30 years later, this rendering is by a later scholar.
TORANA, ca. 1135-1140
An Uttunga-torana door, found in, Vadnagar, India. Drawing from Parul Pandya Dhar, The Torana (2009), after a drawing by Kinloch Forbes in The Architectural Antiquities of Northern Gujarat, Burgess and Cousens, 1903.
Toranas - densely encoded arched portals, often free-standing, offering open ceremonial access to Hindu temples - have been built in India for more than 2,000 years and explicated in Hindu treatises since the 11th century. The same region can produce several treatises, each with its own precise definition of a torana's symbolic order, and the significance of its location in a temple. While consensus on a definition of the torana remains elusive its linguistic roots imply "to surge forwards" or "to rush forth," according to Parul Pandya Dhar in his 2009 study, The Torana. One treatise, Aparajitaprccha (12th—13th century) specifies three possible sizes (small, medium, large) and five types (the Uttunga, Maladhara, Vicitra, Citrarupaka and Makaradhvaja) based on variations in number of pillars and type of ornamentation. Others focus on classification of toranas based on material (including gold, precious stones, and flowers). Some distinguish the pilars of the arch from the architrave, which, as the piece that transforms columns into a doorway, is considered the actual torana. One treatise, Samaranganasutradhara, describes what to do should a torana be damaged and describes the tragic events that might unfold as a result of such an inauspicious occurrence.
DOOR
PAGE 11
"And anyone who wanted this gateway to be larger or smaller should increase or diminish i the feet."
"The architrave should be half the column width."
"The central [voussoir should be] a quarter part wider than the others."
Columns encompassed in rustic fascias"

Columns ought to be seven diameters ... following the precepts of Vitruvius, but... with no great weight above them, they should be made nine wideths tall."

The height of the pedestal should be three feet."
operation
E EXTRAORDINARY BOOK OF DOORS, 1551
Door I which "belongs to the house of the Very Reverend and Exceed-ingly illustrious Cardinal of Ferrara, Don Ippolito d'Este," with some of Serlio's instructions and options added as annotations to his woodcut
illustration.
Throughout his volumes on architecture, Sebastiano Serlio heaps praise on Vitruvius, 'the Great Architect." But in The Extraordinary Book of Doors, he deviates from the most basic of his idol's tenets: keeping architectural styles pure his introduction, Serlio presents the door, because of its role as a symbol of personal distinction, as demanding exception:
"I full well that the majority of men take great pleasure, more often than not, in new things; and particularly that there are some people who in every small work which they have made require large spaces in which to lace lettering, coats of arms, devices and similar things, and that there are others who require ¡storiette in half-or bas-relief, or sometimes in an ancient bust or a modern likeness and other similar things. For this reason I strayed into licentiousness..." (Sebastiano Serlio, The Extraordinary Book of Doors,
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION ILLUSTRATED, 2008
Francis D. K. Ching, United States
"Doors and doorways provide access from the outside into the interior of a building as well as passage between interior spaces. Doorways should therefore be large enough to move through easily and accommodate the moving of furnishings and equipment. They should be located so that the patterns of movement they create between and within spaces are appropriate to the uses and activities housed by the spaces...
From an exterior point of view, doors and windows are important compositional elements in the design of building facades. The manner in which they punctuate or divide exterior wall surfaces affects the massing, visual weight, scale, and articulation of the building form."
Serlio's calogue of "thirty gateways of Rustic work mixed with various Orders, and twenty of delicate work in different styles" expresses more forgiveness than instruction. Doors can be made taller, shorter, wider or, narrower depending on the owner's taste or where he wants to put the door (gateway, front door, interior door). Blank surfaces are left to be
filled in with whatever signs or codes the author would like.
PAGE 12
'O'
1425-1452 Bronze relief panels of Lorenzo Ghiberti's Gates of Paradise, adorning the eastern doors to the Baptistery of the cathedral of Florence.
DOOR
2014 Standard door.
"In former times, the door, as part of the whole, represented the entire house, just as the house one owned and the house which one was having built were intended to show the social standing of its owner... Back then your house served the purpose of maintaining appearances ... today, however, there are other objects that satisfy this same purpose: travel, cars, sports, winter vacations, suites in luxury hotels..."
— Robert Musil, "Doors and Portals" Posthumous Papers of a Living Author, 1920.
Musil identifies new means of accelerated transit as some of the things that confer status, now that the door has given up the role. He might also have made a causal connection in the shifting of status symbols: it is possible to pass from house to garage to car to airplane without crossing a clear boundary between exterior and interior, and it is exactly the smoothness of that flow - the absence or the defeat of doors - that confers status. The importance of the door as a physical threshold disappears, and the only symbolism worth conveying is blankness, neutrality, an apology for its existence in the form of a minimal, symbol free standard door (which is nevertheless packed with meaning...)
PAGE 14
DOOR
1163-1345 Notre Dame Cathedral. "That external conical form of the door makes entering in contrast to exiting its completely unambiguous meaning. But this is in fact a totally unique situation which it symbolizes, namely, that the movement of life, which goes equally from inside to outside and from outside to inside, terminates at the church and is replaced by the only direction which is necessary." (Georg Simmel, "Bridge and Door," 1909.)
Movable 'finger,' with concertina device for sealing the meeting point of different worlds; entry and exit assigned equal quotidian status.
PAGE 16	DOOR
John 10:7-9
Verily, verily, I say unto you ... I am the door: by me if any man enter In, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, and find pasture.
John 10:1-2
Verily, verily, I say unto you, he that entereth not by the door into the sheepfold, but cllmbeth up some other way, the same is a thief and a robber. But he that entereth in by the door Is the shepherd of the sheep.
Revelation 3:8
I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.
Matthew 25:10-12
...they that were ready went in with him to the marriage: and the door was shut. Afterward came also the other virgins, saying, Lord, Lord, open to us. But he answered and said, Verily I say unto you,
I know you not.
In the New Testament, the door is a crucial and complex symbol: the door is Christ himself; the door is the correct means of entry to the divine; for the faithful, the door can never be closed; for the negligent, the door can never be opened again. Right: German steel plate engraving depicting Revelation 3:20: "Behold, I stand at the door and knock; if any man hear My voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will eat with him, and he with Me."
Siehe! ich stehe vor der Türe und klopfe an.
DOOR
PAGE 17
"In front of the law there Is a doorkeeper. A man from the countryside comes up to the door and asks for entry. But the doorkeeper says he can't let him in to the law right now. The man thinks about this, and then he asks if he'll be able to go in later on. 'That's possible,' says the doorkeeper, 'but not now.' The gateway to the law is open as it always Is, and the doorkeeper has stepped to one side, so the man bends over to try and see in. When the doorkeeper notices this he laughs and says, 'If you're tempted give it a try, try and go in even though I say you can't. Careful though: I'm powerful. And I'm only the lowliest of all the doormen. But there's a doorkeeper for each of the rooms and each of them is more powerful than the last. It's more than I can stand just to look at the third one.' The man from the country had not expected difficulties like this, the law was supposed to be accessible for anyone at any time, he thinks, but now he looks more closely at the doorkeeper in his fur coat, sees his big hooked nose, his long thin tartar-beard, and he decides it's better to wait until he has permission to enter. The doorkeeper gives him a stool and lets him sit down to one side of the gate. He sits there for days and years. He tries to be allowed in time and again and tires the doorkeeper with his requests. The doorkeeper often questions him, asking about where he's from and many other things, but these are disinterested questions such as great men ask, and he always ends up by telling him he still can't let him in.
The man had come well equipped for his journey, and uses everything, however valuable, to bribe the doorkeeper. He accepts everything, but as he does so he says, 'I'll only accept this so that you don't think there's anything you've failed to do.' Over many years, the man watches the doorkeeper almost without a break. He forgets about the other doormen, and begins to think this one is the only thing stopping him from gaining access to the law. Over the first few years he curses his unhappy condition out loud, but later, as he becomes old, he just grumbles to himself. He becomes senile, and as he has come to know even the fleas In the doorkeeper's fur collar over the years that he has been studying him he even asks them to help him and change the doorkeeper's mind. Finally his eyes grow dim, and he no longer knows whether it's really getting darker or just his eyes that are deceiving him. But he seems now to see an inextinguishable light begin to shine from the darkness behind the door. He doesn't have long to live now. Dust before he dies, he brings together all his experience from all this time Into one question which he has still never put to the doorkeeper. He beckons to him, as he's no longer able to raise his stiff body. The doorkeeper has to bend over deeply as the difference in their sizes has changed very much to the disadvantage of the man. 'What Is it you want to know now?' asks the doorkeeper, 'You're insatiable.' 'Everyone wants access to the law,' says the man, 'how come, over all these years, no-one but me has asked to be let In?'
The doorkeeper can see the man's come to his end, his hearing has faded, and so, so that he can be heard, he shouts to him: 'Nobody else could have got In this way, as this entrance was meant only for you. Now I'll go and close it.'"
— Franz Kafka, The Trial, 1925.
1962 ]osef K., played by Anthony Perkins in The Trial (dir. Orson Welles), storms out of the courtroom, and upon closing the door behind him, realizes its absurdly monumental size...
PAGE 18	DOOR
RITES OF PASSAGE
Across diverse cultures, the door's mediating role gives it symbolic charge as site of beginnings and endings, passages through, but never back: "The door is the boundary between the foreign and domestic worlds in the case of an ordinary dwelling, between the profane and the sacred worlds in the case of a temple," French folklorist Arnold van Gennep writes in 1909. "Therefore to cross the threshold is to unite oneself with a new world." (The Rites of Passage, 1960, 20.)
1895 Birth, illustrated as deliverance through	1876 "Passing through the door" ceremony,
an angel-supervised door in The People's	depicted by Justus Doolittle's Social Life of
Common Sense Medical Adviser in Plain English:	the Chinese,
or, Medicine Simplified, by R.B. Pierce.
BIRTH
In his study of comparative religion, The Golden Bough, J. G. Frazer notes the widespread use of doors as a tool in the rituals of "Imitative magic" linked to childbirth:
"We have seen that at such a time the Germans of Transylvania open all the locks, and the same thing is done also In Voigltland and Mecklenburg.
In North-western Argyllshire superstitious people used to open every lock in the house at childbirth. In the island of Salsette near Bombay, when a woman is in hard labour, all locks of doors or drawers are opened with a key to facilitate her delivery. Among the Mandelings of Sumatra the lids of all chests, boxes, pans, and so forth are opened; and if this does not produce the desired effect, the anxious husband has to strike the projecting ends of some of the house-beams in order to loosen them; for they think that 'everything must be open and loose to facilitate the delivery.'
In Chittagong, when a woman cannot bring her child to the birth, the midwife gives orders to throw all doors and windows wide open, to uncork all bottles, to remove the bungs from all casks, to unloose the cows in the stall, the horses in the stable, the watchdog in his kennel, to set free sheep, fowls, ducks, and so forth. This universal liberty accorded to the animals and even to inanimate things is, according to the people, an infallible means of ensuring the woman's delivery and allowing the babe to be born..."
—J. G. Frazer, The Golden Bough: A Study in Comparative Religion,
1922, 239-240.
GROWTH
While serving in China from 1850 to 1873, American Christian missionary Justus Doolittle compiles an 800-page ethnographic tome of Chinese cultural rituals, intended as "a catalogue of sinful practices on an unpreced ented scale" (Dominika Ferens, "The Deserving Heathen: Missionary Ethnography of China and Its American Converts," Trans-Pacific Interaction The United States and China, 1880- 1950, 192). Doolittle Is struck by the ceremony of the "passing through the door," which, he reports, "sustains a very important relation to the welfare of children, according to the sentiment and practice of many Chinese." After the laying out of a ritual feast and other preparations, the key moment arrives:
"The 'door' is finally passed through in the middle of the afternoon or near sundown. This door Is made out of bamboo, covered with red and white pape and is some seven feet high by two and a half or three feet wide, costing perhaps twelve or fifteen cents. The furniture in the room is so arranged tha' the priests and the party which passes through this door can go around arc around without doubling on their track. Sometimes a table is placed near the centre of the room, and an open space is left on all sides of it. One of the priests - who wears a fancy-colored skirt, and has on his head a curious shaped head-dress - takes in one hand a small bell, or a sword having sma bells fastened to the handle, and in the other a horn, and commences recit formulas or incantations in front of this door, which is often at this time standing near the centre of the room.... The priest after a while blows his horn, and advances slowly through the door. He is followed by the psfe familias or his representative, and all the children of the family, who thus pass through the door. ... The door is then taken and placed at one of the four corners of the room, and the priest, father, and children again pass through it in a similar manner. It is then successively placed at each of tne other corners, and again in the centre, where it is respectively passed through by the priest and his followers. Soon after this the door is hacks in pieces, and its parts set on fire and burned in the open court of the poor in the street in front of the house where the ceremony is performed —Justus Doolittle, Social Life of the Chinese, 1876, 92-93.
DOOR
PAGE 19
MARRIAGE
dding-album staple in Singapore is the traditional front door con-tion. The wedding starts with the groom and his band of "brothers" Tng to the front door of the bride's apartment. They are met by 7 of bridesmaids or "sisters" at the bride's apartment. Standing behind i nked Iron grille of a front door characteristic of Singapore's housing, nridesmaids guard access to the bride, who sits somewhere inside risible to the groom. From the bars of the door, the sisters pose ■ enges which the "brothers" have to overcome to gain the groom ss to his bride...
PAGE 20
DOOR
FARCICAL DOORS
The door is the ultimate comic element of architecture, building up and foiling expectations, and facilitating frantic passages on and off stage. Slamming doors and unexpectedly opened doors are a trope whose predictability is part of its allure. As one present-day stage director puts it, "Farce is a reassuring form for both audiences and directors. You're dealing with absolutes: either that door will open on cue or it won't." (Dosie Rourke, quoted in Mark Lawson, "Farce is everywhere on stage - but why?"
The Guardian, Dune 10, 2012).
1935 'Stateroom scene,' A Night at the Opera: Groucho Marx continuously invites people into his already-cramped room aboard a transatlantic ocean liner: two maids, a cleaning woman, an engineer and his hulking assistant, a woman looking for her mother, and a team of stewards all pile through the door one by one. When at last the final visitor - Mrs. Claypool, the patron he's actually supposed to be meeting with - opens the stateroom door without knocking, the entire crowd explodes into the hall as if a booby trap had gone off. "In developing the scene in out-of-town staged tryouts, we know that the Marx Brothers kept adding additional people until they would all fall out the door seemingly of their own accord." (Maurice Charney, The Comic World of the Marx Brothers' Movies, 2007, 39.)
PAGE 22
DOOR
SITCOM DEVICE
The American-sitcom, with its stage-like set-up, makes full use of the conventions of the door as prop, or even actor...
SURPRISE
In Three's Company, tack Tripper and Chrissy Snow are caught in a compromising situation by their landlord Mr. Roper, who is all too eager to catch his tenants in compromising situations...
CLOSE CALLS
Laverne & Shirley, with Penny Marshall and Cindy Williams, who play two single women with little privacy-from their Milwaukee neighbors and from each other.
DOOR
PAGE 23
HOMECOMING
Almost every episode of Cheers provides an [applause] entry for the bar's regulars, including Norm.
INTRUSION
In Seinfeld, Derry Seinfeld's door, chronically unlocked, allows Kramer to constantly burst in uninvited.
PAGE 24
DOOR
INEVITABLE SYMBOLISM
As an openable boundary between one condition and another, potentially unknown condition, doors are instantly and unavoidably symbolic, just as evocative for farcical comedy, unspooling fantasy, and earnest 1930s surrealism. Alice's adventures with the unreal doors of Wonderland have their sequel in the didactic visions of Magritte, primed for psychoanalytic associations with unconscious forces breaking through the fabric of reality...
"There were doors all round the hall, but they were all locked; and when Alice had been all the way down one side and up the other, trying every door, she walked sadly down the middle, wondering how she was ever to get out again.
Suddenly she came upon a little three-legged table, all made of solid glass; there was nothing on it except a tiny golden key, and Alice's first thought was that it might belong to one of the doors of the hall; but, alas! either the locks were too large, or the key was too small, but at any rate it would not open any of them. However, on the second time round, she came upon a low curtain she had not noticed before, and behind it was a little door about fifteen inches high: she tried the little golden key in the lock, and to her great delight it fitted!
Alice opened the door and found that it led into a small passage, not much larger than a rat-hole: she knelt down and looked along the passage into the loveliest garden you ever saw. How she longed to get out of that dark hall and wander about among those beds of bright flowers and those cool fountains, but she could not even get her head through the doorway; 'and even if my head would go through,' thought poor Alice, 'it would be of very litde use without my shoulders..."'
— Lewis Carroll, Alice's Adventures in Wonderland (1865), 165.
DOOR
PAGE 25
e who has had experience in the translating of will, of course, immediately perceive that penetrating ,rr0w spaces, and opening locked doors, belong commonest sexual symbolism ... To be sure, I know ts who have steadily adhered to an architectural
pa'
sf
door
commonest sexual symbolism
ts v\
>lisn
nund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams (1899), 241.
01ism for the body and the genitals ... to whom every suggests a bodily aperture ..."
33 Unexpected Answer, Rene Magritte: paradoxical door, closed but always open, riling darkness on the other side...
e dream is the small hidden door in the deepest J most intimate sanctum of the soul, which opens at primeval cosmic night that was soul long tore there was conscious ego and will be soul far ■°nd what a conscious ego could ever reach." Carl Dung, The Meaning of Psychology for idem Man (1934).
"André Breton calls his own novel Nadja 'a book with a banging door.'
(In Moscow I lived in a hotel in which almost all the rooms were occupied by Tibetan lamas who had come to Moscow for a congress of Buddhist churches. I was struck by the number of doors in the corridors that were always left ajar. What had at first seemed accidental began to be disturbing. I found out that in these rooms lived members of a sect who had sworn never to occupy closed rooms. The shock I had then must be felt by the reader of Nadja.)"
—Walter Benjamin, "Surrealism"(1929).
1939 The Victory, Rene Magritte. A door through a transparent, maybe non-existent wall.
PAGE 26
DOOR
doors to the beyond
ca. 1250 BC Ancient Egyptian papyrus depicts the seven gates that lead to the underworld, or the "mysterious portals of the House of Osiris," the green-skinned god of the underworld. The gates and corresponding guards are described in what is identified as the 144th spell of the "Book of the Dead." There is no known definitive version of the ancient text, but there are, by most accounts, 192 spells. In this spell, the guards of each gate are described, including what kinds of weapons they brandish on their knees. The spell advises travellers to the underworld to bring offerings of "foodstuffs, poultry, and incense" in order to secure safe passage.
DOOR
PAGE 27
"I announce Re at the gates of the horizon, the gods are joyful at meeting me, and the costly stones of the god are on me. The Destructive One shall not attack me, and those who keep their gates shall not be ignorant of me." — From the 144th spell of the funerary text Book of the Dead, ca. 1550 BC.
PAGE 28
DOOR
84.000	DHARMA DOORS TO 100...
Unlike Christianity, where the "door" is a metaphor made flesh in the singular figure of Christ, in Buddhism there are, initially, 84,000 doors to Buddhabood, all of which, at one point, were supposed to be learned by the seeker of enlightenment...
"Later on, because living beings' basic natures were too obtuse, 84,000 Dharma-doors became too many. Therefore, Maitreya Bodhisattva very compassionately composed the Yogacharyabhumi Shastra (T. 1579), which consolidated the
84.000	Dharma-doors into 660 dharmas. But 660 dharmas were still many, and just to clearly remember their names took several years of effort. Then Vasubandhu, 'Heavenly Relative,' Bodhisattva contemplated and saw that people in the future whose natures were suited to the Great Vehicle would prefer abbreviation. So he selected the one hundred most important leading dharmas from the Yogacharyabhumi Shastra's 660 dharmas and condensed them into The Shastra on the Door to Understanding the Hundred Dharmas."
— Hsuan Hua, The Hundred Dharmas (Buddhist Text Translation Society, 2007).
s-e
( £®S;Í )
I
ine


/C.'PJtÎIî£ ( EH—fi )
belonging to the mind
unconditioned
activities not interactive with the mind
Tsoüii itttt
mn-.mmAME tss/sm.
t§m. mAmmm m). Œsmm>. (mmsmi. tw mmmmmm. < mtmmm). (m -tateamm. m Awmmm. (sse msm).
%. mm
Ait ’<Ùî < 'Ùi£ ) ’
*.	s
xsmmiAni
</>«*»« r+»j
‘pmma(-a)
tî
"If you understand these hundred dharmas, you can use them to enter the door of the Buddhadharma," according to Triptaka Master Hsuan Hua. The flowchart shows the 100 dharma-doors divided into five categories...
DOOR
PAGE 29
SUPER-SYMBOLISM
In the Annunciation (known as the Friedsam Annunciation), painted by Petrus Christus around 1450, the door and its surroundings convey the story of the transition from the Old Covenant to the New Covenant, triggered by the conception of Christ, announced by Gabriel to Mary. The door is divided into two parts, one to the left of Mary, signifying the old, the other to the right of Mary, signifying the new. (Bernhard Siegert, "Doors: On the Materiality of the Symbolic,"
Grey Room, Spring 2012, 12.)
PAGE 30
DOOR
GATEWAYS
Without the presence of a heavy, hinged barrier inside the frame, doors become merely doorways, ceremonial portals, often liberated from surrounding architecture. Passage can be had all around the free-standing doorway, but is best had, for symbolic reasons, through it...
1168 (reconstructed 1875) Japan's Itsukushims
Shrine includes one of the most well known tor gates of Shintoism that signify the boundary between the sacred space of the shrine and the quotidian world.

DOOR
PAGE 31
ca. 1700 In Klungkung, Bali, the Great Door (Pamedal Agung) marks the transition from the outer, commoners' world to that of the ruler, whose title Dalem translates to "inside." "The wooden panels of the Great Door have been sealed shut and no one has been able to open it. But this is only fitting, for beyond the Great Door, which once led to the inner reaches of the royal compound, there are now only stairs leading nowhere. ... Indeed according to Klungkung legend the Door is the foundation of the world. ... Fortunately, despite the fact that lower walls had tumbled down and debris was everywhere, the Door was intact, a clear indication that the earthquake was not after all to be the end of the world." (M J. Wiener, Visible and Invisible Realms, 1995.)
Guanghan, China: the pailou, or paifang ceremonial gate, erected not to direct passage but to signify an event, whether the death of an emperor or the enduring chastity of a widow.
PAGE 32
DOOR


1264 Zhongtianmen, or South Heavenly Gate, the final temple during the climb of Mount Tain, one of China's five sacred mountains. Originally reached by ascending 6,000 stone steps, it is now also reachable by cablecar and bus. Mount Tai was the site of rituals known as fengchan (worship of heaven and earth), undertaken by ruling dynasties as a means to ensure longevity.
DOOR
PAGE 33
1968 Rocket door: NASA Vehicle Assembly Building, Kennedy Space Center, Florida. Engineered by Anton Tedesko, the aeronautical Wunderkammer is originally designed for the assembly and outfitting of spacecraft with external fuel tanks and solid rocket boosters, but its life continues with the development of the space shuttle. It takes 45 minutes to open the world's largest operating doors (139 meters and hinged to one of the world's largest buildings by area).
PAGE 34
DOOR
l
1342-1771 Top: Plumb door to Little Square Hall in the Lion Grove Garden of Suzhou, China, performs as a physical threshold and a visual frame, drawing the eye's focus towards what is beyond the door. The plaque above the doorway can be translated to "Experience fun." Below: menu of possible door openings from the 1103 building manual Yirgzao Fuyuan.
DOOR
PAGE 35
Torana garlands: "The andola garland emulates wave-like undulations and follow a sinusoidal rhythm. ... Unlike the illika-torana, which find mention in the [Samarahganasutradhara] and [Aparajitaprccha], the andola-torana is rarely mentioned in the treatises although it is seen frequently in practice and is also recorded in the sculpturs' manuals. One omnibus manuscript does describe the andola-torana: tilaka (miniature niche shrine), lumbi (pendant motif), amaragana (gods), and grasa (gorgon face) are mentioned as also the S-shaped segments (madalas) of the torana, which should pass through the miniature niches." (Parul Pandya Dhar, The Torana, 2009, 32.)
ca. 1150 An approach to the interior of the Vimala Vasahi temple outside Mount Abu, in Rajasthan, India, includes intricate examples of the torana, the ceremonial archway that is often characterized in South Asian architectural treatises. The Hindu temple "functions as a place of transcendence," where humans may contemplate their release (moshka) from the illusory world (George Michell,
The Hindu Temple, 1977).
PAGE 36
DOOR

gates
ca. 540-565 AD Taq-I-Kisra, or the Arch of Khousra, the throne room where Sassanian kings hold public receptions in the city of Ctesiphon (near current day Salman Pak, Iraq). Thirty-six meters high and 26 meters wide, the arch Is said to be the largest In the world (without steel reinforcement). As an iwan - a vast room closed on three sides and opened by an expansive arch onto a large courtyard from which kings were approached - it can also be described as the world's largest doorway, a doorway that supersedes the architecture.
PAGE 38
DOOR
CITY GATES
During the construction of a Roman city, the position of its future walls was demarcated by ploughing the earth; where the plough was lifted and carried designated the location of future gateways. The portae was "the interruption of the line distinguishing inside and outside." (Bernhard Siegert, "Doors: On the Materiality of the Symbolic," Grey Room, Spring 2012, 12.) Once something more than just a metaphor, the gate to the city was a door at the urban scale. City gates were expositions of pride, fear, permanence, impenetrability, and ingenuity. Because of the door, civilizations were capable of simultaneously isolating themselves from and exploiting nature. It is impossible to say at what point a city gate's metaphorical meaning exceeded its physical presence; probably once the closing of the gate doors became a rarity. Modern history is full of tales of destroyed city gates: Uruk, Dericho, Beirut, Kuwait. Latter-day city gates, like the Brandenburg Gate, persist as pure symbolism of civic glory rather
  than actual security devices. Where, in the contemporary world, functional city
gates remain, as in Sanaa, Yemen, they represent a very different type of urban experience than today's mega-cities, which obliterate the difference between outside and inside.
Beijing's Heyi Gate, one of the city's original 16 gates, being demolished in 1972.
DOOR
PAGE 39
2005	(575 BC)
Babylon's Ishtar Gate, reconstructed first in Berlin's Pergamon Museum with fragments found during excavations (1902-14) and second as a replica at the Babylonian ruins with available bricks and paint (begun under Saddam Hussein). In 2005, US 155th Brigade Combat Team visits the site, which reopens to the public in 2009. The form at the Baghdad site is roughly based on that In the Pergamon Museum, which is an estimate of the secondary portal of the gate.
1300 Sanaa's Bab Al-Yemen (Gate of Yemen), a rare exception to the usual fate of city gates, remains the primary entrance to one of the world's oldest continuously inhabited cities. "In the not-too-distant past, Imam Yahya Bin Hamid Al Din, who ruled over Yemen from 1904 to 1948, would see to it that the city's seven gates were closed every day at nightfall. Residents late to return home would be locked out of the city and have to outside the city gates until the break of dawn the following day. They would be exposed to untold dangers since tribesmen lurked around like wild animals, ready to pounce on the enticing sight of their sleeping forms." (Jamal Jubran, "Sanaa's Walls and the Myth of Security," Portal 9, 2013, 2.)
PAGE 40
DOOR
WALL-FREE GATES
Though city walls crumble, the idea of the gate returns, in the form of triumphal arch, icon, or technological border...
1791 Brandenburg Gate, Berlin: commissioned by Prussian King Frederick William II on the threshold of Berlin, surmounted by a statue of the goddess Victoria riding out from the city on a chariot. Never a functional checkpoint, but a scenographic tool to accentuate royal power.

1963 Eero Saarinen's Gateway Gateway Arch, St. Louis, under construct At 192 meters tall, the arch celebrates Missouri as the starting line for the US's westward territorial expansion. On the west bank of the Mississippi the stainless steel-clad gateway is supposed to embody the directional desires of American pioneers who saw a blank slate on the horizon beyond.
DOOR
Page 41
1975 City Gates 2.0: the Singaporian government introduces the Area Licensing Scheme (ALS) to charge for, and discourage automobile use. Drivers planning on entering the downtown area can purchase a license to be displayed on their dashboard to be observed at checkpoints into the city. In 1998 the ALS is replaced by Electronic Road Pricing, a fully automated variable tolling system, a perfectly open gate to those who
pay-
2008 King Abdulllah Economic City, Saudi Arabia's new city without a wall but accessorized with an unmanned gateway.

16th century against the borders of the Austrian
monarchy, a frenzy of fortification-building ensues.
Burg Hochosterwitz is besieged over the centuries and repeatedly attacked by Turks at the turn of the 16th century. Its owner, the Carinthian governor Baron George Khevenhuller, commissions Domenico dell'Aglio, a celebrated Italian designer of fortifications, to build an impenetrable system to defend the winding road up to his castle. Fourteen gates (echoing the 14 Stations of the Cross), each with different deadly security features, are installed to stand between invaders and the castle.
The narrow zigzagging castle road abuts a formidable cliff face, forcing would-be conquerors to confront dell'Aglio's gates one at a time: hot oil followed by
Construction on the gates lasts 13 years (1571-1584) and demands a colossal capital investment of 3,900 guilders, 6 shillings, and 171/4 pennies (at a time when 35 guilders was the average annual salary of a protestant preacher).
The gates are constructed meticulously and obsessively for a confrontation that never comes; the descendent of Khevenhuller, upon a visit by us 430 years after the gates are complete, is proud that the Ottomans never got further than the third gate...
PAGE 44
DOOR
14 gates of Burg Hochosterwitz
1. Cadet's Gate
shooting holes iron-clad door
12. Bridge Gate
 drawbridge
2. Guard s Gate
murder hole vats of boiling oil
3.	Nau Gate
shooting holes
11. Wall's
murder hole
4.	Angel s Gate
retractable footbridge shooting holes
5.	Lion's Gate
retractable footbridge
6.	Man's Gate

marksman's windows murder hole’
si
7. Khevenhuller's-Ga
lattice portcullis vats of boiling oil murder hole
13. Church Gate
Shooting holes hot oil windows
DOOR
PAGE 45
14. Kulmer's Gate
drawbridge retractable portcullis
retractable portcullis murder holes vats of boiling oil death pit

9. Reiser's Gate
shooting holes
PAGE 46
DOOR
1. Cadet's Gate
shooting holes iron-clad door
2. Guard's gate
murder hole 
3. Nau Gate
shooting, holes
4. Angel's Gate
retractable footbridge shooting holes
12. Bridge Gate
drawbridge
5. Lion's Gate	\
retractable footbridge
11. Wall's Gate
G. Man's Gate
marksman's windows
murder-hole
7. Khevenhuller's Gate
lattice portcullis vats of boiling oil murder hole
DOOR
PAGE 47
14. Kulmer's Gate
drawbridge retractable portcullis
murder holes
13. Church Gate vats of boiling oil shooting holes death pit
oil windows
10. Arm's Gate
watchtower
hot oil windows
9. Reiser's Gate
shooting holes
8. Landscape Gate
false floor
PAGE 48

identify
Gate phone
Viewing window
Tapered openings gates and zigzagging
impede
The Door Proper
Not shown in the model The front entrance of each gate will be blocked by a wood-paneled, iron- frame door, mounted on iron hinges.
Portcullis
Behind the primary door, a spiked portcullis will create a second, retractable barrier.
Locking mechanism
Each door will be armed with locking mechanisms controlling the horizontal movement of iron bars bracing the door from jamb to jamb.
Drawbridge
Removing the possibility of even getting to the
door, drawbridges will be installed at gates 4, 5,12, and 14. Each gate abuts a cliff face and, by withdrawing its bridge, would effec-tively deny the enemy's advance with a precipi-tous drop.
Impression of Burg Hochosterwitz under theoretical attack without a system of defences.
Each gate will be equipped with a conic megaphone, two meters in length enabling soldiers to communicate between stations
castle walls will permit
intermittent surveil|ance, of would-be invaders
The castle, properly protected.
DOOR
PAGE 49
"IDEAL" GATE
Presented by fortress engineer Domenico dell'Aglio of Lugano to his client at Burg Hochosterwitz around 1563: a model serving as a catalogue of all defensive features / elements that any gate could have, from which each actual gate selects a number.
immobilize
Hot oil
Syringe-like dispensers will extract boiling oil from a basin, then pour it from a specially-designed window above the entrance to each gate.
Marksman's window
Tapered downwards and covered with a protective wooden sheath, the window will allow marksmen to fire on intruders at the gate without being fired upon themselves from a distance.
Murder hole
A penetration above the gate through which oil, stones, spears, or arrows will be projected at enemy troops.
Weapons
Listed in the arsenal inventory of 1669 are 33 heavy and lighter artillery and howitzers, two arquebus on wheels, four iron sliding-gun carriages, 365 muskets, 106 partisans, 135 halberds, 102 lances, 67 cuirass,
40 battle axes, and an unlisted number of swords and helmets. Over 700 men can be armed at one time.
False floor
Rotating bridge in gate 11 is locked in place until intruders breach gate 10; charging cavalry, having contacted what seems a sturdy floor, will then plummet to their deaths.
PAGE 50	DOOR
1 CADET'S GATE
Shooting holes characterize the first gate: the enemy will be engaged under a barrage of musket fire. The iron-clad wood frame door is bolted closed beneath an arched frame of white limestone and green slate, crowned with a marble relief of the baby Jesus. As invaders attempt to break through, they will be fired upon from their left and driven towards the cliff edge. Weakness: isolation from the other gatehouses.
2 GUARD'S GATE
"Murder hole" above the arched doorway will give the option of spraying enemies with hot oil or shooting them with muskets fired from above. Constructed at a choke point in the road, Guard's Gate is less iconic than the first; with iron shutters and a smaller, sturdier door, it exists to provoke a siege. Shooting holes facing away from the cliff face will allow the castle's defenders to sweep the outer slope should the enemy attempt the precarious climb.
DOOR
PAGE 51
3 NAU GATE
The third gate will absorb the retreat of valuable castle defenders from the first and second gates, should they be
first
Shooting holes are positioned
to provide covering fire along the road,

recover their positions.
advancing forces as soldiers
Entering the gate.
Seen from the other side.
4	ANGEL'S GATE
One of the most heavily fortified of the 14 gates, Angel's Gate is accessible only by a retractable wooden foot-bridge. It will greet intruders with a hail of musket fire from above and from the right flank. A second, detached guard-house is sited on an outcrop. Hewn into the escarpment within the gate is a storage space for firearms and a basement for supplies.
PAGE 52
DOOR

5	LION'S GATE
Connects directly to the fourth gate with a retractable wooden footbridge whose operating mechanism is located on the upper floor. Named after the lions painted on the iron-bound doors which front the threshold.
Door of the Lion's Gate, after the drawbridge.

identify
viewing window
6	MAN'S GATE
Recessed entrance portal with single door, defended simultaneously on left and right flanks. As the enemy advances through the gate, he will be shot at on both sides and overwhelmed from the murder hole above. First of the series of gates to receive the benefit of covering fire from the assemblies higher up; its proximity to the seventh gate helps bottleneck advancing enemies and facilitate safe retreat of defenders.
DOOR
PAGE 53
7	KHEVENHULLER'S GATE
Because the mountain slope along this part of the road Is less extreme, permitting a possible flanking manoeuvre by invaders, a defensive wall extends from Khevenhuller's gate (named after the resident family) to the cliff face. This extension is fitted with a platform for marksmen. The gate itself has two doors; the first an iron-framed double door, the second a retractable lattice portcullis whose operating mechanism is on the upper floor. A fireplace is on hand to heat vats of boiling oil, which can be delivered through murder holes in the ceiling.
8	LANDSCAPE GATE
The most technically ingenious outpost, spanning a concealed abyss. With a simple operation, the seemingly stable wooden bridge will rotate like a see-saw. Invaders are tempted to run through the gate after retreating soldiers - unaware that the false floor will send them tumbling to their doom.
immobilize
shooting holes
TE
temporary obstacle, the same as Nau gate), with enough to significantly delay advance as retreating cover.
PAGE 54
DOOR
10	ARM'S GATE
Elevated position enables use as a watchtower; will provide covering fire for Gates 7 and 8 and receive covering fire itself from outcroppings above. Its facade boasts the first proper hot
oil	windows, designed with a declined, telescoping sill to spray the searing concoction over a wide area.
11 WALL'S GATE
In addition to the murder hole, the gate benefits from a balcony which protrudes above it from the castle road between the 12th and 13th gates;
gunfire will overwhelm intruders as they attempt to break through.

before the yawning gap can be spanned; while re-racted, the bridge acts as a second door - though its destruction will make it impossible to traverse he abyss.
DOOR
PAGE 55
13 CHURCH GATE
First gate with access to the castle grounds (from its isolated upper level). Invaders will find themselves within range of musket fire from overhead watchtowers. Before the gate itself, they are shot at from the upper floor (re-supplied by the castle). If the invaders penetrate two double doors impeding their advance, they will face continued assault from hot oil windows and shooting holes.
14 KULMER'S GATE
Finale: a deep, square pit separates the entrance from the road. A drawbridge will be retracted and held in place by a mechanism on the level above, which is on grade with the castle grounds. If this final death pit is traversed and the first door of the gate penetrated, the enemy will be trapped in a long corridor at the end of which is a retractable portcullis. Along the way are two half-meter-square murder holes manned by armed guards and vats of burning oil.
immobilize
shooting holes hot oil windows
immobilize
murder holes
impede
retractable portcullis
impede
drawbridge
immobilize

vats of boiling oil
PAGE 56
DOOR
TOOLS FOR DEFENSE
In castle or fortification doors, sheer bulk is the most enduring strategy to ensure that a point of ingress doesn't also serve as a weak point in the event of a siege. But because of its natural vulnerability, the point of the door also concentrates a variety of other devices and strategies of repelling the enemy...
15th century Castle Nuovo door, Naples. The hefty bronze door of the castle, a lavish surface with reliefs depicting the victories of Ferdinand I of Aragon over the Duke of Anjou, projecting military prowess to potential intruders.

1503 A cannonball, permanently embedded, legacy of the siege of Naples by Spanish general Gonzalo Fernandez de Cordoba.
1730s Right: elephant defence on the gates of Shaniwar Wada, residence of the ruler of Peshwa, Maharashtra, India. The spikes deter attackers' elephants employed as battering rams. All that remains of the palace are the exterior ramparts and this gateway.
1580 One of several priest-holes in Harvington Hall, Worcestershire. What appears to be a beam reveals a cosy hiding space.
SECRET DOORS
If the secret door had a patron saint it would be Nicholas Owen (ca. 1550-1606). During the persecution of Catholics in England, the Jesuit lay brother Is famed for his construction of "priest-holes," secret chambers where a harried priest can avoid authorities should they come knocking. Owen works at night and alone, travelling from town to town to construct his secret doors. Following the Gunpowder Plot of 1605, Owen Is starved out of one of his own secret rooms at Hindlip Hall, Worcestershire - the authorities unable to locate his hideout -to be tortured and then executed In the Tower of London.
PAGE 58
DOOR
DOOR	PAGE 59
1929 21 Club, New York. Of the 32,000 illegal clubs In New York during Prohibition, 21 is one of the most well-known. After gossip columnist Walter Winchell is banned from its premises, he retaliates by writing a column spurring a raid by agents. Adapting, 21's owners hire architect Frank Buchanan to create a system of defences, Including a secret door to the liquor cellar.
Despite multiple subsequent raids, officers are thereafter unable to find the 2,000 cases of contraband hooch stored on the premises.
1942 During the Nazi occupation of the Netherlands, camouflaging the door is again a matter of life and Anne Frank, a Dewish victim of the Holocaust, hides with her family in a house on the Prlnsengracht in Amssterdam: " Now our Secret Annex has truly become secret ... Mr. Kugler thought it would be better to have a bookcase built In front of the entrance to our hiding place. It swings out on its hinges and opens like a door." (Anne Frank, from her Diary, August 21, 1942.)	_
PAGE 60	DOOR
SECRECY, COMMODIFIED
Though security paranoia fuels the contemporary desire for "panic rooms," contemporary secret doors are also a form of luxury gadgetry. Operations like the Hidden Door Company and Hide A Door offer architectural gimcrackery to order. "Homeowners typically spend about $10,000 on the secret-room setup," Popular Mechanics reports - while a rotating fireplace from Creative Home Engineering costs around $35,000. ("Build Your Own Bat Cave With Secret Room Camouflage," Popular Mechanics, October 18,
2008.)
2014 Armoire-based secret door, from Creative Home Engineering.
Though it boasts "Elite Secret Door Systems for Elite Clients," Creative Home Engineering also explains that anyone can enjoy a secret door: "Our secret passageways are designed to be installed in minutes anywhere in the world. They come pre-hung in their own door frames which simply into the rough door opening as though it were a typical appliance. If you can install a conventional pre-hung door, you can install one of our secret passageways."

DOOR
PAGE 61
2011 Potemkin preservation: when San Francisco's planning rules forbid the construction of a garage, Beausoleil Architects create one disguised as a typical bay window. "Beausoleil carefully measured the elements of the existing façade ... then determined how the bay window sides could be split apart from the rest of the building with almost invisible seams. ... To make the doors work mechanically, there are two floor mounted hydraulic activators, which rotate the doors on pivot hinges." ("Architectural Magic," Beausoleil Architects blog.)
PAGE 62	DOOR
THE CROSS-AND-BIBLE DOOR
The enduring popularity of the six-panelled door the US and UK likely owes something to a coded piety. The design suggests Christian symbolism (though there is no evidence of intention on the part of designers): a crucifix stacked atop an open Bible. While likely apocryphal, the theory gives the design its vernacular name, the "cross-and-bible door."

ca. 1750 (photo ca. 1995)
Front door to Richard Charlton's Coffeehouse, Williamsburg, Virginia. The coffeehouse did not survive, but the front door was reused as a cellar door In the homestead that replaced the coffeehouse. The door Is preserved as the primogenitor of America's prevailing taste for the six-panel door.
DOOR
PAGE 63
SECURITY DISGUISED AS TRADITION
Titan Steel Security Doors offer fortress-like security without the look of living in a fortress: its doors are sheathed in wood with the traditional American "cross and bible" panelling. From Titan's website: "The fact is, wooden doors are just not strong enough to keep intruders out, no matter how many high-quality locks are fitted. The Titan Steel Door has the appearance of a luxury wooden door, but the strength of a Safe Vault."
Defence mechanisms con-within the sheath of a conventional seeming door, including five steel locks on both sides. $2,000 purchases: a 15-minute burglar rating plus a 30-minute fire rating.
1. Steel construction
2a. Main lock with 2 cylinders
2b. Main lock with cylinder
3.	Door lock with 3 steel bars
4.	Security latch
5.	Active upper bar
6.	Hinge
7.	Stable locking bars
8.	Antidrill rosette
9.	High security cylinder 10a. Standard viewer 10b. Wide angle viewer
11.	Handle
12.	Letter box
13.	Outside door knob
14.	Wooden veneer
15.	Interior rosette
16.	Door stop
17.	Main lock striker
18.	Striker for lock with 3 bars
19.	Plastic tap for strikers 20a. Standard door knocker 20b. Large door knocker
PAGE 64
DOOR
FRONT-PORCH FRIENDLINESS
A reaction to the increasing layers of mediation around the door: a longing for a lost era of small town door etiquette. Celebration, a planned community in Florida begun in 1996 -originally built under the aegis of Disney - advertises itself as returning to a day when "neighbors greeted neighbors in the quiet of summer twilight," evoking a prelapsarian town where people sleep with their doors unlocked.
1997 "The Front Facade," from Celebration Pattern Book, Urban Design Associates. Distilled from the most picturesque elements of cities like Savannah, Charleston, and New Orleans, the city promises a mythologized welcoming climate. The front door Is tasked with "providing a comfortable transition between the resident's private world, and the public, community-oriented world of Celebration."
DOOR
PAGE 65
HOME
OCCUPIED
PLEASE STAY OFF PROPERTY
"When you talk to people who live in Celebration, you'll hear a lot about front-porch friendliness they found missing in suburbia..."
— Celebration brochure.
Sign in front yard of a Celebration home - and strategically placed security warning - deters potential unwelcome callers.
Celebration suffers a rash of burglaries by someone posing as a deliveryperson: "According to investigators, the thief knocks on the door to see if anyone is home. If someone answers, the burglar claims to have a delivery for someone with a different last name. If no one comes to the investigators say the thief walks around to the back of the house and breaks in ... Authorities are reminding residents to keep their doors and windows locked, while removing unnecessary temptations from front porches, including bicycles." (Mike DeForest, "Burglars posing as delivery men," ClickOrlando.com, February 17, 2014).
DOOR
PAGE 66
the five men of the forbidden city
Between 1406-20, second Ming Emperor Chengzu builds the Forbidden City, which serves as his palace and the functional political center and symbolic heart of the empire. Enclosed by four walls in a huge rectangle, a system of five courtyards and gateways - known as men -is arranged along a grand axis, whose intimidating scale and vistas generate an aura of gradually intensifying power and interminable impenetrability. The first men begins in a public zone; the last ends in the innermost royal sanctum, where the emperor resides, overseeing the political and social structure of the empire without stepping beyond his compound.
"The Forbidden City isolated the emperor and his court, with its many eunuchs and servant girls, from the rest of the city. The Imperial City was the domain of the emperor's clan and high officialdom."
— Alison Dray, "Spatial Order and Police in Imperial Beijing," The Journal of Asian Studies, November 1993, 890.
inner palace
Emperors, empress, eunuchs and concubines only
outer audience
Members of court and official business only
PAGE 68
DOOR
TIA NAN MEN:
FIRST MEN
Tiananmen gate marks the origin of the Imperial axis. Rarely visited by emperors, whose power emanates from their isolation, the gate is primarily used to relay edicts down to imperial officials.
In 1949, after the revolution, Chairman Mao fundamentally changes the function of the gate from intimidation to benevolent mass inclusion:
"Mao's appearance on the gate carried two significant yet contradictory meanings. First, this was 'hidden power' revealing and submitting itself to the people. Yet, simultaneously, the new leader appeared in an imperial relationship to the people - on a raised podium facing south on the imperial axis.... The tradition of imperial rule was at once denied and affirmed. A similar contradiction was evident in much of the urban design which followed. ... No longer a gate, Tiananmen soon began to appear on coins and banknotes as a monument and emblem of the new state. The central tunnel through it, formerly reserved for the emperor, became a mere pedestrian path with Mao's portrait hung on axis above. Initially the portrait was the revolutionary Mao of the Long March, gazing on and upwards. It was soon replaced with an image staring down, meeting the gaze of all who passed before...
1949 Chairman Mao announces the People's Republic at Tiananmen.
"Tiananmen Square was Mao's vision for a fundamental recentering of the city and empire. The forbidden depths of imperial power were replaced by the 'democratic' expanse of the world's largest open plaza. Modelled in part on Moscow's Red Square, it was also much more than a parade ground. This was to be the antithesis of forbidden space - a square of the people, without walls, corners or rank markers. Here the people's power was to be disclosed, its signifiers those of open access and visibility; open space as a metaphor of freedom. The dream was of infinite space, Mao spoke of it holding a billion people."
— Kim Dovey, Framing Places: Mediating Power in Built Form (Routledge, 1999), 79-80.

1632-1717 Detail of The Kang Xi Emperor's Tour of the South, scroll painting by Wang Hui and others. The final section in a series of 12, it depicts the emperor's return to the Forbidden City after his tour of the empire.
SECURITY POINTS
"Groups of soldiers were deployed at concentrated points or in regions [in blue].
These were of three kinds: checkpoints, stations and areas. The first controlled access to strategic entries; the second were microbarracks that guarded the buildings and courtyards and provided reserves in a particular area; the third formed a free-floating island that kept watch over the surrounding district."
— Jian Fei Zhu, "A Celestial Battlefield: The Forbidden City and Beijing in Late Imperial China," AA Files No. 28 Autumn 1994, 51.
PAGE 69
DOOR
1420 Second men in the series of five, now part of the National Museum of China.
Fromn Duan Men looking towards Tiananmen.
duan men
PAGE 70
NAVIGATING THE MEN
For practical everyday purposes, ministers and officials do not use the ceremonial axis to enter the Emperor's compound but a curcuitous route around the walls of the Forbidden City (dotted line = official route for ceremonies).
INCURSIONS
1644 Li Zi Cheng and his army overtake the Forbidden City to overthrow the Ming ruler and announce Cheng's ascent to power.
burned palaces
area of destruction
coronation site
incursion route
failed assassination site
1803 Southeastern city gate (Dong-hua-men). In disguise, Chen De infiltrates the Imperial Palace In an attempt to assassinate the emperor at the isolated northern gate. De is quickly overcome by guards as he emerges from hiding.
1813 In the Emperor's absence, Lin Qing and an army of religious dissidents lay siege to the southern gates en route to the inner palace.
Source: Jian Fei Zhu,
"A Celestial Battlefield,"
AA Files, 1994.
Wu Men: Meridian Gate
The entrance gate to the Forbidden City, Wu Men is the site annual ceremonies to issue the lunar calendar and declare the dates of festivals. Also a space for the public flogging and execution of prisoners of war and disgraced officials.
Captives are paraded before the emperor to decide their fate.
DOOR
PAGE 71
wu men
PAGE 72
DOOR
TAI HE MEN
GATE OF SUPREME HARMONY
Entry point to the Hall of Supreme Harmony, a courtyard serving as the emperor's throne room beyond which is the Forbidden City's largest courtyard, forming the ceremonial center of the palace, for its most important rituals.
Hall of Supreme Harmony.
"... in all cases and in all the regions, but most notably the Hall of Supreme Harmony, the inhabitant always stood on the northern side facing south, in the gate/hall, and the visitors on the southern side, in the open courtyard, facing north. According to Chinese custom, when two parties meet, the northern side (facing south) and southern side (facing north) always represent and constitute, respectively, the superior and inferior position. Other differentiations in the local configuration of space, such as a change in level, or exterior versus interior, were similarly assigned or attributed to the inhabitant and the visitors. Such asymmetries were built into the architecture, which froze and perpetuated them: the northern side was always a hall/gate building with a dominant and imposing facade looking 'down' towards the south, and the southern side an open courtyard looking 'up,' towards the north."
— Jian Fei Zhu, "A Celestial Battlefield,"
AA Files 1994, 56.
Looking north from Tai He Men towards the emperor at the next men...
tai he men
DOOR
PAGE 73
QIAN QING MEN
GATE OF HEAVENLY PURITY


Final men, leading to the emperor's residence, seen by almost nobody, approached with utmost reverence:
The ceremony of greeting the emperor included the most important and most
impressive moment In the whole drama,
the performance of the kowtow: kneeling towards the monarch (that is, towards the north) and touching the forehead to the ground nine times." - Fei Zhu, "A Celestial Battlefield," AA Files, 1994, 56.
"The emperor's residence, the Palace of Cloudless Heaven (Qian-qing-gong), was also a place (sometimes Including the front gate) where the emperor held audiences with selected ministers and officials for the purpose of discussing government affairs. ... Although all the gates were supervised, directly or Indirectly, by both eunuchs and soldiers, by permanently stationing eunuchs at a few crucial gates the control of strategic thesholds between Inside and outside could be reinforced."
— Jian Fei Zhu, 51.
Stone lion in front of Qian Qlng Men, the last men; the lion plays with a ball, symbolizing a unified China, while his female counterpart controls a cub, symbol of fertility and prosperity.
PAGE 74	DOOR
domestic doors
The traditional Chinese door is of two distinct types: interior and exterior. The former is delicate and of a lattice construction, the latter is defensive and heavy. Both types of doors have strict hierarchical orders, with higher ranking officials and the emperor using certain types of door designs, and the lower ranks using simpler, less adorned types.
EXTERIOR
Studs: from city gate to domestic door
The primary exterior entrance doors to ancient palaces, temples, and mansions In Beijing frequently bear rows of metal studs. Door studs, or bosses, originate from the fortification of city gates, constructed with thick wood braced on the surface with iron plates fastened with visible nails.
More studs = higher status
Ru yi door: beyond functional purposes of protection, the quantity of studs and their materiality came to be identified with ranks in the feudal hierarchy. The number nine, the largest single odd digit, represents ultimate masculinity and the supreme sovereignty of the emperor. Gates used by the emperor have 9 x 9 or 81 brass studs plated with gold. Other titled personages have fewer studs on their gates and the lowest ranking had studs made of iron.
'Fallen' door
Jin Zhu front door: Civilians who bought residences from royals who had fallen out of favor or run out of money would lay bricks to the original front door to respect the class differences.
DOOR
PAGE 75
ca. 1103 Yingzao Fashi: Building Standards
"The Building Standards classifies doors and windows in detail. The major difference between a lattice door and plank door was that the door lead of a lattice door was composed of two parts. The lower part was a plank, and the upper part was a lattice that allowed light to enter. This design was a revolutionary leap, which greatly improved the lighting of the house. As the pattern of lattice could be designed at will, external and Interior decorations me more colourful. The lattice door Illustrated in the Building Standards Is almost the same as those in the classical Chinese buildings constructed over one thousand years ago. All of them are composed of three main parts: lattice, waist panel and apron panel."
- Ma Weidu, Classical Chinese Doors and Windows (Springer, 2006), 38.
Until 20th century: Lattice-style
Traditional Chinese woodframe architecture frees the wall from any supporting function, resulting in the ability to have a large number of doors and windows
Early 20th century: end of lattice-style
In 1911, the last Manchu emporer Puyi abdicates the throne, ending two thousand years of Chinese feudal society; in the subsequent industrialization, Western cultural influences filter in and panel doors gradually replace the lattice-style.
which let light into the building through the lattice construction.
and includes three elements: the solid apron panel, the decorated waist and the permeable lattice work. The last component Is where the doors are most easily distinguished. The Chinese manual orders the styles In a hierarchy, from a wealthy merchant's house to a state ministry. In his study of Chinese doors and windows, Ma Weidu points out that the lattice was a functional as well as symbolic invention, allowing daylight and air to penetrate more deeply into the house.
PAGE 76
DOOR
STATUS AND SYMBOLISM
Typical door advertisements in the US and China reveal radically different aesthetics and styles - rich couples and family fun vs. haiku - but probably in the end the same expectation that a door will play a critical role in the
formation of a lifestyle...	MASONITE: UNITED STATES
Mondrian glass door
"Mondrian glass brings beauty and science together to create a light glass etching in a balanced and symmetrical cubist pattern. Mondrian features Masonite's SpectraWeld technology and is available in Entry, Patio and Interior configurations."
Masonite French door series
"Brighten up any room with a Masonic French door. Masonite French doors accentuate any room with their natural and beautiful wood construction."
Barrington fiberglass entry doors
"The Barrington Sierra Series is engineered to compliment Southwest, Spanish or Mediterranean style homes. The Sierra Series is available with a 2-Panel Camber Top design with or without planks. Barrington is the ultimate in wood door authenticity."
DOOR
PAGE 77
RCCA: CHINA
rajpp035 zen mirror
"How can we have restful peace?
'If we can retrieve the spirit of zen in everyday life and let our lives be as one with zen, then our lives will be beautiful and full, with restfulness and peace.' Perhaps the bell from the ancient temple will cause people's hearts to resonate! Close your eyes,
Chase away every random thought and desire,
Let your heart be quiet,
Listen carefully to the breathing in the deepest part of your soul.
Let your heart be quiet,
Enjoy life."
Tata: China
bl-032 dew
"Daybreak; dew You, and me and love''
jo-008 premium (respect, honor)
"Willow blanketed in snow; feather-light floating lotus
The afternoon sun like a silvery white covering
Shines in the window Pleasure is made tangible"
BL-032
JO-008
PAGE 78
DOOR
doors vs. walls
SLIDING DOORS
One of four ko-shoin (halls or wings) of Katsura Imperial Villa, Kyoto (ca. 1600), where fusuma act both as doors (signalled by small circular openings for handles) and as partitions, made of layers of papers or fabrics, that serve not only to divide and open space but also to absorb sound and transmit (and soften) light.
"The Ko-shoin comprises five rooms: a porch called Okoshiyose (imperial carriage stop), the Veranda Room, the Room of the Spear (Yari-no-ma), a Second Room, and a First Room. These are mostly divided by fusuma, on whose gesso-like white surface great palownia crests embossed in golden mica glisten as they gather light. The indigo lines of the cotton tatami edging, the black-lacquered edges of the fusuma, and the darkness of the aged columns and lintels crisscross this shining volume. These verticals and horizontals afford modular guidelines that articulate the entire three-dimensional space, creating a sense of infinity. The whole yields something like an impression of the variable space based upon a homogenous module that modernist architecture took as its premise. It is no surprise that modernists have shown a particular appreciation for the Ko-shoin."
— Arata Isozaki, Japan-ness in Architecture, (MIT Press, 2006), 277.
DOOR
PAGE 79
SLIDING walls
Photoshopping out the handles, the fusuma instantly lose the only sign
of their doorness; their function as movable partitions comes to the fore
of their"
PAGE 80
DOOR
missing walls, missing doors
As an ally of the wall, the door Is antithetical to the modernist imperative of the open plan: unimpeded flow, and the flexible reconfiguration of interior space...
First floor: optional walls - with embedded doors - emerge from their foldaway hideouts; opening radiuses drawn into the plan..
Walls pulled back, open space...
1924 Gerrit Rietveld's Schröder House, in Utrecht, is commissioned to be wall-less, and therefore doorless. In place of solid walls, Rietveld uses a system of sliding walls with embedded doors, enabling the frequent and orderly reconfiguration of interior space.
alive. It was undeniably impressive, moving, stilling. but house as a lot less imposing when compared with the
seventeenth-century genre piece. For the Schroder
First floor: walls retracted.
DOOR
PAGE 81
With no doors, thresholds, nor latches, but with a few heavy (though negotiable) partitions, Mies van der Rohe's 1929 Barcelona Pavilion heralds the shift from division to flow. The door is established not as an enemy but as an irrelevance...
9 Mies van der Rohe s Barcelona Pavilion doors and latches in favor of uninhibited flowing space between interior and exterior.
Jogged partitions rather than continuous walls; therefore, no doors...
Travertine-clad partition, still allowing flow...
DOOR
PAGE 82
"walls are a nice invention, but if there were no holes in them there would be no way to get in or out."
1992 La Halle aux Cuirs, Paris. "The Groom Is On Strike, For God's Sake, Keep The Door Closed."
Description of a Door by Bruno Latour
Excerpt from "Where are the Missing Masses? The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts," 1992.
... I will start my inquiry by following a little script written by anonymous hands. On a freezing day in February, posted on the door of La Halle aux Cuirs at La Villette, in Paris, where Robert Fox's group was trying to convince the French to take up social history of science, could be seen a small handwritten notice: "The Groom Is On Strike, For God's Sake, Keep The Door Closed" ("groom" is Frenglish for an automated door-closer or butler). This fusion of labor relations, religion, advertisement, and technique in one insignificant fact is exactly the sort of thing I want to describe in order to discover the missing masses of our society.
Walls are a nice invention, but if there were no holes in them there would be no way to get in or out - they would be mausoleums or tombs. The problem is that if you make holes in the walls, anything and anyone can get in and out (cows, visitors, dust, rats, noise - La Halle aux Cuirs is ten meters from the Paris ring road - and, worst of all, cold -La Halle aux Cuirs is far to the north of Paris).
The cleverness of the invention hinges upon the hingepin: instead of driving a hole through walls with a sledgehammer or a pick, you simply gently push the door (I am supposing here that the lock has not been invented - this would overcomplicate the already highly complex story of La Villette's door); furthermore - and here is the real trick - once you have passed through the door, you do not have to find trowel and cement to rebuild the wall you
DOOR
PAGE 83
components of the door:
1.	pivot
THE PROTO-HINGE
The earliest - around at least since 2100 BC - and least complicated strategy for mechanizing the door is the post-and-pivot door, which transforms the door into an appendage of the floor and ceiling (rather than the wall). One edge of the door is shaped into a post (or attached to one) that is mounted in a pivot cup, one in the ground and the other above in the lintel, In essence, the entire door functions as one large hinge.
ca. 2100 BC Door pivot made of diorite for the reconstruction of a temple dedicated to the Sumerian king Ur-Nanshe. Lodged into the ground, carrying the weight of the door, allowing the door to perform, the door pivot is held in high esteem, enough to bear the regional leader's inscription of the completion of the reconstruction
ca 7th century Stone door from Virupaksha Temple in Hampi, southern India. Weighing several tons, the one-piece door is sculpted with a protruding lower 'hinge,' which would have rotatedj within a sheath mounted on a stone pivot.
PAGE 84
DOOR
have just destroyed: you simply push the door gently back (I ignore for now the added complication of the "pull" and "push" signs).
So, to size up the work done by hinges, you simply have to imagine that every time you want to get in or out of the building you have to do the same work as a prisoner trying to escape or as a gangster trying to rob a bank, plus the work of those who rebuild either the prison's or the bank's walls. If you do not want to imagine people destroying walls and rebuilding them every time they wish to leave or enter a building, then imagine the work that would have to be done to keep inside or outside all the things and people that, left to themselves, would go the wrong way. As Maxwell never said, imagine his demon working without a door. Anything could escape from or penetrate into La Halle aux Cuirs, and soon there would be complete equilibrium between the depressing and noisy surrounding area and the inside of the building. ...
Are they all going to be so well trained? Closing doors would appear to be a simple enough piece of know-how once hinges have been invented, but, considering the amount of work, innovations, sign-posts, and recriminations that go on endlessly everywhere to keep them closed (at least in northern regions), it seems to be rather poorly disseminated.
This is where the age-old Mumfordian choice is offered to you: either to discipline the people or to substitute for the unreliable people another delegated human character whose only function is to open and close the door. This is called a groom or a porter (from the French word for door), or a gatekeeper, or a janitor, or a concierge, or a turnkey, or a jailer. The advantage is that you now have to discipline only one human and may safely leave the others to their erratic behavior. No matter who it is and where it comes from the groom will always take care of the door.
Now, draw two columns (if I am not allowed to give orders to the reader, then I offer it as a piece of strongly worded advice): in the right-hand column, list the work people would have to do if they had no door; in the left-hand column write down the gentle pushing (or pulling) they have to do to fulfil the same tasks. Compare the two columns: the enormous effort on the right is balanced by the small one on the left, and this is all thanks to hinges. I will define this transformation of a major effort into a minor one by the words displacement or translation or delegation or shifting; I will say that
Calling on Robert Fox, I do not have to do this work nor even think about it; it was delegated by the carpenter to a character, the hinge, which I will call a nonhuman. I simply enter La Halle aux Cuirs. As a more general descriptive rule, every time you want to know what a nonhuman does, simply imagine what other humans or other nonhumans would have to do were this character not present. This imaginary substitution exactly sizes up the role, or function, of this little character. ...
Visitors push them to get in or pull on them to get out (or vice versa), but then the door remains open. That is, instead of the door you have a gaping hole in the wall through which, for instance, cold rushes in and heat rushes out. Of course, you could imagine that people living in the building or visiting the Centre d'Historie des Sciences et des Techniques would be a well-disciplined lot (after all, historians are meticulous people). They will learn to close the door behind them and retransform the momentary hole into a well-sealed wall. The problem is that discipline is not the main characteristic of La Villette's people; also you might have mere sociologists visiting the building, or even pedagogues from the nearby Centre de Formation.
Solved? Not quite. First of all, if La Halle aux Cuirs pays for
a porter, they will have no money left to buy coffee or books or to invite eminent foreigners to give lectures. If they give the poor little boy other duties besides that of porter, then he will not be present most of the time and the door will stay open. Even if they had money to keep him there, we are now faced with a problem that two hundred years of capitalism has not completely solved: how to discipline a youngster to reliably fulfil a boring and underpaid duty? Although there is now only one human to be disciplined instead of hundreds, the weak point of the tactic can be seen: if this one lad is unreliable, then the whole chain breaks down; if he falls asleep on the job or goes walkabout, there will be no appeal: the door will stay open (remember that locking it is no solution because this would turn it into a wall, and then providing everyone with the right key is a difficult task that would not ensure that key holders will lock it back). Of course, the porter may be punished. But disciplining a groom - Foucault notwithstanding - is an enormous and costly task that only large hotels can tackle, and then for other reasons that have nothing to do with keeping the door properly closed.
If we compare the work of disciplining the groom with the work he substitutes for, according to the list defined above, we see that this delegated character has the opposite effect to that of the hinge: a simple task - forcing people to close the door - is now performed at an incredible cost; the minimum effect is obtained with maximum spending and discipline. We also notice, when drawing the two lists, an interesting difference: in the first relationship (hinges vis-a-vis the work of many people), you not only had a reversal of forces (the lever allows gentle manipulations to displace heavy weights) but also a modification of time schedule: once the hinges are in place, nothing more has to be done
DOOR
PAGE 85
Plate from R. Goodwin-Smith's Decorative Iron and Metalwork, showing the dynamic chamfering of 17th-century hinges.
2.	hinge
"The earliest hinge was a plain strap, for folding together the planks of a door. For large exterior doors, the Smith fashioned spreading iron branches, which made the hinge more strong, and the great door impregnable to attack. Then, as times grew more peaceful, the poet in the Smith began to stir, and he would terminate his brances with leaves or rosettes, his inspiration often coming from the simple flowers and the modest wild roses which nodded outside his country forge ...
"As the centuries wore on, the hinge, like doors and furniture, grew lighter, and more delicately wrought. Early Gothic forms became that blend known as 'Tudor-Gothic'; then, with Elizabeth, exuberant Renaissance ornament banishes the Gothic. In my collection of hinges it is possible to trace these phases quite closely. In doorways of the Renaissance, where the English craftsman tries hard, and not always successfully, to work in the new Italian styles, the Smith stoutly endeavors to make his ironwork echo the same spirit. Classic and Gothic ideas mingled for some while, Tudor-constructed doors showing Renaissance cherub-heads in their spandrels, hinges and handles showing the same tendencies.
"Until Elizabeth died, hinges and cabinet mounts were the work of the Blacksmith; then, however began to dawn the day of the Locksmith - a more finicky and detailed worker on the surface of the cold metal. ...
"Notice, in the following illustrations, the frequent 'chamfering' and 'stop-chamfering.' This was a very popular means of adding interest to the edges of metal, just as it was on furniture. It makes a wood or metal article appear less heavy when seen from a slight angle - as, of course, it usually is seen. This device began on ironwork at the end of the sixteenth century, and was so much used for the next hundred years that one seldom finds a hinge without some suggestion of chamfering upon it."
— R. Goodwin-Smith, Decorative Iron and Metalwork: Great Examples from English Sources (1937).
"A nonhuman (the hinges) plus a human (the groom) have solved the wall-hole dilemma."
PAGE 86
DOOR
apart from maintenance (oiling them from time to time).
In the second set of relations (groom's work versus many people's work), not only do you fail to reverse the forces but you also fail to modify the time schedule: nothing can be done to prevent the groom who has been reliable for two months from failing on the sixty-second day; at this point it is not maintenance work that has to be done but the same work as on the first day - apart from the few habits that you might have been able to incorporate into his body. Although they appear to be two similar delegations, the first one is concentrated at the time of installation, whereas the other is continuous; more exactly, the first one creates clear-cut distinctions between production, installation, and maintenance, whereas in the other the distinction between training and keeping in operation is either fuzzy or nil. The first one evokes the past perfect ("once hinges had been installed..."), the second the present tense ("when the groom is at his post..."). There is a built-in inertia in the first that is largely lacking in the second. The first one is Newtonian, the second Aristotelian (which is simply a way of repeating that the first is nonhuman and the other human). A profound temporal shift takes place when nonhumans are appealed to; time is folded. ...
We have all experienced having a door with a powerful spring mechanism slam in our faces. For sure,
The interesting thing with such impolite doors is this: if they slam shut so violently, it means that you, the visitor, have to be very quick in passing through and that you should not be at someone else's heels, otherwise your nose will get shorter and bloody. An unskilled nonhuman groom thus presupposes a skilled human user.
It is always a trade-off. ...
I am a great fan of hinges, but I must confess that I admire hydraulic door closers much more, especially the old heavy copper-plated one that slowly closed the main door of our house in Aloxe-Corton.
Especially
clever is its way of extracting energy from each unwilling, unwitting passerby. My sociologist friends at the School of Mines call such a clever extraction an "obligatory passage point," which is a very fitting name for a door. No matter what you feel, think, or do, you have to leave a bit of your energy, literally, at the door. This is as clever as a toll booth. ...
As a technologist, I could claim that provided you put aside the work of installing the groom and maintaining it, and agree to ignore the few sectors of the population that are
discriminated against, the hydraulic groom does its job well, closing the door behind you, firmly and slowly It shows in its humble way how
replace, 90 percent of the time, either an undisciplined bellboy who is never there when needed or, for the general public, the program instructions that have to do with remembering-to-close-the-door-when-it-is-cold.
The hinge plus the groom is the technologist's dream of efficient action, at least until the sad day when I saw the note posted on La Villette's door with which I started this meditation: "The groom is on strike."
On strike.. Fancy that! Nonhumans stopping work and claiming what? Pension payments? Time off? Landscaped offices? Yet it is no use being indignant, because it is very true that nonhumans are not so reliable that the irreversibility we would like to grant them is always complete We did not want ever to have to think about this door again
-	apart from regularly scheduled routine maintenance (which is another way of saying that we did not have to bother about it) - and here we are, worrying again about how to keep the door closed and drafts outside.
- Bruno Latour, excerpt from "Where are the Missing Masses?
The Sociology of a Few Mundane Artifacts," reprinted from Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change, edited by Wiebe Bijker and John Law, (MIT Press, 1992).
2011 Hydraulic "groom": automatic door-closer, patent by Yaie Security Inc.
DOOR
PAGE 87
3.	automatic door-closer
"Do not knock. - Technification is making gestures in the meantime precise and rough - and thereby human beings. They drive all hesitation out of gestures, all consideration, all propriety [Gesittung]. They are subjected to the irreconcilable - ahistorical, as it were - requirements of things. Thus one no longer learns to close a door softly, discreetly and yet firmly. Those of autos and frigidaires have to be slammed, others have the tendency to snap back by themselves and thus imposing on those who enter the incivility of not looking behind them, of not protecting the interior of the house which receives them ... In the movements which machines demand from their operators, lies already that which is violent, crashing, propulsively unceasing in Fascist mistreatment." — Theodor Adorno, Minima Moralia (1951)
To Adorno, automatic door closers - already invented by 1894 - and doors designed to be slammed shut signify the decline of modern society into a form of aggression and utility ripe for fascism. The completion of the threshold-crossing ritual, pausing just inside to return the door to its "wall" position, has been lost. The ritualistic behaviors and gestures associated with the threshold, such as removing shoes or hat or paying respect to deities or hosts are also doomed to suffer from the advent of the hydraulic door angle...
This invention relates to that class of automatic door closing devices in which an air cushion offers a yielding resistance to the impulse of the actuating spring; and the invention consists in the mechanism herein shown and described for
PAGE 88
DOOR
4. panel
The progression of American door-making methods: beginning with rudimentary assembly, developing through sophisticated woodworking to better seal the membrane, and climaxing in an automatic door press...
ledged and braced: instead of simply being placed side by side, vertical boards are here connected with a feather or ploughed-and-tongued joint for a tighter seam.
rail and stile (aka frame and panel):
woodworking technique to "float" a panel within a jointed frame, a solution for the problem of the shrinking and expanding of the panel over time.

TS40Q0	TS4140

TS6000
Door designs from TruStile's Traditional series, which "reflects the classic and historic design ideas of an earlier place and time. Bring the charm of Americana or the historic character of the New England Cape to your home with any of the doors from our Traditional collection."
plank and batten: vertical wooden planks lined-up side by side, horizontal battens nailed across them; strengthened by diagonal cross bracing.
bottom and middle rail thinner than the styles by the thickness of the boaids
framed and filled: frame of solid timber (mortise-and-tenon jointed), filled on the outside face with tongue-and-groove jointed boards.
High Density skin
flush: stiles, on the left and right, and rails, on top and bottom, form a frame, which borders a honeycomb core of corrugated cardboard or core (particle board or foam, providing better insulation). The faces are then covered with veneer or other materials.
core
Natural wood veneer
DOOR
PAGE 89
THE DOOR, INDUSTRIALIZED:
Ohio-based Premix's 2,000-ton Macrodyne press, used for the compression molding of doors (among other things) out of Sheet Molding Compound.
2009	SEAMLESS SIMULATION Patent for manufacturing a molded door: "The present Invention relates to an economical method of manufacturing a door skin having the appearance of a solid wood door with raised or recessed panels in which an assembly of wood strips, veneer and a backing of fiberboard or similar material are compression molded to form the door skin... FIG. 5 is an exploded view illustrating the sequence of operational steps in laying up and molding a door skin according to the present invention, it being understood that a mold or press may be large having multiple sections forming a number of door skins in a single operation." (Edward Quinif)
PAGE 90
DOOR
5. knocker
"As the demand for antique door-knockers is far in excess of supply, many modern reproductions and imitations have been placed upon the market.
Some of these are sold without intent to deceive, either as copies of old forms or original patterns, designed to fill the needs of modern house builders. But there are others which have been cast from rare old European models which are purposely intended to deceive the unwary. Of this nature is a ten-inch bronze knocker, elaborately modelled at the top with draped urn and scroll work, beneath which is an oval name plate with a swinging drop, representing a wreath of flowers, which has been carefully dented and polished to simulate age, and chemically treated to imitate verdigris and iron rust."
—	E.A.B., "Old Door-Knockers," Bulletin of the Pennsylvania Museum,
January 1, 1910, 9.
Architect: "Now if you'll give me a general idea of the kind of house you need Client: "I want you to fix up something to go with a doorknocker my wife brought home."
—	Boston Globe, April 25, 1926
The fate of the door knocker is a typical case of symbolism eroded by industrialization: charged with being the all-important point of first contact for visitors, the knocker starts the 20th century in the US as a highly visible personal status symbol; antique knockers, bearing historical gravitas, become increasingly popular exactly as the knocker's rival, the doorbell, gains ground. Elsewhere, the knocker is designed to reveal more about the visitor than the owner of the house...
12th century Gendered entry: male pilgrims at the Ziyarat Imam Sahib, in Balkh Province, Afghanistan must use the knocker that knocks on wood, women must use the metal-on-metal knocker, the better to prepare the inhabitants for their guest. (Arch+)
DOOR
PAGE 91
HE EVOLUTION OF THE DOOR-KNOCKER
WHEN standing before the welcoming doorway of a friend you lift the door-knocker and in this simple way announce your coming, you joing a historic act, an act performed centuries i -long, long before the coming of the electric push- with the mysterious fluid back of it, which carries your summons within.
When first the entrance to the home was guarded o intrusion by doors, it was customary among some lie ancient peoples to announce one’s arrival by ting to the inmates for admission. The first use of door-knockers so far as is known was made by the ancient Greeks who instinctively felt it a breach of manners to enter a house without giving some ting to those within. In the better Greek homes an attendant was at all times kept at the door to visitors. Slaves were generally assigned to this and quite naturally they were tempted to steal t times, to be rid of a task which became too monotonous. They were therefore chained to the and a short bar of iron was fastened to the chain which might be used as a “rapper” by those who ed to enter the house. But this iron bar was putchappy service at times by some enemy of the
Veneian Replica on Entrance GATE
of Hinching
Brook Casti.e,
England
“Sanctuary” :
Copy of the
FAMOUS ORIGINAL Knocker ON THE CATHEDRAL AT
Durham, England. If a
CRIMINAL WERE ABLE TO REACH THE CHURCH DOOR AND STRIKE THE KNOCKER. HE WAS TAKEN IN AND LATER SENT TO SAFETY
(Continued on page vii)
Feb 18 1918 "...when next you lift the striker of a friendly door remember what it means and let its charm, its dignity or its humor command your personal appreciation.” vo- "The Evolution of the Door-Knocker," The Art World.
“Lincoln Imp” from Lincoln, England
“Washington"
householder who found it a ready weapon to use against one of whom he did not approve, and so there came into use a heavy ring fastened against the door by a clamp, which proved useful not only as a “rapper”—but as a handle.
Thus the door-knocker beloved in later centuries by artist and
craftsman alike came into its own. Early door-knockers were fashioned of iron then of bronze and later of brass. In any and all of these mediums there was every opportunity for the craftsman and designer. The heavy ring was chased or beveled, and the supporting plate was changed into differing shapes until at last no ornamentation seemed too fine to bestow upon it. Designs became elaborate
From Hull, England
“Somerset": The Lion's
HEAD FOUND GREAT FAVOR IN England from the seventeenth CENTER V AND WAS PROMINENT IN
the American Colonies untii. the Revolution
in the extreme and interesting or amusing grotesques were added to those which were wrought in more formal and significant fashion.
It wasn’t such an unhappy idea after all to give you something to admire or be amused over as you stood waiting for the door to be opened. You were sure to be put into a worth-while mood in the process of waiting and therefore it is gratifying that the door-knocker has again come into uso both on entrance doors and doors of personal rooms.
One particularly interesting design, "The Sanctuary,” on the Durham Cathedral in England, dates back to 740, when, if a prisoner or criminal were able to reach the church door and strike the knocker he was taken in and cared for, safe from capture for thirty-seven days, after which he was sent for safety far from the scene of his crime.
Art, history and sentiment are associated with the door-knocker and very nearly every particular design has a story back of it well worth recording. Therefore when next you lift the striker of a friendly door remember what it means and let its charm, its dignity or its humor command your personal appreciation.
PAGE 92
DOOR
6. bell
Door bell vs. knocker... As mechanization takes command, emotional nuances and expertise in physical behavior are lost...
"Possibly the coming of the electric door bell means the departure of the doorknocker ... Yes there are many who will cling to the established dignity and undoubted charm of the knocker, which no bell-push can hope to immitate. There seems little to choose in the matter of noise, for the cheery, if robust rat-a-tat-tat of the knocker is not more trying to the nerves than the sudden whirring sound of the bell. Certainly the door-bell can be switched off in case of sickness. But is that a better or more humane way of dealing with the matter than the muffling of a the door knocker? In ceremonial matters the knocker wins by many lengths. Some of us are old enough to remember the thoughtful swathings of the knocker being replaced by drooping bands of crepe when death had crept into the house. There seemed little that an intelligent knocker could not express in the way of joy or sympathy."
— The Times of India, July 14, 1930.
A door bell which does not work unfailingly is worse than no bell at all
1921 No longer dependent on batteries, the hardwired door bell forms a relalble connection between outside the front door and in.
DIME PUT IN SLOT RINGS DOORBELL
Only after a coin has been deposited in the slot, as shown at the right, does the doorbell ring. The housewife can thus be reasonably sure the caller is one having legitimate business with her. This protects her against the intrusion of annoying or casual callers
To SAVE a busy housewife from fP quent annoyance by unwelcome caller-doorbell that works only upon the in-, tion of a dime is soon to be mark, The coin slides into an inside recept . where it closes an electric contact th permits the bell to be rung. If the caller proves to be a friend, the dime is returnee as the guest enters; if the visitor is stranger or one to whom entrance is n fused, the money is retained. Dimes ki by the device provide a fund for charitieV
The interior of the coin-in-slot doorbell is shown above. The coin v into receptacle inside the door when it closes electric contact and r;in-bell. Housewife can return the money
1933 Pay-to-ring: not long after Its Invention, even the predictable monotone of the doorbell becomes Intolerable as a new device to discourage Idle called advertised In Popular Science, would force callers to deposit a non-refundable dime for the privilege of ringing the door bell...
2011 13-year-old Laurence Rook Invents the Smart Bell, a door bell that calls your cell phone If you're not home; you can then speak through an intercom to give the Impression you're at home If necessary, or to instruct the dellveryperson where to leave a package. Rook sells 20,000 units as of Dune 2011.
DOOR	PAGE 93
7. latches and knobs
The latch is the prefered mechanism of door closure well into the 19th century in the US until the glass "Boston silvered knob" is invented by William Leighton in 1855, containing a more complex, and concealed, closing-and sealing mechanism. In 1878, Osbourn Doesey, of Washington, D.C. patents an even more complex knob mechanism attached to the hinge side of a door.
pre-1840s The Suffolk Latch, arriving in the US from England, is ubiquitous before the establishment of the knob.
> Finally, there was the creation of the most attractive doorknob of a-1860 era on January 16, 1855, the 'Boston silvered knob' or a.k.a. ary' knob with its mirror finish. Its inventor, William Leighton of New ad Glass in Cambridge, Massachusetts, proclaimed that his invention 3 glass knob 'which shall possess the color and luster, of polished
and at a cost little above that of the ordinary glass or porcelain
"
«nklin Pierce Hall, "The American Doorknob," Antique American as, Ian 31, 2009.
1878 Patent for "Improvement in door-holding devices," O. Dorsey.
"This invention relates to certain improvements in door-holding devices for securing it (the door) open at any desired angle, and by which there is no possible chance of its being forced to by the draft or other cause, to prevent its accidental slapping and risking the breaking of the glass therein ...
To these ends it consists, first, in the employment, in connection with a rod or bar pivoted or hinged to the door-casing or other desired point, and a slide, of a toothed lever connecting with the knob-spindle; secondly, in providing the slide-holding pin with an elongated slot, which permits the pin to fall by gravity into the coincident notch in the slide inclosed in a case having a tubular shoulder."
PAGE 94
DOOR
8. handle
"The door handle is the handshake of the bulling."
— Juhani Pallasmaa, The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses (1996).
Two visits by the editors, one to Rainer W. Leonhardt's collection of thousands of historic door handles in Berlin, and the other to FSB in Brakel, Germany, to see their 20th and 21st century equivalents, changes your perspective on the "handshake of the building," something one never typically notices, despite its phenomenological charge.
RAINER W. LEONHARDT
According to Leonhardt, a collector of all ancient building materials, but mostly door handles, the door handle used to be the most expensive part of the house, and it was customary to take them with you when moving to a new house (like windows in the Middle Ages). This is why few door handles from the Renaissance (and even fewer from earlier periods) remain. Leonhardt, currently writing a book on the development of door handle symbolism in the 18th century, believes the door handle is a clear reflection of the societal and political situation of the time - or at least it used to be. He notes panthers, lions, and other aggressive ornaments during moments of political turbulence and clams, flowers, and plants during more peaceful times.
In his shop in Berlin, opened in 1980, Leonhardt has tables, cupboards, shelves, and mutliple racks in a 40-square-meter basement dedicated solely to the storage and display of door handles, ranging from classicist to jugend stil, and, somewhat reluctantly, to modernism...
Until the 1930s, hundreds of different workshops were active in the city of Berlin alone - all copying and making slight alterations to popular motifs, generating maximum individuality based on a familiar repertoire. 'Personalized' handshakes, conferring the status of the inhabitant, bestowing comfort on the user, and broadcasting a symbolic order, were crucial...
2014 Rainer W. Leonhardt, door handle collecter, advocates brass as the only appropriate material: warm to the touch and resistant to corrosion, whereas the modern choice of aluminum is too soft (scratches) and turns matt.
17th century Renaissance handle: the oldest in Leonhardt's collection.
Leonhardt's collection, mainly in his basement, remains uncounted...
DOOR
PAGE 95
Results of a design shop with famous cts are encased s small door-. museum in Brakel, any.
A door only reachable by ladder opens the treasure room...
FRANZ SCHNEIDER BRAKEL
In the 20th century, as in every other area of architecture and design, overt symbolism is ceded to a form of minimalism; figuration disappears, and the only important thing about door handles became their shape and material.
A visit to the archives of German door handle manufacturer FSB (Franz Schneider Brakel), founded in 1881, reveals the broad spectrum of door handles the 20th and 21st century has brought despite the apparent reduction in their stylistic repertoire. Hidden in the company's "treasure room" is a collection the equivalent of Leonhardt's in its sheer quantity and devotion.
After the stripped-down handle designs of the early 20th century and development of ergonomic design in the 1950s, a rich seam of kitsch quotations, exaggerations, and experiments in materials (plastic) emerges - the door handle is also a major protagonist in postmodernism, leading to the current moment: a re-emphasis on materiality and sobriety...
PAGE 96	DOOR
RAINER W. LEONHARDT
1790-1850
Lion: symbolizing courage, strength, ferocity, and	Panther: reference to Greek Antiquity.	uiam: popular motit xrom me Kenaissance
wisdom; part of the iconography of cities and	Considered heretical in the middle ages;	represents birth and resurrection,
governments from Mycene, to Bayern and Venice, symbolizes power and deceit.
1850-1900
Classicist baroque.
Medusa head.
Classicist baroque.
Trinity: symbolizing the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit.
Filled Horn: representing peace and happiness also symbol of autumn.
1850-1900
Classicist baroque.
1890-1920
Animal motifs like the lion, frequently used until the late 19th century, are replaced by peacocks; swans/eagles are replaced by pigeons. Plant motifs include exotic new species found in the colonies like pineapple, coconut and artichokes.
Griffin: mythical creature with eagle's head and lion's body; combination of the king of the air and of the ground.
DOOR	PAGE 97
FSB COLLECTION
1907 Antoni Gaudi, Casa Battlo: organically shaped handle as part of his Gesamtkunstwerk.
1880-PRESENT
1926 Walter Gropius, Bauhaus: industrially produced handle built by the Berlin based door handle producer S. A. Loevy. It is used throughout the entire Bauhaus building, for all doors.
3 _Lidwig Wittgenstein spends a full year ig the minimal door handles for the oorough-Wittgenstein House, a residence for c,er in Vienna. 17mm steel rod is bent in an jO-degree angle and welded directly to the er on the other side of the door. The inside ■die is a continuation of the rod.
1954 Johannes Potente's Model 1020 sells millions and is one of the most successful door handles of the 20th century, its shape informed by ergonomic research.
1968 Neue Nationalgalerie, Ludwig Mies van der Rohe: based on a design for the door handles for the IIT campus, Chicago.
I4 Museum Groningen, Alessandro Mendini: ■ersial re-design of Gropius's Bauhaus handle, colorful grip, initially to be made of terrazzo, ; replaced by high-grade plastics.
ata Isozaki's model, the result of a workshop red by FSB. Isozaki: "The door handle ts the barrier between spaces. When crossing one space to another the handle is touched romes an extension of our body. In our autoworld, the door handle is a refuge for the J hand and should be flattering for both." otype though would/could not be taken eduction.
1970 Handle 111, HEWI: high-grade poly-amide cult door handle available In 14 colors.
1993 Peter Eisenman's handle for his unexecuted Max Reinhardt building in Berlin: "My objects are aimed to confront us with the anthropocentric nature of architecture. I don't want any decoration or representation - to the contrary, my objects are part of a continuously evolving scale, which starts at the door handle and ends at the building."
1956 Maison Louis Carré, Alvaro Aalto: combining bronze and cognac-brown leather.
2007 Dames Simon Gallerie, David Chipperfield: referring to classic modernist handles, available in aluminum, stainless steel, and bronze.
itto Wagner, Postal Savings Bank, Vienna:
¡s one of the first architects to use aluminum 30r handle. The functionalist design, with ,r|y visible screw caps, is part of the sober ;v of the bank.
PAGE 98
DOOR
HYGIENIC HANDLES
As the public point of contact, the door handle also bears the burden of germs. At least three devices are invented to sanitize the interface: a small ledge to hook the foot under and pull open the door hands-free; a wrist-pull; a self-
cleaning doorknob.
Purleve: "Intelligence isn't an attribute often	Push-pull model: a	Latch model: the
associated with door handles. But with the advent	new typology of door	base containing the
of the Purleve™ hygienic door handle, you might	handle in form as well	technology is as chunky
just want to rethink things next time you attempt	as function.	as the actual handle	is
to make a clean exit from a restroom or other	spindly.
public space. Innovative Automatic Sleeve
Dispenser (ASD) technology provides Purleve
with the brains to know when its handle has been
grasped and the smarts to do something about
it - namely, advance its self-contained sleeve
of antimicrobial-treated material to fully cover
the handle and provide each user a completely
sanitary touch."
The Clean-Escape: open doors with toes.
The WristPull, with silicone rubber loop.
DOOR
PAGE 99
DOOR LABYRINTH
Germ-phobia makes the public toilet, surprisingly, embrace doorless entry, replacing the door with so-called "labyrinth entrances," familiar from airports the world over. The most sanitary door is no door at all...
"Barrier Free Washroom Planning Guide" issued by Bobrick Washing Equipments. The doorless, labyrinth layout ensures hands free entry.
■everyone washes their hands after using the toilet. Those that do should e required to touch potentially unclean surfaces after they have scrubbed, oom doors should be designed so that after one has washed their hands, s possible without touching a surface. Doors that swing outward allow one
without gripping a surface but they must be configured to avoid hitting in9 hallway traffic. Labyrinth entrances (door-less) have no surface to whnate and they avoid the problem of an outward swinging door hitting -one. With no door opening to give warning of possible visit by security )nr«l, labyrinth design is less conducive to unwanted activity. Additionally, °und signature of criminal activity is more likely to be detected when no o exist."
e,'ican Restroom Association, "Public Restroom Design Issues."
PAGE 100	DOOR
9. lock and key
2000 Doorknob lock apparatus, operable by combination or key. Submitted for US patent by Curt A. Walby of Amherst, New York. The complexity of the device is matched by the complexity of Walby's language:"A lock apparatus operable by combination or key includes a cylinder plug secured at a reference orientation relative to a frame by a plurality of detent wafers biased for engagement with a primary keyway in the frame, and a combination dial mounted coaxially about the cylinder plug and operably connected to the detent wafers by a plurality of cam rings mounted about the frame and cylinder plug for engaging a plurality of associated radial push pins arranged to force the detent wafers out of the primary keyway."
PAGE 102
DOOR
SOME RECENT ADVANCES IN DOMESTIC LOCKS
Implemented by Belgian makers of door and window fittings, Sobinco.
1970-1972 DEAD BOLT: First lock with a sliding dead bolt, which only protrudes 10mm out of the lock; very insecure against burglary.
1978-1980 PIVOTING DEAD BOLT:
Protrudes 20mm out of the lock, and pivots rather than slides back in.
DOOR
PAGE 103
2010 TRIPLE LOCK Orca multipoint lock series 8000: top and bottom lock with upward hook bolt and two security pins. The three hook bolts pivot, rather than slide, making it extremely difficult for burglars to force entry.
PAGE 104
DOOR
analog key
ca. 4000 BC Ancient Egyptian Drop-Hatch lock: a hollowed wooden bolt connects to pins which prevent the bolt from being removed until key is inserted and the obstructive pins are lifted up.
1818 Chubb lock, patented by Englishman Jeremiah Chubb, designed for a government competition to create an unpickable lock, a title which it holds until the Great Exhibition of 1851 when rival locksmith and inventor of the protector lock Aflred Charles Hobbs became the first person to subvert It.
1865 Linus Yale, Jr., Second Pin-tumbler Cylinder Lock. "Minor changes apart, Yale's lock has reached its final stage. The key is 'a thin slip of steel properly shaped to bring the lines of division between the tumblers into the same line.'"
(Mechanization Takes Command.)
1640 Chestnut wood tumbler lock from South Tyrol, Italy.
1844 Linus Yale Sr.'s Door Lock. "Its four tumblers are packed radially around the movable cylinder pierced with holes to take them. Each of the tumblers (still called pistons) is composed of two pieces that springs (G) keep pressed toward the center. The key which moves the tumblers outward, is cylindrical in shape, and In many ways resembles Bramah's key. It acts on the 'pistons' (D,F) much as Bramah's key acted on his 'sliders'." {Mechanization Takes Command.)
1889 Catalog showing "Yale's Lock Independent of the Door's Thickness." Rather than extending through the door, the lock Is rotated by a compact steel bar plug. (Yale and Towne Manufacturing Company, Catalogue #12, 1889.)
1T84 Joseph Bramah's h
lock: There is a close r
between the bank |0rl,re!a‘ eighteenth centurv see ? Yales' solutions for?Ld mechanized door |0c|f first locks were made w(LThe a separate and indepe^h spring to each slider h?,6ni a very great ¡mprovmj : introduction of one com 6
spring to raise up the
number.'" (Sigfried Gled°e Mechanization Takes d°n' Command, 1948.)
1861 Linus Yale Jr., First Pintumbler Cylinder Lock "tumblers aligned one behind another in a single row: and lock divided into a fixed cylindrical lock-case (escutcheon) and a smaller, eccentrically placed cylinder (plug). The pin chambers are formed by corresponding holes in the lock case and in the plub. To align the tumblers, however, Yale still uses a round key inserted groove downward in the traditional way." {Mechanization Takes Command.)
1979 Patent for the Vingcard mechanical key1 reader and lock, which notes a potential marker hotels where "it Is not uncommon that the gue, forget to leave the key upon departure or tha key is lost in some other way." A version is ins01“' in John Portman's Westin Peachtree Plaza no Atlanta.
gital key
DOOR
PAGE 105
ba Nova, the world's first mechatronic ock in which both keys and locks can be rimed, thereby avoiding the obligatory lock ng associated with losing a key.
10 Visionline system keeps tabs on the whole building, ral server controls access to rooms and monitors unusual i'ke doors lingering open for too long.
1998 The Hilton Towers in New York becomes the first hotel to install SmartCard and SmartKey electronic lock systems. "These smart locking systems recognize information stored on a microchip embedded in the hotel's smart keycard or a guest's smart card. Smart cards are much more difficult to duplicate than the traditional hotel room magnetic stripe keycard, hence bringing security features to the CISA locking system that could help to reduce a hotel's liability." ("Gemplus And Cisa To Work Together To Develop Smart Card Applications For Hotel Industry," hospitalitynet.org.)
RFID Carrier;
■zy \ r# & [I
|___l«wi«__|	|___________|	I___tunMi__|	I WCQtlyhaw |
2012 Essence by VlngCard, an RFID enabled locking mechanism. "By eliminating all lock hardware on the door and encasing all of its electronic components inside the door Itself, Essence by VingCard Integrates the company's most advanced contactless locking solutions into the interior electronics. By making the lock disappear from the hotel door, the use of Essence by VingCard not only resolves any design challenges that hoteliers may encounter, it also minimises a host of other operational Issues, including integration, Installation and maintenance. By hiding the locking components from the user, hotel designers are now able to align guestroom doors with the current trend toward a more residential look, while still proving the ultimate in security technology." (BuslnessExcellence.com, February 6, 2013.)
PAGE 106
DOOR
ANALOG PRISON KEY
In 1979, two anti-apartheid activists, Tim Denkins and Stephen Lee, are incarcerated at South Africa's Pretoria Central Prison, a facility for white political prisoners. The plethora of gateways is one of the prison's methods of thwarting hopes of escape: 10 doors separate Denkins and Lee from freedom. Over the course of a year in alliance with another prisoner, Alex Moumbaris, they devise one of the most audacious prison breaks in history.
Stages of construction of wooden keys
the necessary- tools up to my cell. We'd notie bottom of their thermos flasks, which we wer coffee or soup. This seemed a good way; so
THE KEY: The first step involves Denkins figuring out how to create fake keys. "In my early years I had learned to pick the back door lock at home with a piece of wire ... I got a piece of paper and, using a knife, pressed it into the lock. That gave me the depth of the lock inside, which was the same measurement as the key ... We were working in a carpentry workshop and I thought, 'I wonder if we can make a key out of wood.' We had to make the key under the noses of the guardsmen. I made the first key in the first week. After that I took a chance and took the parts we needed, including a file, back to my cell in a Thermos flask."
Opening door 2
THE BROOMSTICK: Having opened the inside door, a second steel outer door can only be unlocked from the outside, necessitating the transformation of a broomst|CiX into a device to reach the lock through a nearby window
DOOR
PAGE 107
STROKE OF LUCK: Door 3 shares the same locking mechanism as Door 1. Only 7 doors to go...
THE FINAL ESCAPE: Door 4 is also relatively easy, but Doors 5 and 6 on the ground floor put them in proximity to the warden's office, requiring a new strategy: leaving dummies in their beds, they plan to hide in a cupboard during the warden's sweep upstairs to check on the prisoners. More than a year is spent doing trial runs, taking them through to Door 10 - the final exit, which will wait for the night of the escape. Even then escape requires the aid of a fellow political prisoner, Denis Goldberg, who distracts the guards.
Lee: "It was December 11, 1979, 18 months after our conviction. There was only one guard on duty and he was chatting to Denis. We got through the nine doors and then at the final door, we found we couldn't open the lock. Dust in case, we had brought a chisel.
I was so worried - it was making a tremendous noise. We were right underneath an armed guard but he didn't see us. We walked out as if we had every right to be there."
(All quotes from Tom Parry, "Sawn Plank Redemption: How Wooden Keys Let Anti-Apartheid Activists Escape South African Prison," The Mirror,
April 19, 2013.)
PAGE 108
DOOR
DIGITAL PRISON KEY
The advent of digital monitoring and communications software renders the door as merely one component of a centralized system of prison control. With centralization though comes increased vulnerability...
1994 Remote control doors: at the first "supermax" prison, in Florence, Colorado, prisoners "deemed too dangerous or high-profile for regular incarceration" are locked up "under the strategy of sensory deprivation and solitude" behind over 1,400 steel doors which can be monitored and operated remotely.
12013 "Group release": security footage from Guilford Knight Correctional Center, Miami, where a "group release" function is mysteriously triggered, opening all prison cell doors simultaneously. Though the administration says the event is caused by a computer glitch, some see sinister forces at work: According to [security expert John] Strauchs, a hacker could install malware to gain control of phs0! computers either by getting a corrupt insider to install it via an infected US8 stick - and programming the attack to kick in at 2am on someone else's shift - or by sending it to a worker via a phishing attack ... Though control systems at prisons shouldn't be connected to the internet, Strauchs says his team once toured a prison control room in the Rocky Mountain region and found a staffer reading his Gmsj account on a control system connected to the internet. There are also computers in non-essential Parts of prisons, such as in the commissaries or laundry rooms, that are sometimes connected to the networks that control critical functions, allowing someone to remotely hijack the control room systa" from another location in the prison." (Kim Zimmer, "Prison Computer 'Glitch' Blamed for Opening O Doors in Maximum-Security Wing," Wired, August 16, 2013.).
DOOR
PAGE 109
13 Claybank jail, Fairfield, California, receives ; million upgrade which includes new digital -ameras and improved monitoring software . > central control room. The administration •s that they can zoom in on any region at the ,( a mouse, at a resolution sufficient to read ext on a belt buckle.
THE DOOR INSIDE
The need to supplement the discipline of the physical door with inscrutable observation - and the resulting self-discipline on the part of inmates - is a technique at least as old as the Enlightenment theories of incarceration of Deremy Bentham (1748-1832), with his scheme for a "panoptic" prison, famously described by Michel Foucault: "[T]he major effect of the Panopticon: to induce in the inmate a state of conscious and permanent visibility that assures the automatic functioning of power. So to arrange things that the surveillance is permanent in its effects, even if it is discontinuous in its action; that the perfection of power should tend to render its actual exercise unnecessary; that this architectural apparatus should be a machine for creating and sustaining a power relation independent of the person who exercises it; in short, that the inmates should be caught up in a power situation of which they are themselves the bearers."
(Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, 1977, 201.)
Contrary to Foucault, who describes inter-1 surveillance superseding mere physical nment, at Claybank intensified observation somes with ever-multiplying barriers: security improvements include more than the " ' ng system. For example, iron doors are ■ osing a pod of cells, where previously J! stood." (Barry Eberling, "Claybank Tail M security facelift," Daily Republic,
PAGE 110
DOOR
BODY AS KEY
As a security device, the lock is the door's Achilles' heel. You can make doors sturdier to prevent them from being broken into, but as soon as someone gets the key, the strength of the door is meaningless. The solution? Countless patents that turn the body itself into a key, transforming everything from odor to heartbeat into a unique and indelible signature, one that is often for sale...
EAR
2013 "A biometric identification or authentication images an ear of the user. A source of near-infrared structured light illuminates the ear... and an image acquisition device captures a near-infrared image of an ear. ... The analysis area of the near-infrared image is processed to determine a reflectivity of the ear and it is determined if the reflectivity corresponds to an ear of a living person. The user is authenticated if the classified identifying features correspond to an authorized user and the reflectivity corresponds to an ear of a living person."
— Gary David Shubinsky, Alan Sobel, patent for "Biometric identification, authentication and verification using near-infrared structured illumination combined with 3D imaging of the human ear."
VOICE
2011 "There are two forms of speaker recognition: text dependent (constrained mode) and text independent (unconstrained mode). In a system using 'text dependent' speech, the individual presents either a fixed (password) or prompted ('Please say the numbers '33-54-63") phrase that is programmed into the system and can improve performance especially with cooperative users. A 'text independent' system has no advance knowledge of the presenter's phrasing and is much more flexible In situations where the individual submitting the sample may be unaware of the collection or unwilling to cooperate, which presents a more difficult challenge."
— National Science and Technology Council, Committee on Technology, Committee on Homeland and National Security, Subcommittee on Biometrics, "Speaker Recognition," www.fbi.gov/.
GAIT
2005 "To access his office, [Dr. Walker] has to undergo an authentication process. The main entrance is at the end of a well-lit corridor, 20 meters in length, equipped with several cameras. Dr. Walker walks steadily towards the entrance. As he gets close, his gait is recognized, the door opens automatically, and the intelligent system that manages the building welcomes him with a friendly, albeit synthesized, voice."
— Nikolaos V. Boulgouris, Dimitrios Hatzlnakos, Konstantinos N. Plataniotis, "Galt Recognition:
A challenging signal processing technology for biometric identification," www.comm.toronto. edu/, November 2005.
DOOR
PAGE 111
EYE
1994 "Localization of the iris is an important step in iris recognition because, if done improperly, resultant noise (e.g., eyelashes, reflections, pupils, and eyelids) in the image may lead to poor performance. ... Upon imaging an iris, a 2D Gabor wavelet filters and maps the segments of the iris into phasors (vectors). These phasors include information on the orientation and spatial frequency ("what" of the image) and the position of these areas ("where" of the image). This information is used to map the IrisCodes. ... To perform the recognition, two IrisCodes are compared. The amount of difference between two IrisCodes -Hamming Distance - is used as a test of statistical independence ... If the HD indicated that less than one-third of the bytes in the IrisCodes are different, the IrisCode fails the test of statistical significance, indicating that the IrisCodes are from the same iris." — biometrics.gov, developed by the NSTC Subcommittee on Biometrics, 2006.
FACE
1991 "Early facial recognition algorithms used simple geometric models, but the recognition process has now matured into a science of sophisticated mathematical representations and matching processes.
... Facial recognition can be used for both verification and identification (open-set and closed-set)."
— Biometric Center of Excellence, "Facial Recognition," FBI.gov.
SMELL
2008 A scheme owned by American Express: "The present invention discloses a system and methods for biometric security using smellprint recognition biometrics in a smartcard-reader system. The biometric security system also includes a smellprint sensor that detects biometric samples and a device for verifying biometric samples. ... In ... another embodiment, the present invention discloses methods for proffering and processing smellprint samples to facilitate authorization of transactions." — David S. Bonalle and Glen Salow, patent application for "Method and system for smellprint recognition biometrics on a smartcard,"
January 1, 2008.
HEART
2013 "Unlike faces and fingerprints, a heart's electrical activity is difficult to fake - it's a unique and potentially ideal security tool. Bionym is taking advantage of this trustworthiness in its upcoming Nymi bracelet. The wristwear authenticates users through a combination of electrocardiograms and Bluetooth proximity detection; if Nymi recognizes your heart rhythm, it automatically logs you into nearby devices. The bracelet also recognizes gesture commands, and a future developer kit should extend the gadget's usefulness beyond basic security for PCs and smartphones. It could unlock doors or make retail payments."
— Jon Fingas, "Nymi bracelet uses biometric heart data to unlock digital and physical doors," Engadget.com, September 3, 2013.
O^jfcent advances in Brain-Computer Interface j05	| n0|ogy indicate that there is potential
(Bcl) w type of human-computer interaction: a 6 smitting thoughts directly to the computer.
1 | 0f a 'pass-thought' system would be to 'ag5 much entropy as possible from a user's , nals upon 'transmitting' a thought. Provided sl^ |_irain signals can be recorded and pro-|f|n an accurate and repeatable way, a pass-’ syStem might provide a quasi two-factor, bie, authentication method resistant to surfing."
Thorpe, PC. van Oorschot, Anil Somayaji,
• 'oughts: Authenticating with our minds," Hinas of New Security Paradigms
%P. AP^ 2005-
PAGE 112
DOOR
PATTERN RECOGNITION
"Face-prints are collected into databases, and a computer program compares a new image or piece of footage with the database for matches. Cognitec boasts a match accuracy rate of 98.75 percent, an increase of over 20 percent over the past decade. Facebook recently achieved 97.25 percent accuracy after acquiring biometrics company Face.com in
2012.
"Flow face recognition is already being used hints at just how pervasive it could become. It's being used on military bases to control who has access to restricted areas. In Iraq and Afghanistan, it was used to check images of detainees in the field against Al-Qaeda wanted lists. The Seattle police department is already applying the technology to identify suspects on video footage.
"As the scale of face recognition grows, there's a chance it could take its place in the technological landscape as seamlessly as the iPhone. But to allow that to happen would mean ignoring the increasing danger that it will be misused."
— Kyle Chayka, "Biometric Surveillance Means Someone Is Always Watching," Newsweek, April 17, 2014.
2012 Patent filed by Behavioral Recognition System for video tracking and behavior recognition.

2011 Tag and Track, by Ipsotek, uses pattern recognition to track tn movement of individuals captured on CCTV. Combined with behavioi recognition software, footage can be used to identify "suspicious behavior in real time. The system is tested in Edinburgh and Dubai a' r
DOOR
PAGE 113
DOOR
Office Reception
Monday, April 07, 2014 1:47 PM
Everyone Rotterdam
mid entrance doors 6th floor Tuesday, April 8
From:
Sent:
To:
Subject:
Importance:
Dear all,
Please, be informed that because of the installation of new doors, no access is possible through the mid entrance, next to the canteen, on the sixth floor: Tuesday, April 8 between 7 AM and 12PM.
During these hours, please use the main entrance.
Met vriendelijke groet/kind regards,
Reception
OMA
Heer Bokelweg 149 3032 AD Rotterdam The Netherlands
office@oma.com
PAGE 114
DOOR
AUTOMATIC DOOR II
Every door harbors a wish: that it can switch seamlessly and instantly between its "wall" state and its open state, without the cumbersome manual process of opening and closing. Greek mathematician and engineer Hero of Alexandria pioneers the automatic door with a hydraulic system to open temple doors. In the 12th century, the Muslim engineer Badi' al-Zaman al-Dazari creates the first fully mechanized door openers using hydropower, incorporating them into lavish amusements like his "serving waitress" automata.
Dream realized: open sesame, and the thickest possible wall suddenly opens to become an automatic door (AH Baba and the Forty Thieves, dir. Arthur Lubin, 1944).
1206 Automaton from Badi'al-Zaman Abu al-'lzz ibn Isma’TI ibn al-Razaz alOazarfs The Book of Knowledge of Ingenious Mechanical Devices. "When set in motion by a series of weights, levers, and pulleys, the figure opens double doors, rolls down a ramp ... and serves a cup of wine." (Lisa Nocks, The Robot: The Life Story of a Technology, 2007, 15-16.)
DOOR
PAGE 115
62 AD "Temple Doors opened by Fire on an Altar," from The Pneumatics, by Hero of Alexandria, reads like a modern day patent application: "The construction of a small temple such that, on lighting a fire, the doors shall open spontaneously, and shut again when the fire is extinguished..."
PAGE 116
DOOR
ELECTRIC DOOR:
"MAGIC EYE" DETECTS MOTION IN THE KITCHEN
The electric automatic door, "recently tested in the laboratories of General Electric" appears in Popular Mechanics in 1930, with its first application being in the kitchen, helping the servers rather than the served. The photo-electric cell technology requires no physical human contact with the door, although the example depicted retains its knob. "Doors are opened without touching them through use of the photo-electric cell, the 'magic eye' of science. The device is especially suited to restaurant doors ... As the person approaches and passes through a beam of light, shining on the cell, the interruption in the rays affects the cell, actuating a relay which operates the door-opening mechanism."
AUTO DOORS IN THE SUPERMARKET
The more pressing requirement of the automatic door is not to make workers' lives easier; it is to lure consumers and accelerate commerce. In the 1940s, Publix Market is the first store in the US to adopt electric doors...
proached, and Apparatus Which Operates it
February 1930 Popular Mechanics.
1940 Publix Market, in Winter Haven, Florida, is the first store in the US to feature air-conditioning and "electric-eye doors," built by founder, George W. Jenkins.
DOOR
PAGE 117
June 27, 1967
SLIDING
Filed Aug. 3. 1965
D. D. HORTON ETAL	3,327,428
I'AXUL TRAVERSING HOUSING AND SUPPORTING KEANS
3 5ft«ct3-3Ji«ei I
ELECTRIC SLIDING DOOR
In the mid 1950s, Lew Hewitt and Dee Horton, former employees of a glass door factory, Invent the first commercial automatic sliding door. The problem they are attempting to solve is a practical one: high winds In Corpus Chrlsti, Texas slam swinging glass doors shut, shattering the glass. Establishing Horton Automatics, Inc., the duo installs the first door of its kind In 1960 at Driscoll Hotel's Torch Restaurant In south Texas. When the sliding door combines with glass, the dematerlallzatlon of the door begins In earnest.
1967 Automatic Sliding Door Patent, Lew Hewitt and Dee Horton: "There has long been need for a sliding panel which is so mounted and supported that it may be easily opened without causing possible injury to persons standing nearby during the opening and closing operation ... Briefly stated, this invention is for a traversing housing and supporting means for a sliding panel. "
1966 Star Trek, which debuts the year before Horton and Hewitt's "sliding panel" patent, envisions a future where all doors are automatic.
ENABLING THE UNBROKEN STRIDE
1996 The variable-speed automatic door, which senses your direction and speed of approach to ensure the door is fully open the moment you arrive at it, patented in the US by Masahiro Sai and Koji Tsutsumi.
PAGE 118
DOOR
AGAINST THE DOOR
2000 Engineer Werner Sobek completes the triple-glazed all transparent House R128 for his wife and himself in Stuttgart. All appliances, fixtures, lighting, windows, and doors are controlled with motion sensors, voice commands, and via a touch screen terminal. Sobek claims "technology was to be used only where it made life easier; it was not to be installed as an end in itself."
18 Dune, 2013
Werner Sobek interviewed by Rem Koolhaas and Stephan Triiby
RK I'm wondering whether it would be good to simply name every element and get your response. You can respond emotionally, you can say that it is dead, or that it's coming alive. Let's start with the door.
WS I think the door should be reinvented. Overcome the handle. Overcome the physical object that somehow turns against you.
RK I think in the case of the door, the more you abandon the physical, the more you surrender to a scary, Orwellian, insidious situation.
WS You asked me for a frank statement. When the famous Swiss engineer Robert Maillart was doing his first bridges, there were always cracks close to the abutments. So he added a little more reinforcement, and a little more on the next bridge, but still there were cracks, and he didn't understand why. Then he made a very fundamental statement, which is part of my philosophy. He said: "If the walls crack then I will not have them in future bridges anymore." And this is what I mean with the door. If I consider this to be something in my daily life to overcome, my radical statement is to just get rid of it. What is the door for? OK, it should be something that is soundproof, airtight. Can we achieve this with other means? This is the question I am asking my people, which gives them a nervous breakdown.
RK Do you have any sympathy for particular types of doors - for pivoting doors or revolving doors?
WS Maybe there should not be a rigid physical piece that turns or slips or pivots, maybe it should be something soft, for example something inflatable made from fabric.
RK But movement - isn't that a particular quality?
I love the revolving door because it gives me the ability to change its spin.
WS Yes, there's a quality to that.
ST I was very interested in the nonexistence of doot in your house. I think a burglar couldn't even find the door...
RK Do you think that the door will become less or more important in the future?
WS I think less.
RK Because? People are less interested in defining their own territory, or they want to share their interiors or...
WS I think this sharing of the interior will become more important in the future. There will be more openness, more communication. But the door as an element of architecture’ importance where you put effort into it, to make it functional make it look great - this effect will probably be diminished while other things become more important. So this is a rebalancing of the importance of the elements....
RK We realize that there is a crisis in which we are moving to a different condition, and this is why we are talking to you. But we are also documenting how in the time that elements were or are viable, there was an unbelievable richness in terms of decoration, comfort, intelligence, that was regularly displayed. While in the tendency to minimalism, the rejection of symbolism, a lot of that richness disappears. That is why, even though minimalism is a very defendable drive and to some extent one that I also share, I am increasingly aware that it doesn't make everybody very happy, and that it also made too many domains disappear.
WS Yes. But in all my work, at first glance you might say It is minimalistic, but it is never austere or ascetic. It is never Calvinistic, it is rich. You always want to touch it, or you experience it barefooted, you hear it, things like that. And even in the D10 House, there's a golden door...
RK OK, a golden door. So there is a moment of symbolism.
WS Of luxury, of richness, of contradiction.
RK And it's a golden door to the outside?
WS No, it is a sliding door to the kitchen...

J'2 House D10, southern Germany.
Its golden sliding door, manually operated.
The door, hidden.
The nerve center: a touchscreen control panel operating all the house's automated systems.
nie handle-less House R128 in Stuttgart, by
Sobek.
PAGE 120
DOOR
"always closed": revolving door
What the escalator is to the stair, the revolving door is to the "normal" door: not just a mutation but a new species of element enabling new functions and abolishing previously integral features. The revolving door, hinge-less, undoes the basic dialectic of the door, which is either open or closed, a part of the wall or a breach in it. The revolving door, on the contrary, is always closed but also always open. Whereas the door (before electric doors) deliberately blocks human traffic, the revolving door permits a constant, even torrential flow. And while the door requires additional manpower or technology to guarantee the process of opening and closing, the revolving door is exhilaratlngly user-powered...
Theophilus Van Kannel, 1841-1919.
In 1888, Theophilus Van Kannel, a mechanical engineer with inventions ranging from water hydrants to curtain cord tighteners, patents the "Storm-Door Structure," the first revolving door, with radial wings and three compartments. With the slogan "Always closed," Van Kannel touts the revolving door over the swing door for its abilities to keep out rain, snow, wind, and dust with only one set of doors, unlike storm doors, which require two. Hotels, public buildings, steamships, and the nascent typology of the skyscraper are early converts...
Early Van Kannel publicity offers to "furnish [architects, builders, and carpenters] with copies of scale drawings [of] various designs and styles of Doors without the usual heavy expense of having such drawings made to order."
Drawing of an early Van Kannel revolving door, this one with four compartments. "An early customer at the Philadelphia Chamber of Commerce attests to its benefits: 'At no time was any trouble experienced in the ingress or egress, as a solid stream of persons can go both ways without collision and with less danger than the old style of storm door. Another great advantage -there is no slamming.' In 1910, a closing hour test on one of the 50 Van Kannel doors at the Marshall Field's Store in Chicago demonstrates 1,132 people exiting through a door in a single 10-minute period." (George Burdett Ford, Alexander Burton Randall, Leonard Cox, Building height, bulk, and form, 1931, 38.)
DOOR
PAGE 121
1 he Revolving Door in a Nutshell," by Van Kannel:
-toy made can be made for a building that affords so much comfort..."
PAGE 122
DOOR
REVOLVING DOOR AND THE SKYSCRAPER
The birth of the revolving door coincides with the emergence of the skyscraper in New York and Chicago. The "stack effect" caused by the amplified differences in pressure and temperature between inside and outside, as air is sucked up elevator shafts and stairways can cause air velocity at an entrance to rise to 50 km/hour. Under such pressure, swing doors flail in the wind or become impossible to open, whereas the revolving door relieves air pressure differentials and is always operable.
1930 Chrysler Building, New York: together with the elevator, the revolving door is a key enabler of the syscraper, allowing the simultaneous and rapid influx and egress of huge amounts of people...
e
e
re
Typical skyscraper air pressure differentials, making swing doors untenable.
1912 The electric revolving door arrives, patented by E. Haviland and Van Kannel Revolving Door Co., promising to eliminate, after little more than 20 years, the human agency and drama in pushing the revolving door.
DOOR	PAGE 123
21st CENTURY REVOLVING DOORS: DO NOT PUSH
"[Revolving doors] place two or more people In a form of relationship not created by any other apparatus for the movement of bodies through space ... What ought to occur is a model in miniature of the well-functioning civil polity, a system of co-operative strangers and an equilibrium of individual interests: the enterer's desire for ingress is presumed to counterbalance the exiter's for egress."
— Dames Buzard, quoted in "Why is the Ritz getting rid of its revolving door?" Guardian, Duly 11, 2011.
Revolving doors in the 21st century have mostly gone automatic, and in doing so, reverse their original formula: now, pushing triggers an alarm and stops the door. Previously the doors had to be pushed, hard, in order to start revolving. And with the thwarting of the combined physical effort of enterers and exiters, a subtle social contract, and form of mutually-beneficial physical effort, is lost forever.
"They are the doors that have ushered world leaders, Royalty and the biggest names in entertainment into the timeless luxury of the Ritz hotel. The revolving doors of the London landmark have stood for 67 years as a symbol of opulence and were untouched by Hitler's bombs, V1s and V2s. But now they have been declared a security risk after the hotel was besieged by masked thugs in this year's anti-capitalist riots. In a move reflecting less civilised times, the doors, installed in 1944, are set to be replaced with conventional flush doors and metal shutters."
— "Rioters do what Hitler could not: close the Ritz's revolving doors,"
Daily Mail, Duly 9, 2011.
PAGE 124
DOOR
THE OPEN DOORS OF POWER
At one time, the entrances of official buildings were sites of elaborate symbolism to convey state ideology. Despite the generally anti-symbolic character of modern architecture, they still are: transparency, even if it directly conflicts with increasing security concerns, is the new imperative. A 2007 study, "Rethinking Openness: Courthouses in the United States," collects data on how the public perceives 18 different courthouses in the US, finding that the doors in particular play a key role in how the public views the institution. "Accessibility" triggers associations with "openness." A clearly visible, articulated entrance, preferably made of glass, the existence of multiple entrances, and non-intrusive security measures all contribute to positive associations.
Journal of Architectural and Planning Research 27:3 (Autumn, 2010)	260
TABLE 1. Openness-security	: constraints and opportunities (reproduced from Pati. el ai.		2007).
Security		Openness	
Section in U.S. Courts Design Guide	Stipulation	Conception and Interpretation	Constraint (-) / —^ Opportunity (+)
Perimeter security: site selection	Avoid inner-city sites	Accessibility to site	Reduced accessibility'^	 people dependent on public transportation (-)
		Exposure: local	Lack of exposure at pedestrian scale (-)
		Exposure: city-scale	Difficult to achieve (-)
		Inclusiveness	Fewer communities and reduced access means limj,ed activities (-)
Perimeter security: setback	Large setbacks (stand-off distance) with barriers	Accessibility to building: articulated entrance (for consistency with subheadings)	Creative landscaping~helpi— create processional entry (+)
		Accessibility to building: easy physical access for all	Creates longer travel distance for the physicallv challenged (-)
		Transparency: outside-in	Reduced visibility of interiors from public thoroughfare (-)
		Inclusiveness	Landscaped stand-off distance creates opportunity for outdoor public activities (-)
Perimeter security: landscaping	Small and low plants to avoid sightline obstructions	Accessibility to building: articulated entrance	Limits flexibility of designing processional entry (-)
Perimeter security: parking	Visitor parking (if provided) must be outside the courthouse	Accessibility to building: easy physical access for all	Creates problems for the physically challenged (-)
Perimeter security: public entrance	Only one public entrance recommended: large lobby to accommodate peak traffic and security station	Accessibility to building: multiple entries Accessibility to building: security mitigation	Conflicts with designers' interest in creating an urban streetscape (-) Large lobbies help reduce attention on security devices (-)
	Public entry must have metal detector, x-ray machine, and closed-circuit television	Accessibility to building: security mitigation	Discourages nonjudicial users from entering the building (-)
Special facilities: multi-tenant buildings	Discourage multi-tenant facilities; large number of nonjudiciary-related patrons could complicate security	Inclusiveness	General discouragement of nonjudiciary-related patrons means less inclusiveness and fewer activities (-)
Almost every security stipulation triggers a negative impact for the architectural ambitions of "openness": large setbacks mean reduced visibility of interiors; discouragement of multi-tenant buildings "means less inclusiveness and fewer activities." The authors of the report conclude that "designing for openness possibly conflicts with the necessities of site selection, setback, landscaping, parting, entry, and occupancy type." (Debajyoti Patl, Mahbub Rashid, and Craig Zimring, "Occupants' Perceptions of Openness in Federal Courthouses," Journal of Architectural and Planning Research,
27:3, Autumn 2010, 260.)
DOOR
PAGE 125
2012 Taunton Trial Court, Massachusetts, Leers Weinzapfel Associates.
2012 A man throws a rock at the glass doors of Saginaw County Governmental Center, Michigan. He is charged with malicious destruction of a building, but is found mentally unfit for trial. The glass Is replaced.
2011 United States Courthouse, Buffalo, 2010 Lindsey-Flanigan New York' Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates. Courthouse, Denver,
Klipp Architecture.
Working overtime to symbolize transparency and efficiency, the structure boasts 54,500 square feet of glass and 870 doors, inside and out.

PAGE 126
DOOR
1967 Parody of transparency: when Monsieur Hurlot breaks the glass door in Dacques Tati's Playtime (1967), he continues to act as doorman, "opening' the door by moving the handle through thin air, his guests accepting his gesture unquestioningly; when completely transparent, the actual physical presence of the door hardly matters...

PAGE 128
DOOR
THE AIR CURTAIN
In 1904, Van Kannel, responsible first for the revolving door, patents the hot air curtain as a "means for excluding drafts from open doorways." The hot air curtain, or "air door," allows shop doors to remain always open (the opposite of Van Kannel's "always closed" revolving door). Delivering a constant flow of air from the top of the open door, the air curtain maintains temperature separation between inside and outside while blocking the entry of dirt, dust, fumes, and insects. Increasingly popular over the course of the 20th century, until sustainability anxiety emerges in the latter part, the air curtain facilitates the disappearance of the physical door and its replacement with an ephemeral device.
DOOR
PAGE 129
The Windbox, offered by ]S Air Curtains, provides over 21,000 cubic meters per hour of airflow to seal doorways. Here, the air curtain is utilized in conjunction with automatic sliding doors.
2006 Air door heat map.
PAGE 130	DOOR
SPACE DOORS
Doors in space must be perfect. With increasing "Extravehicular Activity" (space walks) necessary for development, recovery, and repair of space systems, NASA devises a system of internationally compatible airlocks. The space suits used for such missions are themselves entered through a door.
SHUTTLE DOOR
door to space
1987 NASA considers four different airlock types for Extra Vehicular Activity (EVA) access: "The EVA airlock for space station must be more than just an enlargement of the space shuttle airiock. It must be a complete EVA Access Facility that supports sustained EVA productivity and maintenance on orbit." The suitport and crewlock concepts, both alternatives to traditional airlocks, are earmarked for further study. (Marc M. Cohen and Steven Bussolari, "Human Factors in Space Station Architecture 2," NASA Technical Memorandum 86856, 1987.)
2011 An astronaut exits the international space' station via the Quest Airlock for an Extravehicul-Activity session. The aluminum airlock, which B' develops the "crewlock" concept, is installed i 2001. Each unit costs $164 million. Before its 1 installation, American astronauts could only do spacewalks when the Space Shuttle was dockec
2010 The airlock system of space shuttle Atlantis, prior to mission STS-132, International Space Station assembly flight ULF4.
1967 Enter through the back door: the Soviet Union's Krechet-94 space suit, designed for a manned lunar mission, one of the first self-sustaining suits, the life-support system of which
2012 NASA's Z-1 prototype aims to replace not only existing spacesuits but airlocks as well: the spacesuit itself becomes the airlock...
is located in the rear door; the 90 kg suit's total
operating life is estimated to be 48 hours.
PAGE 132
DOOR
GLOBALLY COMPATIBLE SPACE DOORS
2011 The International Docking System Standard - the usefulness of which is demonstrated aptly in the movie Gravity (2013) as the protagonists drift around desperately in space, docking on crafts belonging to various nations -is developed by NASA along with its International Space Station partners, the Canadian Space Agency, European Space Agency, Japanese Space Agency, and Russian Space Agency. An Interface Definition Document "provides the basic geometry and design parameters that would allow developers to independently design compatible docking systems suitable to their own unique program and mission requirements." ("Development of the International Docking System Standard," 2011.) The initiative is not only an act of global cooperation in space but a measure that allows private companies to contribute to a shared infrastructure too...
2012 "The IDSS IDD defines a 2-stage approach to docking. The first stage establishes the initial capture of the docking vehicles, and is performed by the Soft Capture System (SCS). During the capture phase, the active docking mechanism stabilizes the newly joined spacecraft...
... The soft capture system then pulls the docking spacecraft together in order to initiate the second stage of docking, performed by the Hard Capture System (HCS). The HCS performs structural latching and sealing at the docking interface in order to transfer structural loads between the spacecraft and to create a Iransfer tunnel which can be pressurized for crew and cargo transfer for joint mission operations."
— "Development of the International Docking System Standard," 2011.
DOOR
PAGE 133
surface of BEAM is a thick but ■it! structure which includes s of Kevlar to block the twin tords of space travel: radiation i imeiometeorites traveling if than bullets.
BEAM is a
cylindrical module that weighs roughly 3,000 pounds and is 13 feet long and 10.5 feet wide.
flr strain layer
Redun rant Micro-	Multi layer
bladders	meteoroid	insulation
shielding
2013 Androgynous Docking Door Interface. The Multilateral Coordination Board (MCB) attempts to standardize docking door systems: "The purpose of the IDSS IDD is to provide basic common design parameters to allow developers to independently design compatible docking systems. The IDSS Is intended for uses ranging from crewed to autonomous space vehicles, and from Low Earth Orbit (LEO) to deep-space exploration missions." (International Docking System Standard (IDSS) Interface Definition Document (IDD): Revision C, 2013, 1.)
SPACE HOTEL
2013 Bigelow Expandable Activity Module: under budget pressure to outsource its operations, NASA signs a $17.8 million deal with Bigelow Aerospace to create flexible new modules that can dock on the International Space Station: "NASA is partnering with a commercial space company in a bid to replace the cumbersome 'metal cans' that now serve as astronauts' homes in space with inflatable bounce-house-like habitats that can be deployed on the cheap." (Glenn Miller, "Space Station to Get $18 Million Balloon-Like Room," Associated Press, January 17, 2013.) The move is seen as a vote of confidence in Bigelow's larger plans to build "space hotels," charging wealthy clientele $400,000 a day for an orbiting suite, promising a new era of space architecture.
PAGE 134
DOOR
airport: stretched door 1970-2020
As logical entrance and exit points to the city for millions of travelers, airports represent the modern equivalent of the city gate, bearing all its symbolic weight. In the Jet Age 1960s, airports are built glamorous; even through the 1970s, after the first modern hijackings, security involves relatively light-weight X-ray equipment. In the US, 9/11 provokes a dramatic increase in ever-more demanding procedures, with each subsequent terror scare provoking new rituals: the removal of shoes, bans on liquids, full body scans. "While security represented 5-8 percent of airport operating costs a decade ago," notes the International Air Transport Association, "that figure has increased to as much as 35 percent at some airports today and there can be no confidence that this trend will change."
Today, the Transportation Safety Authority boasts no less than 20 separate checks on travellers. Screenings, searches, and scannings are only the most obvious manifestations of a procedure that extends well before and well after arrival. The airport becomes an endless door stretching out ahead of travellers...
1973 Scanning of all passengers becomes mandatory In the US; a security checkpoint is installed at Columbia Metropolitan Airport, South Carolina.
DOOR
PAGE 135
20 LAYERS OF US AIRPORT SECURITY
"We use layers of security to ensure the security of the travelling public and the Nation's transportation system. Because of their visibility to the public, we are most associated with the airport checkpoints that our Transportation Security Officers operate. These checkpoints, however, constitute only one security layer of the many in place to protect aviation. Others include intelligence gathering and analysis, checking passenger manifests against watch lists, random canine team searches at airports, federal air marshals, federal flight deck officers and more security measures both visible and invisible to the public. Each one of these layers alone is capable of stopping a terrorist attack. In combination their security value is multiplied, creating a much stronger, formidable system. A terrorist who has to overcome multiple security layers in order to carry out an attack is more likely to be pre-empted, deterred, or to fail during the attempt." ("About TSA: Layers of Security," Transportation Security Authority, www.tsa.gov/, 2011.)
PAGE 136
DOOR
RUNNING THE GAUNTLET
The American airport security system
impede
queue management system
identify
behavior detection officer
identify
whole body imager
impede
passenger containment
impede
TSA officer
identify
surveilance camera
identify
i metal detector
DOOR
PAGE 137
single strap queuing stanchions
anti-fatigue mat
blue nitrile gloves
composure bench
bag search table
garbage cans for contraband material
identify
os'ves and narcotics detector
PAGE 138	DOOR
TXL: BERLIN TEGEL THINNESS
1975	The unique "drive to gate" terminal, designed by Gerkan, Marg and Partners (GMP), is the epitome of convenient, short walking distance between landside and airside. Cars emerge at the ring shaped terminal to drop off passengers, who face just a 25-meter walk across a corridor to their gate, where check in and security are integrated. The 21st century's more demanding security requirements and the need for more shopping render the narrownes of Tegel's terminal inefficient with regard to operating costs and revenue generation. The increased costs to operate the plethora of security checkpoints and the inability to concentrate passenger flows to a centralized shopping area result in significant functional and financial limitations; Tegel is declared obsolete even though it continues to handle nearly 20 million passengers per year.
Super-fast transition from curb to airplane at Berlin Tegel.
DOOR
PAGE 139
BER: BRANDENBURG WILLY BRANDT THICKNESS
2006-2019? Delayed for years - leading to the firing of the designers, Gerkan, Marg & Partner and the bankruptcy of their partners, JSK Architekten - the new Berlin Brandenburg Willy Brandt airport, is originally meant to replace both Tegel and Schonefeld, but now will only replace the former. BER will initially accomodate 34 million passengers per year - making it only the third biggest airport in Germany. Those passengers will pass through three levels and traverse up to 500 meters before boarding a plane. Processing and security areas within BER include a vast departure hall with 10 check in areas and a total of 118 desks, 36 security lines and a central baggage reclaim hall with eight carousels. 150 shops, restaurants, and service facilities and a 9,000 m2 airside marketplace are planned to maximize concession revenues.
dropoff departure security airside	P|ER	gate/ loading
CURB	HALL	ZONE RETAIL	LOUNGE BRIDGE
DOOR
PAGE 143
ere is lethal collateral damage associated with all this spending on airline ity - namely, the inconvenience of air travel is pushing more people onto roads. Compare the dangers of air travel to those of driving. To make flying dangerous as using a car, a four-plane disaster on the scale of 9/11 would e to occur every month, according to analysis published in the American ''tist. Researchers at Cornell University suggest that people switching from to road transportation in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks led to an increase '2 driving fatalities per month - which means that a lot more people died on fads as an indirect result of 9/11 than died from being on the planes that 'ble day. They also suggest that enhanced domestic baggage screening ;ne reduced passenger volume by about 5 percent in the five years after and the substitution of driving for flying by those seeking to avoid security es over that period resulted in more than 100 road fatalities."
Carles Kenny, "Airport Security Is Killing Us," Bloomberg Businessweek,
■ember 18, 2012.
PAGE 144
DOOR
LUXURY SECURITY
Where some see only endless layers of tedium and security state paranoia, others see a business opportunity. Elite passages, yoga studios, therapy dogs, and other soothing amenities multiply to ease the stress of airport security. "The Next Level," a concept in Dallas sponsored by the Marriott-owned Spring Hill Suites hotel, aims to at least make it a more comfortable experience. The Next Level aims to transform checkpoints into "a welcoming and aesthetically appealing space designed to offer travelers a new level of comfort inside a security checkpoint."
The checkpoint features leather couches, music, nature imagery, and direct passage into Marriott hotel lobbies. Flat-panel screens deliver both useful information and advertisements. The scheme is a partnership with SecurityPoint, a company that sells ads inside x-ray trays. "We want to think about it as a service instead of a governmental gap nobody touches and everyone tolerates," says an airport official. (Scott McCartney, "A Kinder, Gentler Airport TSA Screening Checkpoint," Wall Street Journal, October 16, 2013.)
Keep Calmer and Carry On
A diagram of a new airport security checkpoint that aims to ease flier aggravation
Warm-toned LED lighting
Video displays with screening instructions and TSA messages
Directional audio and screening instruction
Bigger, more colorful bins
'Recomposure' area for getting dressed after screening
Veneer of comfort over the gruelling airport security experience.
Pastel mood lighting to smooth the transition, while signs display estimated waiting times.
"Recomposure area," bearing an unmistakable resemblance to a hotel waiting area. High-top tables feature foot bars for retying shoes.
Trays for personal belongings are larger, and clad with soothing nature imagery. Ads for SpringHill Marriott, which pays for the makeover, compete with airport signage.
DOOR
PAGE 145
0|TED SECURITY
gA's solution to the morass of airport security:
ISA Pre™ Experience." For an $85 fee and assent gital background check, travellers gain access to a ■al expedited line in which they do not have to remove belts, coats, or their laptop from their bag.
door
,i5 of stratification multiply within iayers of security, separating the mobile elite traveller, who is and willing to pay, from the rest, yerdam's Schiphol airport claims ts Privium program, "for frequent s who want holdup-free travel," will ct "the pleasure back to travelling." €121 a year, Privium Basic nbers are guaranteed expedited der crossing if they submit to an iris
i.	For €205 a year, Schiphol offers :y parking, a special lounge, ness class check-in, and the use a special walkway circumventing leparture hall, taking them almost ctiy from parking garage to gate.
ECKPOINT THERAPY
ness and mindfulness find their Into one of the First World's most essful environments...
2013 Therapy dogs: Pets Unstressing Passengers (PUPs) provide canines at Los Angeles International Airport not just for sniffing for contraband, but for the pleasure of petting. Here, even the dog gets a pat-down from security, in case it is an unwitting vehicle for illicit objects.
2014 Privium Members lane, Amsterdam Schipol airport: opened by iris scan.
Entrance to Privium lounge makes a play on the iris scan.
2012 Checkpoint therapy: yoga studio opens at San Francisco International Airport.
PAGE 146
DOOR
SMART SECURITY
The dream of not having to "divest" your shoes, belts, liquids, and laptops at airport checkpoints means a surrender to enhanced surveillance technology coming online before 2020, according to the Airports Council International (ACI), representing airport operators in 177 countries and the International Air Transport Association (IATA). "Smart Security" is no longer focused on the "checkpoint." By 2020, the "bilateral agreement for risk assessment," in which countries share information about passenger identities, means that the airport security zone starts in your home and on your devices. ACI unveils a blueprint for the three phases of implementation...
2014 INCREASED RELIANCE ON INTELLIGENCE:
BEHAVIOR RECOGNITION, RISK CALCULATION, ADAPTIVE USE OF EXISTING EQUIPMENT
Security checkpoint: adaptation of current conditions.
"Covert and overt behavior analysis techniques deployed at checkpoint."
"Biometric verification e-Gate at the checkpoint for known travelers."
"X-ray technology advancement to enable LAGS "Remote image processing from checkpoint at an screening with divesting."	airport specific basis."
"Passenger Security Scanners deployed as the secondary search device for passengers."
2017 INCREASED USE OF BIOMETRICS AND PASSENGER TRACKING
Security checkpoint: installation of new	"Separate known traveler queue and lane with	"International cooperation and recognition
technologies, including prescreening throughout	biometric identity authentication at entry."	of known traveler programs."
the airport.
"Risk assessment and identity management systems connected via a secure information network."
"X-ray technology advancement to enable LAGS screening without need to divest and no volume restrictions."
"Real time data collection of checkpoint Kr! (e.g. passenger queue time and throughput) with forecast ability to provide queue time to passenger on-demand via a checkpoint management system."
DOOR
PAGE 147
2g TAILORED screening based on risk
from
2020 and beyond it is envisaged that the passenger will be able to flow through the security checkpoint without
Liption unless the advanced technology identifies a potential threat. A passenger will have a level of security 3ning based on information from states of departure and arrival through bilateral risk assessments in real-time. In s 0f the passenger experience, there will no longer be the burden of divesting by default, and there are expected 3 uttle to no queues as a result of the enhanced speed at which screening can occur."
.ports Council International (ACI), 2014.
■■nd-off identity management system based on "Passenger and flight data risk assessments are "Real time risk score updates and level netric capture and verification."	common practice with international cooperation." of screening decisions."
"Screening technology complete with advanced threat detection and dynamic adjustment based on the risk score of the passenger."
w •’	WWÊh. WÊÊÊÈÎÈ&.	'-..-v	No Need to Remove Coats. Shoes & Belts
	
"'ote image processing with	"X-ray technology advancement to enable LAGS "No need to remove coats, shoes & belts."
iatic decision algorithms"	screening without need to divest and no volume
restrictions."
PAGE 148
DOOR
BAD OBJECTS VS. BAD INDIVIDUALS
lATA's previous scheme for a Checkpoint of the Future, built around a "new philosophy": rather than screen for "bad objects," the IATA proposes to profile "bad individuals" using pre-screening, background checks, and biometric data. For the citizen in good standing, the airport will no longer function as an old-fashioned gate: "travelers should walk uninterrupted through a 'tunnel of technology' where security and customs processing occurs in a transparent manner." The core of lATA's approach is to negate "one-size-fits-all" screening, segregating travelers into three groups: Known Travelers (KTs), Normal Risk Passengers (NRPs), and Elevated-Risk Passengers (ERPs). IATA pictures a world in which international data sharing makes biometric information a universal key for the known global traveler. For those who fall into the Elevated-Risk category, on the other hand, the gates tighten: immediate segregation to the special lane, with a battery of elaborate checks. ("Checkpoint of the Future: Blueprint," IATA, 2011, 3.)
Enhanced Security Lane
KNOWN TRAVELER SCREENING
"The first step is self-nomination by passengers that are currently flying frequently. Candidate nominees are thus better known from a security viewpoint, and they have the added benefit of making up a disproportionately high fraction of passengers on any day. When the candidate nominees have given their consent, they are cleared for registration by two processes: a fingerprint-based criminal history check; and a check against a state terrorism database. ...
If these checks are completed without issue, the passenger can be enrolled as a Known Traveler, with his or her biometric identifier and relevant personal data entered in a government database.... Since these travelers have no need to 're-assemble' themselves, no benches tables or chairs will be needed to be directly adjacent to their exit, because the KT will have ample opportunity to gather the few objects that they needed to divest prior to exiting."
— "Checkpoint of the Future:
Blueprint," 15-16.
Secondary Search Integrated display
Metal Detector
Automatic access control door
AT X-ray Operator Console
Boarding Card/
Biometric Reader Verifier
Known Traverler screening: biometrically-controlled door, metal detector, X-ray.
DOOR
PAGE 149
Bag reassembly Card Reader
ipervisoi
1 Wl/.y Privacy Curtain
w
n , Private ^ec,baS search conveyor booth
reassembly
area
Bag inspection console, operator
Quadnipole Resonance scanner
t Divesting trays:
Green - non electromcs Red - electronics
Enhanced screening: including quadruple resonance scanner, card reader and "Exit supervisor."
ENHANCED SCREENING
"Elevated-risk passengers are those that present a higher likelihood of posing a threat to airliners or which little biographical/law enforcement data is known. All such passengers must be identified and directed to an enhanced security lane, in order to be screened by the technology and processes needed to detect and interdict, with sufficiently high confidence, the types of lEDs, and their disassembled components, terrorists are known to use today. It is of course essential that any and all would-be terrorists intending to attack an airliner will be included in the elevated category. It follows that the pre-screening of passengers should have several layers, and if any layer indicates that the passenger should be designated elevated risk, then that must be the pre-screening system's final determination, even if all other layers do not." (18)
Normal screening: metal detector, X-ray, body-scan, shoe scan, scondary bag search.
AIT Console/ Passenger Search
Secondary Search AIT
AT X-ray Operator/ Workstations
X-rays	\
Secondary bag Search
NORMAL SCREENING
"Normal risk passengers make up a considerable fraction of the total at the checkpoint. They are the passengers who have none of the characteristics that would cause them to be categorized as elevated risk but have not been enrolled as Known Travelers, possibly because they are infrequent flyers. Given the high probability that proper pre-screening has placed potential terrorists in the elevated risk category, it is highly unlikely that the normal risk category includes any terrorists." (17)
PAGE 150
DOOR
THE DOOR AS SATUS SYMBOL, AGAIN
Security systems no longer rely on the brute force of a heavy door but on a combination of indelible biometric data ephemeral digital records. Doors that know you in advance, likely to be phased in soon at airports around the world9 do not have to unleash their full arsenal of defensive measures, and so can maintain the feeling - increasingly import for our sense of status - of unhindered, seamless global travel. Anyone who complains about excessive, blind, routing airport security is now confronted with a (false) choice: either accept the democratic inconvenience of universal check regardless of your personal record, or accept the logic of a segregated, biometric-powered system that singles out supposedly risky travellers. The door, elsewhere drained of the ornamentation, finery, and weightiness that used to convey meaning about the people who could pass through it, re-emerges in disguise at the airport as a precise instrument confering status and rank.
DOOR
PAGE 151
y'S checkpoint was designed 40 years ago to stop kers carrying metal. Today, everybody is equally nged to prove themselves innocent. My vision for checkpoint of the future combines technology and ,,ence to end this one-size-fits-all approach. Passengers all< through tunnels of technology appropriate to the jeve| identified with background screening without ping, stripping or unpacking." vanni Bisignani, lATA's Director General and CEO, \A/ings Club, New York, March 31, 2011.
2011 Concept drawing for tunnels of technology.
Enhanced security lane Normal security lane
2011 Prototype of lATA's "Checkpoint of the future," dividing travelers into three tunnels according to risk.
In the "enhanced" tunnel, travelers would have to pause in front of a sequence of surveillance devices, while "known" travelers face a tunnel equipped only with an iris scanner at the beginning.
PAGE 152	DOOR
bibliography
Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves. Film. Directed by Arthur Lubin. USA: Universal Pictures, 1944.
Adorno, Theodor Wiesengrund, and Renato Solmi. Minima Moralia. Torino: Einaudi, 1954.
"Architectural Magic." Beausoleil Architects Blog. www.blog.beausoleil-architects. com/2011/03/architectural-magic.html (accessed May 6, 2014).
Barber, Edwin Lee. "Old Door-Knockers." Bulletin of the Pennsylvania Museum 8 (1910): 5-9. http://archive.org/details/ jstor-3793788 (accessed May 3, 2014).
Boulgouris, N.V. "Gait Recognition: A Challenging Signal Processing Technology for Biometric Identification." Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, November 2005. http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/login.jsp?tp= &arnumber=1550191 &url=http%3A%2F%2 Fieeexplore.ieee.org%2Fxpls%2Fabs_all. jsp%3Farnumber%3D1550191 (accessed August 2, 2014).
Burgess, Dames, and Henry Cousens. The Architectural Antiquities of Northern Gujarat, More Especially of the Districts Included in the Baroda State. London: B. Quaritch, 1903.
Carroll, Lewis. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland. London: MacMillan and Co., 1865.
Chang, Shih-Kai and Colin G. Drury, "Task Demands and Human Capabilities in Door Use," Applied Ergonomics, April 7, 2006.
Charney, Maurice. The Comic World of the Marx Brothers' Movies: "Anything Further Father?". Madison N.D.: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 2007.
Chayka, Kyle. "Biometric Surveillance Means Someone is Always Watching." Newsweek. www.newsweek.com/2014/04/25/biometric-surveillance-means-someone-always-watching-248161 .html (accessed May 6, 2014).
Ching, Francis D. K. Building Construction Illustrated. 4th ed. Hoboken, N.D.: Dohn Wiley & Sons, 2008.
Cohen, Marc M. and Steven Bussolari, "Human Factors in Space Station Architecture II," NASA Technical Memorandum 86856, 1987.
DeForest, Mike. "Burglars Posing as Deliverymen." Click Orlando, www. clickorlando.com/news/burglars-posing-as-delivery-men/24531890 (accessed May 6, 2014).
Dhar, Parul Pandya. The Torana in Indian and Southeast Asian Architecture. New Delhi: D.K. Printworld, 2009.
Doolittle, Dustus. Social life of the Chinese. Singapore: Graham Brash, 1986.
Dovey, Kim. Framing Places Mediating Power in Built Form. London: Routledge, 1999.
Dray-Novey, Alison. "Spatial Order and Police in Imperial Beijing." The Journal of Asian Studies 52 (1993): 885-922.
Drier, Hannah. "Space Station to Get $18 million Balloon-like Room." NewsDaily. www.newsdaily.com/technology/ f94b2c317030e2ec67055897b0800922/ space-station-to-get-18-million-balloon-like-room (accessed May 6, 2014).
Eberling, Barry. "Claybank Tail gets $3.2M security facelift." Daily Republic, www. dailyrepublic.com/news/solanocounty/ claybank-jail-gets-security-facelift/ (accessed May 6, 2014).
"Facial Recognition." FBI. www.fbi.gov/ about-us/cjis/fingerprints_biometrics/ biometric-center-of-excellence/modalities/ facial-recognition (accessed May 5, 2014).
Fingas, Don. "Nymi Bracelet Uses Biometric Heart Data to Unlock Digital and Physical Doors. " Engadget. www.engadget. com/2013/09/03/nymi-bracelet/
(accessed May 6, 2014).
Ford, George B., and A. B. Randall. Building Height, Bulk, and Form; How Zoning can be Used as a Protection Against Uneconomic Types of Buildings on High-Cost Land. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1931.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: the Birth of the Prison. New York: Pantheon Books, 1977.
Frank, Anne, Otto Frank, Mirjam Pressler, and Susan Massotty. The Diary of a Young Girl: The Definitive Edition. New York: Doubleday, 1995.
Frazer, Dames George. The Golden Bough. London: Macmillan, 1955.
Freud, Sigmund, and Doyce Crick.
The Interpretation of Dreams.
Oxford University Press, 1999.
Gallagher, Ian. "Rioters do what Hitler Could Not: Close the Ritz's Revolving Doors." Mail Online, www.dailymail.co.uk/ news/article-2012974/Rioters-Hitler-close-Ritz-s-revolving-doors.html (accessed May 6, 2014).
"Gemplus And Cisa To Work Togethe, -t Develop Smart Card Applications F0r u° Industry." Hospitality Net. www.hospit r °tel org/news/4001073.html	ai,Vnei
(accessed May 6, 2014).
Gennep, Arnold van. The Rites of passa Chicago: University of Chicago Press iggf
Giedion, S. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford Universit Press, 1948.
Hall, Franklin Pierce. "The American Doorknob." Antique Homes, www.
antiquehomesmagazine.com/Articles
php?id= 14 (accessed May 6, 2014).
Hickman, Leo. "Why is the Ritz Getting Rp of its Revolving Door?" The Guardian July 11, 2011. www.theguardian.com/ travel/201 l/jul/11 /leo-hickman-revolving. doors (accessed January 20, 2014).
International Building Code 2009, International Code Council, Inc.
"International Air Transport Association Report." IATA. www.iata.org/pressroom/ Documents/annual-report-2011 .pdf (accessed October 2, 2013).
Isozaki, Arata, and David B. Stewart. Japan-ness in Architecture. Cambridge, Mass. MIT Press, 2006.
Dubran, Damai. "Sanaa's Walls and the Myti-of Security." Portal 9, Spring 2013. http:/, portal9journal.org/articles.aspx?id=86 (accessed Danuary 11, 2014).
Dung, C.G. Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious. London: Routledge, 1991.
Kafka, Franz. The Trial. New York: Knopf, 1957.
Kenny, Charles. "Airport Security Is Killing Us." Bloomberg Business Week. www. businessweek.com/articles/2012-11-18/ how-airport-security-is-killing-us (accessed May 6, 2014).
Knox, Richard. "Protests Mount Over Safety And Privacy Of Airport Scanners. NPR. www.npr.org/blogs/ health/2010/11/12/131275949/protests-
mount-over-safety-and-privacy-of-airport-
scanners (accessed May 6, 2014).
Latour, Bruno. "Where are the Missing Masses, Sociology of a Few Mundane Artefacts." In Shaping Technology/BuiU»>9 Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Charge Wiebe Bijker and Dohn Law (editors), Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1992. 225-259.
n iviark. "Farce is Everywhere on ' _ But Why?" The Guardian, l62012. (Accessed danuary 5, 2014).
iaY®rS
of Security." Transportation Administration, www.tsa.gov/
irity'
t tsa/layers-security 5Sed May 6, 2014).
arthy, Erin. “Build Your Own Bat Cave Secret Room Camouflage." Popular gnics. www.popularmechanics.com/ /¡mprovement/interior/4282305 ;Ssed May 6, 2014).
jrtney, Scott. "A Kinder, Gentler l0rtTSA Screening Checkpoint." The Street Journal (New York), October 16, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/ 00142405270230441020457913937061 o;770 (accessed danuary 10, 2013).
aie||, George. The Hindu Temple: An oduction to its Meaning and Forms. York: Harper & Row, 1977.
Pierce, R.V. "The People's Common Sense Medical Adviser in Plain English: or, Medicine Simplified." Gutenberg.org (accessed 10 dan. 2014). <www.gutenberg. org/files/18467/18467-h/advise.html>.
"Public Restroom Design Issues."
American Restroom Association. http://americanrestroom.org/design/ (accessed May 6, 2014).
Serlio, Sebastiano, and Vaughan Hart. Sebastiano Serlio on Architecture,
Volume Two: Books VI-VII of "Tutte Topere d'architettura et prospetiva" with "Castramétation of the Romans" and "The Extraordinary Book of Doors".
Yale University Press, 2001.
Siegert, Bernhard. "Doors: On the Materiality of the Symbolic." Grey Room 47 (2012): 6-23.
Simmel, G. "Bridge and Door." Theory, Culture & Society 11.1 (1994): 5-10.
1 Robert. Posthumous Papers of a .¡Author. Hygiene, Colo.: Eridanos
ss 1987.
ajinan, Scott. "TSA: No More Graphic, Body Airport Scans." NPR. www.npr.
blogs/thetwo-
2013/05/30/187376559/tsa-no-more-::aphic-full-body-airport-scans (accessed 6, 2014).
±s, Lisa. The Robot: the Life Story of a nology. Westport, Conn.: Greenwood
s, 2007.
asmaa, duhani. The Eyes of the Skin: vtecture and the Senses. Chichester: Academy, 2005.
Tom. "Sawn Plank Redemption; How >oden Keys Let Anti-Apartheid Activists ape South African Prison." Daily Mirror,
: 7daily-mirror.vlex.co.uk/vid/sawn--redemption-anti-apartheld-10-432146942 cessed May 6, 2014).
, Debajyoti, Mallika Bose, and Craig lag. "Rethinking Openness: houses in The United States (study)." terny of Architecture for Justice. 'network.aia.org/
Lmyofarchitectureforjustice/resources/ locument?DocumentKey=4b5a2d04-18d9-b9b0-06170413819b (accessed
6,	2014),
Smith, R. Decorative Iron and Metalwork: Great Examples from English Sources. Dover ed. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover Publications, 2002.
"Speaker Recognition." FBI. www.fbi.gov/ about-us/cj'is/fingerprints_biometrics/ biometric-center-of-excellence/modalities/ facial-recognition (accessed May 5, 2014).
Thorpe, dulie, and PC. van Oorschot, Anil Somayaji, "Pass-Thoughts: Authenticating with Our Minds." Carleton University, Canada: Digital Security Group, School of Computer Science, 2005.
Weidu, Ma. Classical Chinese Doors & Windows (Zhong guo gu dai men chuang). Beijing: China Architecture & Building Press, 2001.
"What to Expect When Getting a New TSA Pat-Down." American Civil Liberties Union. www.aclu.org/technology-and-liberty/what-expect-when-getting-new-tsa-pat-down (accessed May 6, 2014).
Wiener, Margaret d. Visible and Invisible Realms: Power, Magic, and Colonial Conquest in Bali. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1995.
Zhu, dian Fei. "A Celestial Battlefield: The Forbidden City and Beijing in Late Imperial China," AA Files No. 28 Autumn 1994, 51.
PAGE 154	DOOR
image sources and courtesy
PO © Photo Wolfgang Tillmans
P2 Paul Haeck, Greg Drake, Albert E. Ranzau. Ill / Detex Corporation / US6532777.
P 8-9 SK Chang CG Drury, "Task Demands and Human Capabilities in Door Use," Elsevier (2007).
P10 Yao Chengzu, Yingzao Fayuan (1927-37); Parul Pandya Dhar, The Torana in Indiaan and Southeast Asian Architecture, D. K. Printworld (2009).
P11 Sebastiano Serlio, The Extraordinary Book of Doors (1551); Francis D. K. Ching, Building Construction Illustrated, Wiley (2008).
P12 Ricardo André Frantz.
P15 "Salgado Filho08" by Rhcastilhos, licensed under CC BY 3.0.
P16 Peter Carl Geissler, "Desús Christ".
P17 Orson Welles, The Trial, Parisa-Europa Productions, Hisa-Film and finanziaria Cinematográfica Italiana (1962).
P18 R. B. Pierce The People's Common Sense Medical Adviser in Plain English; or, Medicine Simplified, Dustus Doolittle (1895).
P19 Anton Chia; Intersphere / www. youtube.com/watch?v=3Pa6xA6flOI.
P20-21 Groucho Marx, Chico Marx, Harpo Marx, A Night at the Opera, Irving Thalberg (1935).
P22-23 ABC Photo Archives; NBC Universal Studios; Sony Pictures Television.
P24 Illustration by Sir Dohn Tenniel for "Alice in Wonderland".
P25 Rene Magritte / Musee Magritte Museum.
P26-27 ©The Trustees of the British Museum. All rights reserved.
P28 Fosss.org / Hsuan Hua, The Shastra on the Door to Understanding the Hundred Dharmas.
P29 "Annunciation" by Domenico Veneziano.
P31 M.D. Wiener, Visible and Invisible Realms, Chicago: University of Chicago Press (1995) Koes Karnadi; Liang Ssu-ch'eng. A Pictorial History of Chinese Architecture: A Study of the Development of Its Structural System and the Evolution of Its Types MIT Press (1984).
P32 National Geographic Society.
P33 NASA.
P34 Florian GrupP
P35 Michell, George, The Hindu temple: an introduction to its meaning and forms (University of Chicago Press, 1977).
P 36-37 FreerlSackler Archives.
P38 K'ao /Cu (1972).
P39 Kees de Vries.
P40 Sven Gross-Selbeck; Fred Waters/AP. P41 Derry Wong.
P44 Burg Hochosterwitz - Burgverwaltung. P56 Marie-Lan Nguyen.
P57 Ang Shuman.
P58 http://lastwelshmartyr.blogspot.nl/ 2010/07/priest-holes.html.
P59 21 Club New York; Anne Frank Organization.
P60 Creative Home Engineering, LLC.
P61 Beausoleil Architects.
P62 Erin Kuykendall.
P63 ASL London Locksmiths.
P64 www.myoops.org/ans7870/11/
11.001j/ f01/lectureimages/9/image5.html; Urban Design Associates, Celebration Pattern Book (1997).
P78 Tata China; RCCA. P78-79 Yasuhiro Ishimoto.
P80 Ernst Moritz.
P81 The Ludwig Mies van der Rohe Arch
P82 © Commission du Fil Manuel Braun; porte © PE
P83 ©The Trustees of the British Museum All rights reserved.
m d'lle-de-Fran .Rastoin/EppG^:
P85 R. Goodwin-Smith Decorative Iron Metalwork, Dover Publications (2002)
P87 Yale Security Inc.; Winkelhofer / |\j0 525,830; US7971316 B2.
P88 Archinet UK / Extonet Ltd.; © TruStile Doors LLC; Liviu Grecu, Greli Hydraulics Engineering, Canada.
P90 Dosephine Powell.
P92 Popular Science; Craig Hibbert; Periot House Group; Franklin Pierce Hall, "The American Doorknob," Antique American Homes, Dan 31, 2009; O. Dorsey.
P96-97 Rainer W Loenhardt / FSB Collection.
P98 WristPull™; Purleve / www.purleve. com; Clean escape.
P99 Bobrick Washing Equipments; Scott T /www.flickr.com/photos/ swilliamthomas/2958626716.
P100-101 Curt A. Walby.
P65 www.myoops.org/ans7870/11/
11.001j7f01/lectureimages/9/image6.html.
P66 "View from Dingshan Park" by Francisco Anzola, licensed under CC BY 2.0.
P67 http://blog.sina.com.en/s/ blog_692f69530100kj12.html.
P68 © Bridgeman Art Library / Private Collection / © The Chambers Gallery, London;.
P69 CTRIP.
P72 © Marilyn Shea.
P73 Dian Fei Zhu, "A Celestial Battlefield," AA Files (1994).
P74 http://ilishi.blog.sohu.com/
111853663.html.
P102-103 SOBINCO NV.
P104 KABA®; Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, W. W. Norton & Company (Dune 1969); Yale Lock Co.; US Patent 4149394.
P105 KABA®; CISA®; Visionline; VingCard . Elsafe.
P106 Raw TV; Pretoria News Library/ Correctional Services Museum; Tim Denkin, Inside Out: Escape from Pretoria Prison, Dacana Media (2003).
P107 Tim Denkin, Inside Out: Escape from Pretoria Prison, Dacana Media (2003).
P108 © Lizzie Himmel/Sygma/Corbis;
© Miami Herald.
P109 Brad Zweehnk/Daily Republic.
P75 Ma Weidu, Classical Chinese Doors and Windows (2006); Li Die, Yingzao Fashi (1100).
P76 Windsor Plywood; RCCZ.
P77 Masonite®.
'ary David Shubinsky, Alan Sobel / 130236066 A1; Georgia Tech Photo:
;:v Leary-
jatiada Border Services Agency;
-i identification Scientific Working
iflSWG); Bionym Inc.
JP 1
12 0t0k
Arthur Lubin, AH Baba and the Forty .„Universal Studios (1944).
6 popular Mechanics Magazine; Archives of Florida taken by Robert
ahlgren-
ylasahiro Sai, Koji Tsutsumi / Nabco d / US5583405; Gene Roddenberry, ,e/c, CBS and Paramount (1966).
j WERNER SOBEK Engineering &
: ign.
General Bronze Corporation; i itional Code Council®; E. Haviland Van Kannel Revolving Door Co.
23 s ASSA ABLOY; Reuters.
; Debajyoti Pati, Mahbub Rashid, and : Z'mring, "Occupants' Perceptions of mness in Federal Courthouses," Journal . chitectural and Planning Research,
■ Autumn 2010, 260.
>5 Brad Devereaux; Kawneer; Beyer ler Belle Architects & Planners LLP; as Weinzapfel Assocoates Architects, Kohn Pederson Fox Associates;
:o Architecture.
6-127 Jacques Tati, Playtime, Jolly Film s Specta Films (1967).
>8 T, Van Kannel / No. 774730.
29 MECI; Berner International Corp.
>0 NASA; Smithsonian National Air and
■ce Museum.
NASA; Marc M. Cohen and Steven olari, "Human Factors in Space Station lecture II", NASA (1988).
P132 International Docking Standard.
P133 International Docking Standard;
NASA.
P134 Hunter Desportes.
P135 Transportation Security Administration.
P136-137 Teh Virbickis.
P138-139 © 2014 Flughafen Berlin Brandenburg GmbH.
P140 UPl/Brian Kersey; Ted S. Warren / AP; Los Angeles Times; Craig Lassig/AP.
P141 Rapiscan® Systems; © 2007 L-3 Communications; "Protests Mount Over Safety And Privacy Of Airport Scanners," NPR, November 12, 2010); FLYING PASTIES INTERNATIONAL; CREDIT Scott Neuman, "TSA: No More Graphic, Full-Body Airport Scans," National Public Radio, May 30,
2013.
P142 Ted S. Warren / AP.
P143 Robyn Beck/ Getty.
P144 Spring Hill Marriott; Misty Keasler;
The Wall Street Journal; Harriet Baskas.
P145 AP Photo / TSA ; PRIVIUM / Schiphol; AP Photo / Paul Sakuma; AP Photo /
Damian Dovarganes.
P146-147 IATA, "Checkpoint of the Future: Executive Summary" / O&l Consulting.
P148-159 IATA, "Checkpoint of the Future: Blueprint" (2011).
P150—151 © International Air Transport Association (IATA).
2017 Window at Mandalay Bay hotel broken open with a hammer by Stephen Paddock before opening fire on a crowd at the Las Vegas Village, killing 58.
WINDOW
PAGE 1
contributors manfredo di robilant niklas maak
window seats, bay windows, sills, shutters, blinds, curtains, screens, lintels... all emphatically declared the multiple functions and the recognizable status of the window, both from the outside and on the inside of architecture...
glass, which initially seemed the perfect material for the window, eventually took over entirely: the growth in size of glass sheets, culminating in the invention of the glass curtain wall, has abstracted the window... it is now everywhere and nowhere... the former accessories of the window - shading devices, bars for security, handles with which to open the window - are internalized in the glass itself, becoming invisible, or discarded entirely... glass controls solar gain and radiation, provides unrivalled insulation, generates energy, conveys digitized information... meanwhile the most fundamental window function is abandoned: fewer and fewer of them can be opened... 'windows' offer uninterrupted views of the world, but no physical contact with it...
window
PAGE 2
1904 Balagan family dwelling, with adjacent barn for cattle, Yakutsk Oblast, Yakutia county, Boturussky Ulus.
CARVED WINDOW
Balagan dwellings in Russia's far east built by Yakutians, typically feature three carved birch bark windows- still used into the early 20th century. | bark is softened by cooking in cow's milk, carved into shape by male members of the family, and sewn together with tendons from a horse or cow. Two windows, each of around 30cm square, are oriented to the south and one to the west. With glass affordable only for rich families, the birch bark window can be filled with oil paper, fish membranes, mika and inrare cases small glass shards - the size and geometry of the carved openings varying depending on the income of the family. In winter, the carved window is removed from the punctured hole in the wall and replaced by a thick sheet
Early 20th century Birch bark window frame (33cm x 26cm), from a Yakutian balagan in Russia's far east. Preserved by the Siberian department of the Russian Museum of Ethnography, St Petersburg.
1910 Lunch in front of a balagan, Yakutsk region, Meginsky ulus Kildemsky nasleg.
WINDOW
PAGE 3
PROFILED window
Even traditional
harbor little known complexity in their internal details, requiring a specialist vocabulary now mostly forgotten by architects...
Windows are so troublesome ... but they give a building character, and so they're worth preserving. That's what this issue is about: appreciating the variety and importance of windows, fixing and weatherizing them. So why is The Old-House Journal leading off with an article about replacing old We're meeting the enemy
head on.
- The Old House Journal, April 1982.
1764 "The Anatomy of a Double Hung Window," a typical American wooden sash model, from Parson Smith House, Windham, Maine (below), illustrated in The Old House Journal.
1764 Parson Smith House, Windham, Maine (home to the town's minister, Rev. Peter Thatcher Smith), featuring traditional American sash window illustrated above.
PAGE 4
CONFLICTS OF THE WINDOW
1300 Temple of the Three Windows, Machu Picchu.
WINDOW VS. WALL
Window seats, bays, niches, sills, shutters, blinds, curtains, etc. - all can emphatically declare the position and character of the window, both from the outside and the inside of a building. In the 20th century, the growth in size of panes of glass, and then the invention of the glass curtain wall, generalizes the window: it is now everywhere and nowhere, its profile ambiguous, even anonymous.
The same building might be all window or have no windows at all depending on how you look at it: is the window the openable part (if there is one), or the transparent part of the façade?
1850 Tomb of Sheik. Salim Chisti Uttar
Pradesh.
1924 Villa
le Lac, Lake Geneva, Le Corbusier
70 AD Window pane near Herculaneum
1914 Glas
Pavilion, Cologne Bruno Taut
1720 Bay window at Lyme Park, Cheshire, England, Giacomo Leoni.
1851 Crystal Palace, London, Joseph Paxton.

WINDOW
PAGE 5
OPTICS VS. HAPTICS
-the openable kind -
offer not just a view of the outside
world but the possibility of contact with it, passively in terms of a breeze and listening to the noise of the outside world; actively in terms of shouting or tossing something down to the
or just sticking your head out to take the air. With the growing  preference for enormity or panorama in the 20th century, more and more windows provide a view of the world, not a physical
connection to it.
1936 Berghof
estate, Bavaria
Hochtief AG.
2010 Trump Soho, New York, Handel Architects, Rockwell Group.
2012 Abraj Al-Bait Towers, Saudi Arabia, SL Rasch GmbH and Dar Al-Handasah Architects.
2017 Elbphilharmonie, Hamburg, Herzog & de Meuron.

1969 IBM Building, Chicago, Mies van der Rohe.
WINDOW VS. GLASS
Glass, which initially seemed the perfect partner for the window - transparent, flat strong - overwhelmed the window during the 20th century, culminating in the curtain wall. Advances in glass technology allow many of the former accoutrements of the window - shading devices, bars for security, handles with which to open the window - to be internalized in the glass itself, or made or discarded entirely. Glass takes on new roles beyond providing light: it controls solar gain, radiation, insulation, generates energy, conveys digitized information...
WINDOW VS. THE WORLD
The window as a singular articulated area, a hole punctured in a wall in order to select a particular view, and even as an anthropomorphic metaphor, an "eye," is replaced by the idea of the window as a uniform screen wrapped around a building. The curtain wall allows other regions to stake a claim in architecture, liberated from its classical western concepts...
PAGE 6
WINDOW
ETYMOLOGY
The array of meanings of window in various languages shrinks with modernity. The window is initially perceived as an opening for air and light to enter, but also for looking out of. In Latin, each function determines a different name for a window. Old English sees the window as an escape hatch of the imagination, an eyethurl, eye hole. Modern English for window descends from vindauga, a compound of Old Norse for wind and eye, uniting the device's two major functions: to provide a view, and to allow ventilation into the interiors of a building. Romance and Germanic languages also draw from the Latin fenestra, meaning a window with glass, which first appears during the Roman Empire, ca. 200 AD.
origins...

2000 BC Greek, phainein, meaning to shine, seem, and to produce light.
400 BC ramate
Sanskrit: window, and also to rest.
Other Sanskrit words for window also
mean resting place of women.	^^separate words for different
functions of the window specularia
Latin for window, and meaning to look.
fenestra / finestra	ca. 700 AD augadauro
Latin, originally meaning hole in the	Gothic, eye door
wall, from Greek. (The root, ventus, comes from ventus, meaning wind.)
window
/'baelkam/
window/door
lumen januae
Latin, literally light-door
ca. 890 AD eyethurl
Old English, window. Thirl means to pierce, so literally eye hole.
ca. 1000 AD ougatora
Old German: window. Literally eye door.	
Definitions: 1. An opening in a wall or side of a building to admit light or air, or both, and to afford a view of what is outside or inside.
In ancient buildings it was either left entirely open, furnished with shutters or curtains, or (sometimes) glazed; in modern buildings or vehicles for human occupation, it is usually fitted with sheets of glass (horn, mica, etc.), a frame containing a pane or panes of glass, or glazed sashes, the whole framework being known as the window.
Unless noted, source is: "window, n." OED Online, June 2013.
valvae
Latin: two doors, related to valvarum, meaning cavity. Door and window thus interchangeable.
In: Valpy, Francis Edward lackson. An Etymological Dictionary of the Latin Language. Published by Baldwin and Company, 1828.
ca. 1000 AD vindauga
Old Norse, from vindr + auga (wind + eye).	\
windeye
ca. 100 AD fenestra	1
Latin, during Roman empire,	ca. 1000 AD rama	J
windows yrvith glass	Old High German, strut, prop or brace
first word for the glass	j
window	1

r
PAGE 7
modernity
■é 0%
^Bfkatômado, a Buddhist drfow, meaning flame head.
window/canvas
ca. 1277 raem
Middle Dutch: wooden frame over which cloth is stretched.
„0"peileaste (aet e eauer muhen
windohes al beon ho lutle. ^^rluta windohe beo least &
'!-ewest."(Middte English)
■	Vdear sisters, love your windows -mte as possible; and see that they
■	small, the parlour's smallest and owes:
of the Ancrene Riwle, Frances ■¡EETS252, 1963, 3.
ca. 1450 "Merlin ... opened the two wyndowes towarde the gardyn, for he wolde that thei hadde lyght ther-ynne."
Merlin, or, The early history of King Arthur: a prose romance, (1899) x. 140.
ca.1500 fenester
Middle English
:::Sty
a 1200 eagduru Old English, eye d>
1706 "Putas en véntana, y rufunas en la pláza."
1225 "thurh eiethurles death haueth elngong into the soule."
Death through these eye-holes (i.e„ edowsor, eyes) has entrance into 5S0Ul."
"Whores at the window, and ruffians to the market," meaning honest women ought not spend their time at the window, just as honest men should not be idling in public places.
A new Spanish and English Dictionary, Dohn Stevens.
: English tex,
ca. 1753 ramen
Dutch, dubbele glazen ramen: double-glazed windows.
1852 "Fenestra: un'apertura nel muro della stanza per darle lume.
"Window: an opening in the wall of a room to give it light."
Giambattista Bolza, Vocabolario genetico-etimologico della lingua italiana.
1900 mwagnazani
Swahili, small window, aperture, also means to be in view.
fenster
German
fenêtre
French
finestra
Italian
ventana
Spanish
^imR
Sanskrit, jalin, having a window or net, but also means deceit.
falF1
Japanese, mado. Characters that form window are "space"H and "interval," P and meaning "door."
w
Sanskrit, griha, eye of the house, or round or oblong window.
rama, okho Russian
PAGE 8
WINDOW
FUNCTIONS OF THE WINDOW
The repertoire of the window's abilities...
VENTILATION
Certain windows hinge open to allow in the maximum amount of air as part of a highly tolerant passive climate control systems. This window is left open during a building renovation at the Salt Lake Temple, built 1893, Salt Lake City, Utah.
ILLUMINATION
Allowing light to enter is typically, but not always, the window's principal function. Sunlight traces the hours of the day across one of the churches of Lalibela, Ethiopia, ca. 11th century.
WINDOW
PAGE 9
FILTRATION
The window risks the entry of the unwanted - dust, sand, people, fire, light, air, bugs, animals, prying eyes -so it often needs to operate as a filter as well as a source of light and air.
A screened window in the tomb of Sheikh Salim Chishti, built in 1851 in Fatehpur Sikri, Uttar Pradesh, India, permits light and air but little else to enter the mausoleum.
"they must... prevent the dust disturbed by the numerous feet from irritating eyes or lungs.
I would therefore strongly advise the use of thin sheets of bronze or lead, patterned with numerous tiny perforations, to admit light and breezes to purify the air."
— Leon Battista Alberti,
De Re Aedificatoria (1542).
FRAMING
Picture window installed in 1935 in Adolf Hitler's Berghof estate, Bavaria, framing Mount Untersberg. In warm weather, the entire window can be retracted, allowing an unobstructed view. "I basically built the house around the window," Hitler states, and, of the estate: "Those were the best times of my life; my great plans were forged there."
PAGE 10
WINDOW VS. OTHER ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURE
The window is increasingly supplanted by other elements of architecture: the ceiling supplies the light and ventilation once required of the window; the curtain wall façade overwhelms the window's capacity to select and frame a view, replacing it with a totalitarian transparency...
WINDOW VS. ROOF
For buildings with a roof so large that access to light is at risk, the window, normally appearing on the façade, must adapt: a multi-slope solution permits the insertion of vertical windows in the roof of the Fruchtkasten, 1393, now home to the Musical Instrument Museum in Stuttgart.
WINDOW VS. FAÇADE
By the mid-20th century, the window grows to encompass the entire façade, losing its singular identity in the process. (Mies van der Rohe's IBM Building, Chicago, 1969.)
WINDOW
PAGE 11
WINDOW VS. CEILING
The increasing sophistication of the ceiling - in Mies's Seagram building (1958) a continuous luminous surface -allows it to utterly outperform the window / façade, covered by blinds.
WINDOW VS. WALL
As a penetration, the window momentarily compromises the structural continuity of the wall - a weakness compensated for by the lintel. The central window at the Temple of the Three Windows at Machu Picchu (ca. 1300 BC) tapers inwards at the top, transferring vertical loads through a lintel and down into the wall.
"The history of architecture in temperate regions is, we can say, the story of the conquest of light.
A hard and ongoing struggle between conflicting functions: one, the wall, designed to support the house (and it is essential that the wall is as solid as possible); the other, the window, to illuminate the house (yet the window tends to destroy the strength of the wall). Thus, over the centuries, it has been a struggle between two opposing functions..."
— Le Corbusier, Glaser,TUe Fundamental Material of Modern Arc/7/tectpfe^1935).^ 1 S
PAGE 12
'IK: MAYAN GLYPH & WINDOW
The Mayan '"Ik" glyph, meaning spirit, wind,] or breath in ancient and living Maya languages, | features a central T-shape that is used for windows in several buildings in the Mayan city of Palenque (dating from the 8th century), ] in central Mexico. Punctured sometimes through double stone walls - here in the Throne Room of "House E" - 'Ik windows are just wider than the head and situated to meet the eyes and the mouth of a standing person - an opening for sight and for breath. | The 'Ik window provides for architecture precisely its glyphic meaning in language -wind.
The 'Ik glyph (registered as T503 by scholars)| is also the second named day of 20 in the Maya calendar (similar to "Monday").
Contemporary echo of the Ik window: as toilet vent.
PAGE 13
'IK & THE SHINING
Kubrick's magellanic path through cinema involved bending how symbols are used. For the poster of The Shining (1980) Kubrick borrows the 'IK window's exact dimensions, and shows precisely how it frames a face, a ghostly window on any wall where the poster hangs. In contrast to The Shining's endlessly false windows, this is based on a real window in a real place. The 'IK's T-shape passes through the film, framing the elevator's central mask as well as shapes in layouts (as in the red bathroom). Harvard anthropologist and archaeologist Allan Maca confirms the correspondence:
"The proportions of the windows at Palenque, and their relation to the height and width of the human head, are precisely those seen in Kubrick's poster design ... the 'IK windows at Palenque are completely unique, not only in the world but in the entire Maya area, a specific sign with very specific meanings."
— Kevin McLeod (see "Corridor Syntax", p. 1350.)

PAGE 14
WINDOW TYPES:
A selection from the Charles Brooking collection
When historic buildings get demolished in England, Charles Brooking shows up on a rescue mission, to salvage and preserve the social and artistic knowledge embedded in their elements and materials. A collector of building parts since the age of three, Brooking asked for a sash window for his seventh birthday "but was annoyed when the one he received was not in full working order." (BBC, November 11, 2011). Brooking has amassed 500,000 elements of architecture, dislocated from their buildings, including
5,000	windows, all stored in warehouses in Surrey. "A sea of plastic is enveloping the British Isles," Brooking has said. "I want to preserve the social nuances and subtle changes that went into building types." Culling from his collections it is possible to illustrate window typologies that became prevalent in the 19th century and continue to appear in contemporary construction.
2013 Small part of the window section of Brooking's archive. Brooking: "It Isn't some nerd's collection of ironmongery sash pulley windows for the sake of It - it Is a useful resource."
2013 Salvage operation: Charles Brooking with a casement window rescued from a demolished piece of English heritage.
r
WINDOW
PAGE 15
icgMENT
Kah one side
Hin9
,ed on
late 1^*'	casement
■pi includes original panes of cylinder ^Ksetinto lead cames, from Hampshire ^BcmM6.8 cm)'
PIVOTING
the middle, top, or bottom
5-75 Gothic style cast-iron window with P pivoting diamond light, made by the
Company, from Ironbridge area Bjpshire (116.8 cm x 49.5 cm).
ca. 1882 Early factory-made Tudor-Revival iron casement window. From the 1882 extension to Kingswood Warren in Surrey, a country house later converted into studios for the BBC (55.9 cm x 30.5 cm).
ca. 1932 Almarco steel window with high-level ratchet opening device, from Haywards Heath, West Sussex (63.5 cm x 50.8 cm).
ca. 1935-36 Small side-hung window with sliding stay - a design introduced by Crittalls, from a house near Glastonbury, Somerset (68.6 cm x 30.5 cm).
PAGE 16
WINDOW
SASH
Made of two parts, one of which slides vertically or horizontally along the jamb to open the window.
ca. 1875-85 Gothic-style top sash, by Crossland window makers, from dormer window, Royal Holloway Sanatorium, Virginia Water, Surrey (63.5 cm x 58.4 cm).
ca. 1850-55 Four-pane Tudor-style sash window, from large villa, Northfleet,
Kent (134.6 cm x 81.3 cm).
ca. 1810 Section of Regency style sash window, from building on Castle Street, Reading, displaying internal folding shutter and case (99.1 cm x 45.7 cm).
1819 Section of arched sash window illustrating complex construction, from Summer Hill House, Charmouth Road, Lyme Regis, Dorset (63.5 cm x 27.9 cm).
1912 Top sash with toughened-glass glazinq ("chicken wire"), from prisoner's corridor ° Epsom Magistrates Court, Surrey (45.7 cm x 68.6 cm).
ca. 1845 Section of margin-light basic sash window from a semi-detached villa: No. 35, Stoke Road, Guildford, Surrey (25.4 cm x 22.9 cm).
714
WINDOW
PAGE 17
AND CRAF, S
¿„1895 Early factory-made iron-framed Hnient window, with gunmetal fittings and H green leaded-lights, from a large villa Jfalswoiiny Road, Kingston-upon-Thames, Hi (94 cm x 27.9 cm).
ca. 1927 Designed to be set Into stone mullions, from Woking Roman Catholic Church (27.9 cm x 24.1 cm).
UNCATEGORIZED
Complex cast-iron window, based century leaded-light arrangement, ^Hslyfrom the Midlands (121.9 cm x 71.1 cm).
1876 Bulls-eye window turned on a lathe from one section of timber, from Tangier Block, Stoughton Barracks, Guildford, Surrey (66 cm diameter).
1937 Section of a steel window showing top-hung light and Art Deco style glazing, by Almarco Windows of Birmingham (33 cm x 50.8 cm).
PAGE 18
WINDOW
FORTOCHKA
Two separate layers of windows - a very wide double glazing - with partial or offset openings for efficient ventilation, popular in 19th century Russia, and making a comeback in the 21st century....
18th century Fortochka of the Hermitage, St. Petersburg.
Mitigated airflow through two layers of windows.
Aluminum frame fortochka windows of a St. Petersburg apartment building.
Open to the inside at the top, to release stale air, and to the outside at the bottom, to draw in fresh air.
PAGE 19
^koWS WITHOUT GLASS
fulfill many performance requirements without glass. Perforated, latticed, hinged and these wooden windows, from Amsterdam's anthropological Tropenmuseum, many of them former Dutch colony of Indonesia, provide shade, ventilation, filtration, ornamentation - all Rhout glass...
pre-Second World War Wooden window with flower decoration, dendela rujen (45 x 49.5cm).
pre-1965 Hatch: painted wooden door (54 x 26cm).
Wooden window with flower and animal ornamentation (65.5 x 42.5 x 3.5cm).
nre-Second World War Wooden box SilliBfred flower and leaf ornaments Jendela rujen (53 x 68cm).
PAGE 20
Window as place
The window has the ability to affirm itself as a place, the key destination in a room, claiming a vast territory; it can also retreat into anonymity. In Edwardian England, the bay window at Lyme Hall (1720), swollen and celebrated as a room-within-a-room, becomes an exalted area of leisure, expression of privilege, and vantage point for looking wistfully out...
"The bay of the drawing-room in Lyme Hall, Cheshire, is so broad and deep that its proportions are sufficiently ample for a room by itself, or would be anywhere but in England where the apartments in the ancient mansions boast such large dimensions. In this bay one may observe, in the picture, a pleasant scene. A cavalier standing in an easy attitude is listening to the playing of a lute by a lady who is seated. A small dog lies near her. On the drawing-room floor outside the bay and some distance over from the group, lie two gauntlets with one of which another dog is playing. In the drawingroom is a richly ornate over-mantel and a table on which are some books and papers. The fact that all the details mentioned are incidental and not in any manner obtrusive, show how large is the bay-window itself."
— "Bay-Window at Lyme Hall," The Lotus Magazine 5: 2, November 1913, 88-90.
PAGE 21
PAGE 22
VINDOW
WINDOW BEHAVIOROLOGY
Yoshiharu Tsukamoto, cofounder of Tokyo based architecture firm Atelier Bow-Wow, coined the term "behaviorology" for studying "the correlations between human life, nature, and the built environment." Tsukamoto's book WindowScape (2012) applies the method to the window, an area that used to suggest specific activities. Tsukamoto explains to the editors how he attempts to recapture the sense of window as a place...
I'm interested in how windows have been transformed during the 20th century, but also how much human beings have developed windows based on climate conditions, cultural conditions, and social conditions in various places around the world. Industrialization has really taken over the agency of people in defining their buildings. The window was sacrificed to industrialization. Even in traditional architecture, the window is produced outside of the construction site. There are certain ateliers that produce the same type of window for each city, so it's quite interesting how much buildings are different but how much windows are similar.
The contemporary window has a lot of potential because the window can act as a threshold between nature and the human body. So windows are a device to grasp what nature is in a very concrete way rather than a very abstract way. I am interested in behavior, of nature, buildings, and people. The window is something that synthesizes the behavior of people and the behavior of nature. Through the window, we don't see nature as statistics, we grasp it through our behavior. In the high rise building this sensibility is totally lost and contemporary architecture has to now bring a sense of nature into human life again. The window is the most important device to deal with this issue.
In the case of Dapan, we don't really focus on the 20th century, when we produced so many aluminum windows. Most of the traditional windows were suppressed by industrialized aluminum window frames, which ignore the genealogy of the window. This production was encouraged by the institutionalization of the performance of the functional window, which is fire resistant, waterproof, airtight. The traditional wooden window became something that didn't fulfill the standard.
In city centers in Europe you still keep the genealogy of the window. By respecting this genealogy of the window you could keep the streetscape as a cultural resource, whereas in many places in Dapan new economic activities destroyed all the traditional streetscapes. But through this destruction and replacement by new buildings, the industry grew..¿J rapidly so now it's a moment to think about how we can -deal with this issue, how we can reframe the role of construction culture.
For me the window is a very important means or device to establish commonality among different buildings. Windows are produced by several companies in Dapan, so even though each building is different the windows can be similar among buildings. The appearance of the window really defined the quality of the streetscape as a public space. In Dapan this quality is deteriorated by the constant realization of new buildings in the city center and residen areas. I am interested in how we can reestablish a sense of commonality, using the window as a means to recapture a sense of place.
...by respecting the genealogy of the window you could keep the streetscape as a cultural resource...
WINDOW
PAGE 23
Naples
Jaipur
Seville
PAGE 24
WINDOW
A window is an object, or a device providing a function, but it is also a location, a destination within architecture. People go to a window to look outside, to feel a breeze, to hear the sounds of the street. In 1996, Lars Tunbjork photographs two businessmen standing curiously close to the windows of a Tokyo highrise, treating even the most featureless, ubiquitous wraparound window like a place commanding a certain reverence.
PAGE 26
THE BULGING BAY WINDOW
In the 17th century, windows, previously flush with the façade, or simply a hole punctured in them, start to project from the surface of the dwelling. The window assumes three-dimensionality, becomes legible on the façade, and, inside, becomes a treasured object and a designated place - usually for private contemplation - within the home, almost an enclosed balcony.
Medieval oriels, derived from the Latin word oratoiolum, a little place of prayer, are redolent of the Middle Eastern mashrabiya with their intricate carvings. Oriel windows feature bays, bows, and bowers protruding from the façade to signify the oratory space where a lord and his guests would attend religious services.
The oriel coincides with the emergence of the dormer window, which pierces through the roof and is covered by a protruding gable. These windows correspond to the dorming apartment at the uppermost levels, where the cheapest housing is crammed under sloping roofs.
Around the 18th century, the window shifts from a functional device to a vantage point from which to view nature or the street below. The bay window creates a space for homeowners to appreciate the outside world from the comfort of the interior, like a mini promontory...
1480 Oriel window, St. Sebaldus parsonage, Nuremburg: early type of bay window supported by brackets or corbels. Before the Second World War, over 450 of these windows, known locally jj as chorlein, could be found in Nuremburg;.^
100 remain after the war.	;a
Early 14th century Prior's study Castle Acre Priory, Norfolk, England, built by descendents of Norman knight William de Warenne.
WINDOW
PAGE 27
1894 Hotel Tassel, Brussels, home of scientist Emile Tassel, designed by Victor Horta. Considered the first Art Nouveau building, features large bay window.
Bay windows of San Francisco.
^^Jjnglish "Tudorbethan" suburban housing, ^^KÜpof histórica' styles, postmodern avant which bulging, stacked bay windows ^^Hnajor part of the facade, and almost to tne rooms they serve...
...also featuring mini bay windows reminiscent of medieval oriels.
2014 Advertisement for a bay window seat, from the Tri-State Window Factory - the window as private nook (although intrinsically linked to the outside).
PAGE 28

MITIGATING THE WINDOW
The rise of large plate-glass windows at the end of the 19th century calls for the mitigating effect of the curtain, the blind, and other forms of "hangings," sparking a new sub-discipline of interior design. Window decoration allows the "artful homeowner," inspired by magazines like The Decorator and Furnisher (published in New York from 1882), to create privacy as needed, while experimenting with lighting effects. "The object of this Company," writes the publisher, "is to supply decorators and drapery departments with strictly first-class watercolor sketches, consisting of new and 'up-to-date' designs for draperies of all descriptions." Drapes, decorative stained glass sash windows, ivy and other plants, as well as diaphanous "glass curtains" (of muslin, lace, or thin cotton) together with the all-important drapery allow for multilayered effects. (Karen Zukowski, Creating the Artful Home: The Aesthetic Movement, 2006, 141-142.)
Simple and Elegant Window Drapery.
WINDOW DRAPERY DESIGNED BY JAMES McCREERT A CO.
Treatment of Wide Window, by J. P. Murray.
PAGE 29
„BR, 1882.]
THE DECORATOR AND FURNISHER.
81
CURTAINS and draperies.
R r0RATlvB furnishing in all its phases oilers no more r ^oans .of adorning the room than in the use of effeC, ttU(i hangings, they relieve the sharp outlines of m. „oWs and give an inviting appearance to the doors.
HR' wj,0 considers at all the picturesque qualities of an I T° °neen* hangings require no recommendatiou, for even I PP°V furnishing seen through the prettily drawn portiere j ^'deceptive attractiveness given it out of all propor- i **** to it* *lu0,,t,e8 when Been	the aid of tapestry j
■tarco®aI1'
yortunately this mode of de-
-tlon Is possible to the means	_________________________
?!ceryooe, and exceUent goods tr-.-asaanagagaa: artistic patterns are sold at
*,«oar«tIvely mCMlerate priccS-
Section from the many va-^ offered is the greatest
sible to reconcile the two euds of the picture with each | other.
Tinsel tapestries in pink, blue, cream, etc., are not ob- j jectionable, and the modern velvet tapestry of the new re- i versible cotton plush in most delicate shades, and “ Roman satin,” all hang gracefully and arc admirable for the pur- ! P08C.
Of the lighter materials, Syrian curtains, a yellowish, , flimsy muslin, is an excellent example. The musliu is made | with gold colored stripes or large chequers. Nottingham and ( Scotch curtains are to be an ecru shade, and resembling i antiques and guipure d’art. Madras cloth has developed a ; strength in its attractive qualities that rather endangers the j
the shopper has to con-
rietles
Mculty -
A «Ith, each seems so worthy Preference. Whether the fact 011 Arabi Pacha’s tent was lined P crimson damask silk and obroidered with pomegranates, i Pet-me-n°t8 end other artistic A were and fruits, has increased ¡h°e rage for hangings, we know not, but certain it is that embroidered and appliquid work never more popular than at
rite material, and it is said the orders from American houses b»ve anticipated the facilities of the French manufacturers for some months to. come. Silk plush perfectly plain, the dealers giy) is called for more than the more elaborate. Olive is a pleasing color for these goods.
•Turcoman and Chenille are, of’course, in favor, and may be considered almost stock materials for this purpose. In copper color, which has taken the place of old gold, the Turcoman curtain is particularly rich. The public has become so accustomed to both of these, that they naturally suggest themselves to anyone decorating an apartment, and the prices asked have become much more moderate.
The “Liberty” stuffs, little known in this country, are used to a considerable extent in England, and might find many admirers here if imported more largely. It might be well to remind the housekeeper that “stuff" hangings, if draped in straight folds, are less liable to accumulate du6t than in the less careful mauner of irregular creases, where the particles in the air readily settle and make agrimmyand unpleasant appearance.
< . Jute velours or velvet are among the recent additions to curtain fabrics, and the great variety of colors in which they are made adapts them to almost any apartment.
f: . 8ome of the cotton waste materials or the printed Indian cottons, known as “sarabars,” are quite cheap, say about forty cents per yard, and highly colored. In common with Canton H&nnel, these may be very effectively used by parties feeling it-undesirable to lay out larger amounts in this direction. The flannel in dark olive green, with »0 appliqudd border of Autumn eaves, ¡8 very pretty indeed.
The closely woven Eastern ^pet makes a very rich por-ere, as do also the heavy aatins. These latter, however, ** frequently “ fixed ” by the addition of some foreign and dwterious matter. This adulteration (** may be so termed)
“embroidery in colored silks and tinselled cord, are used “ as curtain caps and borders,” says Harper'» Bazaar..
The illustration upon this page gives an excellent idea for the arrangement of a window drapery. The design is furnished us by Messrs. Hart & Young, of Boston, and they accompany it with the following directions for cutting and making and an estimate of the quantity of material required :
Paper patterns are not needed with this design, as it is drawn on a scale of 1 1-4 inches to the foot, and can be adapted to any sized window by first measuring the window, and cutting the Lambrequin in the same proportions as are shown' on the design.
The design does not show the returns; 4 inches on each side must be added to the width, when the returns are required.
No description of poles or cornices is given, for the reason that either can be used.
In all Cases where a thin material is used for free folds a Cotton Flannel interlining should be added, as it makes the curtain hang much better.
The design is purposely drawn very plain, and will admit of considerable more trimming, should parties bo desire.
2 pieces 9 ft. 6 in. by 1 foots in. (sides).
1 piece 5 ft. 3 in. by 1 foot 6 in.
(top)-
1	piece 5 ft. by 6 in. (border for top valance).
2	pieces 1 it. 3 in. by 10 in.
bottom (of sides). .	*
2 3-4 yards Fringe.
7	“	Cord.
4 1-4 “	Silesia.
Panel design, for embroidered work is not used, this style can be made at very slight expense and very pretty,”
By following the above directions this lambrequin may be made at home.
Parties desirous of seeing 6ome very unique ideas in hangings are referred to our illustration of the Spanish Renaissance on page 75.
may be discovered by boiling a *m»U piece. If it i8 the real artic
kn M been “doctored,” it will wind it6elf almost into a l ^his i8 an ordinary precaution that every house-| P“p «bould take before buying.
Portf Cha*n °r band of Pln^ may be used to hold the 8h bac^’ aQd in making selection of designs it | pl«U ^ remeujhered that a landscape is entirely out of I «id* ■vf00 a han8iDg- The Watteau idea is gaining favor, , 1	**8t lbe £ardeu 6cene and picturesque attitudes of
| |,Jr pers°nages may be tolerated and admired upon the |	8 °f chaire and sofas, they would not be acceptable
popularity of lace, and it is not unreasonable to expect a j decided falling off in this latter goods. It may be an effort ; to counteract this that prompts manufacturers to color lace curtaius. Some were recently shown representing : 6tained glass, whilst black has been used for some time. | Whether this is in the best taste is a question that it would j be well for decorators to consider. Scrym may be hung on the curtain pole and trimmed with antique lace.
For heavy portiere a bullion fringe is the proper thing, ! and gives a rich tone that becomes the hanging admirably. The proper manner to hang a portiere over a double door- ;
December 1882 The Decorator and Furnisher, depiction of the ideal window, heavily hooded with half-drawn blind + pulled curtains, revealing pastoral picture beyond. Curtains and hangings "relieve the sharp outlines of the windows..."
PAGE 30
WINDOW TAXED
In 1696, William III of England introduces the window tax, recognizing that the number of windows is a faithful gauge of the inhabitant's wealth. Easy to assess - tax collectors had only to count existing windows - the window tax is nevertheless notoriously capricious, since the definition of "window" is flexible. In cities it also has the deleterious effect of causing landlords to brick up windows to avoid paying the tax. After a major movement for its abolition, the Window Tax is repealed in the same year as the construction of the apotheosis of transparency, the Crystal Palace, in 1851.
2014 Legacy of the window tax, Londom'landlo d» brick up windows to avoid or reduce the
WHAT A WINDOW IS, ACCORDING TO THE WINDOW TAX
"There was another great grievance to be complained of, namely, that the Act of Parliament did not specify what a window was; and Professor Scholefield, of Cambridge, had to pay for a hole in his coal-cellar, used for shooting coals through ... Mr. Gregory Gragoe, toyman, Parson-street, St. George's, Westminster, was charged for having under the stall-board of his shop an opening into his cellar, which opening is supported by iron bars, but unglazed. He was also charged for a hole in the wall of his back cellar, of the dimensions of eighteen inches by fourteen, likewise unglazed. The judges were of opinion that Mr. Gragoe was liable to pay for each hole as a window accordingly. So that if a brick fell out of a wall, and provided the light came through, any man might be instantly surcharged by the assessors not only for one additional window, but, provided the windows in his house were below the magic number 40, he might be surcharged for every window in his house owing to the extra number." — Official Report on the Debates of the House of Commons, February 24, 1848, vol 96.
WINDOW * WEALTH
"The principal objection to all such taxes is their inequality; an inequality of the worst kind, as they must frequently fall much heavier upon the poor than upon the rich. A house of ten pounds rent in a country town, may sometimes have more windows than a house of five hundred pounds rent in London; and though the inhabitant of the former is likely to be a much poorer man than that of the latter, yet, so far as his contribution is regulated by the window tax, he must contribute more to the support of the state."
— Adam Smith, An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (1827), 357.
1721 The 294 windows of Floors Castle near Kelso, Scotland, cost the Duke of Roxburghe £14 and four shillings in 1748.
PAGE 31
A VISION OF THE REPEAL OF THE WINDOW-TAX.
" Hollo ! °LD Fellow ; WE ,RE GLAD TO SEE YOU HERE.”
pO Punch magazine anticipates the
imminent repeal of the window tax.	MEASURED BY APERTURES, NOT BY LIGHT

"But the great and crying evil of this tax is in its root, which is so bad that it cannot be justified under any modification, and ought not to exist at all; in all reason, houses should be rated in proportion to their VALUE; otherwise there must of necessity be an overtaxed and oppressed class of persons, so long as there are old houses in the land. When the taxes of a house bear any proportion to its rent or value we do not complain of them, for in that case the government cannot make any distinction between rich and poor; but the window tax is an EXCEPTION to the general rule, and is also a most capricious tax, which is levied not according to the quantity or quality of the light obtained, but according to the number of apertures or channels through which it is admitted, just as if a host of stars were worth as much to the inhabitants of the earth as so many suns! It is an anomaly amongst other taxes which savours too much of the ignorance of a barbarous age. It is a tax that is bad in principle and baneful in practice. A tax that presses hard upon industry.
A capricious and an unreasonable tax, unwise and impolitic in its constitution, and partial and oppressive in its operation."
— M. Humberstone, The absurdity and injustice of the window tax (1841), 18.
GENDERED WINDOW
Where there is a gendered division of space - men in the public realm, women in the domestic - the window assumes a particular charge: an opening to the wider world, but one that remains a barrier...
WINDOW
PAGE 33
EMBLEMA SEXTUM.
1681 Immaculate conception symbolized by divine light shining through the window. "The unbroken windowpane transmitting the bright sunlight symbolizes the virginal hymen, the very symbol of maidenhood ... Open windows and broken panes, on the contrary, are depicted in paintings of married or deflowered women.'' (Irene Cieraad, Dutch Windows: Female Virtue and Female Vice, 40.). The plate is from Virgo Maria Mystica Sub Solis Imagine Emblematice Expressa (Under the Image of the Virgin Mary, mysterious, expressed emblematically), Dan De Leenheer, 1681. The subtitle of the image is manent illaesa, remain unaltered.
1655-60 Two Women At a Window, Bartolomé Esteban Murillo. An earlier title is Las Gallegas (The Galician Women); many of Seville's prostitutes originate in Galicia, northwestern Spain.
PAGE 34
wir*
"DUTCH WINDOWS: FEMALE VIRTUE AND FEMALE VICE"
From the Golden Age to contemporary Holland, the architecture of the window transforms in tandem with its shifting social symbolism. All quotes from Irene Cieraad, "Dutch Windows: Female Virtue and Female Vice,"
At Home: An Anthropology of Domestic Space (1999).
"With her chair on a heightened stage the housewife secured her guarding position at the often open window while monitoring life in the street and supervising the open entrance door."
"The front living rooms could have been excellent control towers for the monitoring of street life, but the available controllers, the upper-class mistresses of the house, retreated from the window in the course of the 18th century. They left most of the actual controlling to their maids, who answered doors and enjoyed leaning out of the windows of the upper floors. By the end of the century the 'window attitude' of women marked their status. Upper-class women were not to be seen at the front of the window or to be seated in an open window, acts from which lower-class women were not yet restrained."
"The practice of working-class women leaning out of the window while monitoring street life and having loud conversations by shouting to one another was condemned fiercely. The goal of domestication of working-class women and privatization of working-class family life required the retreat of working-class women from the window."
1870 Mother looks sternly at her daughter as she peers out the window while the rest of the family sits at the table. "An old Dutch family household" from Dutch History and Folk Life Sketches, 1 and X Van Lenner Ter Gouw.
ca. 1661 Lady Seated in a Window, Gabriel Metsu.
1800 Milkmaid, Wybrand Hendriks.
WINDOW
PAGE 35
1930 Street scene, Amsterdam, photographed by Nico Swaager.
Postwar Dutch suburban house, Kaatsheuvel: large front window mitigated by net curtain.
^Hpnen in the windows ^■fothel, Amsterdam.
"Postwar domestic architecture mirrored in its large glass windows and glass doors the spirit of the time. Modernity was hailed for its honesty and openness in matters of life, notably sexual matters. In the same period of sexual liberation, Dutch window prostitution developed its notorious exhibitionistic character. The prostitute's act of standing or sitting close to the window demonstrates the violation of the female boundary between honor and shame."
wmdowpahe."
PAGE 36
WINDOW
DUTCH PRIDE / NOTHING TO HIDE
With its origins in Calvinism - proudly showing the world you have nothing to hide - and a side effect of seafaring
-	wives expected to display their honesty while their husband is at sea
-	an architectural and social tradition / imperative emerges in the Netherlands: the "through lounge" created by windows on either end of a house so large that every domestic activity can be easily inspected from the street.
The following through lounges in Rotterdam, photographed in 2014...
"In a new type of family house, mainly built in Dutch commuters' villages in 5 the 1960s and early 1970s, the living room became a through lounge fitted with j extensive glass windows in both the front and the back of the house, resulting in total transparency. The tremendous popularity of the through lounge also * affected the owners of prewar houses. They broke away the sliding doors to create the same effect... This development signaled the pinnacle of Dutch showcase mentality by its daily and nightly show of family life and interior • decoration"
— Irene Cieraad, "Dutch Windows: Female Virtue and Female Vice," At Home: j An Anthropology of Domestic Space (1999), 39.	§
WINDOW
PAGE 37
^Kre is a mood that settles into me here [in the Netherlands], deepening by |H&ees until its deepness has become darkness. It happens typically on a SunOS, afternoon. I'll be strolling through a neighborhood on the outskirts of Arristerdam, or cycling in a nearby small town, and the calm, bland streets and succession of broad windows giving views onto identical interiors will awaken in my mind a line from Camus's 'Myth of Sisyphus' that struck me to the core when I first read it as an undergraduate: 'A man is talking on the telephone behind a glass partition; you cannot hear him, but you see his incomprehensible ®mb show: you wonder why he is alive.'"
—Bussell Shorto, "Going Dutch," New York Times Magazine, April 29, 2009.
PAGE 38
WINDOW
REASSERTING WINDOW AS A PLACE
The temporary addition, in 2014, of perpendicular, black-painted partition walls to the massive window at Rotterdam's Boijmans Van Beuningen museum drastically reduces direct sunlight, suiting an exhibition of Man Ray photographs in the gallery, while allowing the window to remain largely uncovered. The intervention, designed by MaxWan architects + urbanists, also slices the landscape window into elongated portrait-format parts, each one framing a specific view of the park beyond, while creating, almost as a side effect, habitable niches - a fleeting rediscovery of the window-as-place...
PAGE 39
WINDOW
PAGE 40
WINDOW
Glass
Initially used primarily to let light in, glass - traditionally made out of silica (Si02) mixed with other chemical compounds - increasingly takes on additional roles previously fulfilled by other materials. Continual improvements in the production of ever-larger panes means more glass in windows, so much glass in fact that the window itself starts to disappear...
ca. 70 AD One of the earliest window panes, 3 mm thick, found near Herculaneum.
WINDOW
PAGE 41
Hp’PG Float glass manufacturing plant, Cufeerland, Maryland.

PAGE 42
Wl
GROWING PANES
Advancing glass technology since the 1st century AD makes possible ever larger, smoother, stronger panes...
ca. 1100 "If you have the intention of making glass, first cut many beechwood logs and drv out. Then burn them all together in a clean place and carefully collect the ashes, taking care thaJ^^_ do not mix any earth or stones with them. After this build a furnace of stones and clay, fifteen fe ',°u 5 long and ten feet wide. When you have arranged all this, take beechwood logs completely drierilB In smoke, and light large fires In both sides of the bigger furnace. Then take two parts of the asha^l which we have spoken before, and a third part of sand, collected out of water, and carefully C|eaes °* of earth and stones. Mix them in a clean place, and when they have been long and well mixed ta^^l lift them up with the long-handled iron ladle and put them on the upper hearth in the smaller sect^B of the furnace so that they may be fritted. When they begin to get hot, stir at once with the samel^l ladle to prevent them from melting from the heat of the fire and agglomerating. Continue doinq th'°n a night and a day. Meanwhile take some white pottery clay, dry it out, grind it carefully, poUr water^* it, knead it hard with a piece of wood, and make your pots. These should be wide at the top, narr jl at the bottom, and should have a small in-curving lip around their rims. When they are dry, thojH with tongs and set them in the red-hot furnace In the holes made for this purpose. Pick up the fritt TtUp mixture of ashes and sand with the ladle and fill all the pots in the evening. Add dry wood all throucih 5 the night, so that the glass, formed by the fusion of the ashes and sand, may be fully melted." -Bb — Benedictine monk, Theophilus Presbyter in "On Divers Arts."	•-
ca. 900 AD German manuscript showing glass blower in front of a furnace.
70 AD 5m x ,3m
Translucent cast glass plates in
Pompeii
		1870 1.44m x ,96m ! ~|l Based on cylinder ; glass production
1685 ,33m x ,25m	1790 ,6m x	1830 ,72m x.6m &
Re-glazing of the	,38m	,84m x ,54m
Banqueting House,	Maximum	Maximum sizes
London	dimensions of Crown glass	available in Belgium 1845 1.2m x ,72m Maximum sizes increase f <3
1678 Crown Glass, London, dominates until 19th century
1620 Brown Plate, London, used for mirror and coach plates
1330 Crown Glass, Rouen
1226 Broad Sheet produced in Sussex (later possibilities below)
1800 Polished Plate, England, using steam
engine power for grinding and polishing
1688 Polished Plate, France
1847 Rolled
plate, Dames Hartley, 9 used for large roofs in railway' S stations u
1843 Early float glass invented by j
Henry Bessemer, expensive and not commercially successful ||
1834 Improved Cylinder Sheet based, Gfj
1550 "The tradition is that a merchant ship laden with nitrum being moored at this place, the merchants were preparing their meal on the beach, and not having stones to prop up their pots, they used lumps of nitrum from the ship, which fused and mixed with the sands of the shore, and there flowed streams of a new translucent liquid, and thus was the origin of glass."
— Georgius Agricola, De re Metallica, describing Phoenician traders' discovery of glass at the Belus River.
1871 Broad sheet method of blowing glass: large, balloon-shaped cylinders are created at the end of a blow rod. The ends of these cylinders are then removed and, while the glass is still hot, the cylinder is split and flattened into a plane.
WINDOW
PAGE 43
1951 15.24m x 2.4m
Exhibition glass shown at the Festival of Britain, Power and Production Pavilion

2010	18m x 3.3m
Insulated glass shown at Glasstec Düsseldorf

------------4L1L
t9fl6 3.8m x 1 .»rr,
Aureal pro°ess
1925 4n
■tróveme its i1
^^Bgul'

1927 4m x 2.5m	1970s 6m x 3.21m	2009 9m x 3.21m	
Pilkington improves	Jumbo float glass, to protect	New Jumbo size announced	
plate glass process	European glass production from external imports j		
Chart by Alejandro Zaera Polo
1959 Float Glass, Alastair Pilkington, England
ftj^Kshed Plate, England, allows for larger panes 1113 Flafcrawn Sheet technique, Belgium DBMachine Drawn Cylinder technique, US
SSWiredOast glass created by Pilkington for safety and security
HMfdiine Rolled glass allowing Introduction of patterns
■^remelting c
cut glass cylinders, used to
glaze the Crystal Palace. Common until First World War.
^^Bojircault process: "In this apparatus the glass ascend between asbestos roll; ^^Rpradually cooled till they come cold 01 ^^Rpparatus, where they are cut by ^■pond to the desired length."
1950 The men of Pllkington admire their handiwork: float glass.
PAGE 44
WINDOW
GLASS PRODUCTION PRE-1800
12TH 6 13TH CENTURY CHURCH IS GLASS GUARDIAN
- MANUFACTURING PROCESSES AND FORMULAS FOR GLASS SAFEGUARDED BY CHURCH
1400-1600S: LEADING GU\SSWORKS IN VENICE
-	FORWARDED NEW TECHNOLOGIES
-	ORDINANCE MOVED PRODUCTION TO MURANO
15ÏH CENTURY FIAT GUtSS ENABLED MIRRORS
- 16«. GALERIE DES GLACES VERSAILLES MADE POSSIBLE, WINDOWS MIRRORES AND EXPANDED
1680 FRENCH PERFECTED POLISHED PIUTE GLASS
- LARGER SIZES AND BETTER QUALITY
1696 ROYAL GLASS COMPANY ESTABLISHED
- MANUFACTURE ROYALE DES GLACES DE FRANCE
17TH CENTURY EXPLOSION OF GLASS PRODUCTION
-	ENLIGHTNEMENT RATIONALISM AND CLARITY
-	DEMOCRATIZATION OF GLASS
1700: LEAD GLASS
- ENABLES GLAZING OF LARGE WINDOWS
1700'S: INTRODUCTION OF SODA TO COMPOSITION
-	CUTS COSTS OF GLASS PRODUCTION
-	BETTER TRANSPARENCY AND STRENGTH
MAIN MODES OF PRODUCTION
- BLOWN CYLINDER GLASS SHEET: BLOWN INTO CYLNDER THEN CUT AT EDGES
-CROWN GLASS: EXPLOITS CENTRIFUGAL FORCES,
BLOWN ON TUBE AND THEN FLATTENED (SMALL PLANES BUT BETTER OPTICAT QUALITY) -CASTING AND ROLLING METHOD: VISCOUS GLASS MELT POURED ONTO A METAL TABLE AND ROLLED FLAT
PRODUCTION RESTRICTIONS
-	AVAILABILITY OF RAW MATERIAL IN CLOSE PROXIMITY
-	HEAT ENERGY TO MELT RAW MATERIAL
-	EXPERIENCED PERSONNEL WITH PHYSICAL ABILITY
-	TECHNICALLY ADVANCED FACILITY FOR PRODUCTION
-	PROXIMITY TO TRANSPORTATION ROUTES TO DELIVER THE END PRODUCT, ESPECIALLY RAIL AND SEA
ENERGY IMPACTS PRODUCTION
-	ENERCY TO RAISE TEMPERATURES TO I500°C
-	UNTIL 1800 WOOD USED, THEN COAL
18TH CENTURY GLASS REMAINS LUXURY
-	MAJORITY OF HOMES COVER WINDOWS WITH OILED PAPER AND LINEN
-	RESERVED FOR PUBLIC BUILDINGS AND WEALTHY PATRONS
m
WINDOW
PAGE 45
Westerj#Asia and Northern Africa
■tattogSkSZ-
fnrsh
Axov
0 F	s
A M lY4o R^lMNS
prus
QSyrjnn1 lead, Scd>
Jsthnuvi t ^dnSur-i 13
Nubid n
^ Mamlrl>
ROD + CORE FORMING CASTING WITH OPEN AND CLOSEC FREE BLOWING
BLOWING INTO MOLD AND FORMS,
-	THINNER GLASS
-	MORE TRANSLUCENT, Ll£Ht TRANSMITTING
-	ROMANS ALSO USED COLORED GLASS'; SHEE1 SET IN WOOD
n ARtHltE&TURAL APPLICATIONS
-	LARGER PIECES
-	IN THE NORTH, GLASS MAKERS WERE LARG CONFINED TO MONASTERIES
-	PROLIFERATION OF-STAINED GLASS FOR AE
-	IN FRANCE, CENTERS OF PRODUCTION WERI ENGLAND, PARTICULARLY JARROW WHERE CC WERE RIPE FOR GLASS PRODUCITON
IN CATHEDRALS
PAGE 46
WINDOW
SIZE VS. CLARITY: CAST AND SPUN GLASS
Over centuries, European glassmaking skills advance in sophistication, but the basic production processes remain the same. "In the 16th century, the choice in window glass remained that between spun glass, known as crown, and blown cylinder glass, known as broad sheet... essentially the same choice that lay open to the cathedral builders in the 11th and 12th centuries." (Michael Wigginton, Glass in Architecture, 2002, 31.) Spun glass gives brilliance and evenness, but cast glass (broad sheet) can be made into much bigger panes. The quest to overcome this opposition drives innovation: in late 17th century France, plate glass casting is developed, allowing for larger panes and removing some of the limitations of the old cylinder glass method, which involves blowing a glass container and then unrolling it. The resulting glass is still less attractive than spun glass, forcing continuous refinements...
CAST
ca. 1772 Casting plate glass, illustrated in Diderot's Encyclopédie. Using table and roller, impressive volume is achieved, though at the expense of transparency.
Victorian era window retrofitted with blown cylinder glass, giving a rippled appearance.
WINDOW
PAGE 47

18th
century With expert craftsmanship, spun glass can a high degree of luminosity, but panes are limited in ^Bopiblown bulb being spun in front of the "glory hole," ^■eored glassmaker. Bottom: centrifugal force is used the disc, which can then be cut into panes.
"By the nineteenth century, [the spun glass] technique was developed to produce discs nearly two metres in diameter, with remarkably little wastage at about ten per cent. The pane sizes were always, and inevitably, less than those available with cylinder glass, but the fired and unmarked finish often led to preference, particularly in England."
— Wigginton, Glass in Architecture (2002), 31-32.
1835 The Crown Glass Cutter & Glaziers Manual, Edinburgh, depicts window pane sizes to be cut from spun glass "tables."

PAGE 48
FROM CRYSTAL PALACE...
The industrial revolution advances the cause of the window through improvements in both size and cost. Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace of 1851 demonstrates the new roles of glass: not only as a symbol of luxury, but an enabler of commerce -the perfect material for showing off a wide variety of wares. Technical innovation allows the individual panes of the Crystal Palace to exceed typical 19th century limitations:
"In the 1830s, a method was introduced to make large transparent glass sheets for smooth panes quickly and in large quantities. The process still involved hand work, although routinized. A large ball of blown glass was rolled out on a metal table into the form of a cylinder. The sides of the cylinders were cut along its length to form a remaining sheet of glass which was then polished to a true face. For the Crystal Palace, this method was employed to produce 293,655 individual panes of transparent sheet glass, each four feet [1.2 meters] by ten inches [1/4 meter], a markedly large area for the time."
— Herbert L. Sussman, Victorian Technology: Invention, Innovation, and the Rise of the Machine (2009), 57-58.
1851 Installing the glass roof of the Crystal Palace.
1851 A "green-house larger than any greenhouse ever built before": John Ruskin on the Crystal Palace.
WINDOW
PAGE 49

JL class pavilion
■ expressionist architecture of Bruno Taut, glass takes on radical and even ^BLn promise. Novelist Paul Scheerbart inspires Taut with his treatise Gla-(and his 1914 science fiction novel, The Gray Cloth, essentially an ^Keto glass architecture). Scheerbart lauds the prismatic and multi-colored K pavilion: "If we want our culture to rise to a higher level, we are obliged, ^^Ker or worse, to change our architecture. The new glass environment will ^Cletely transform mankind."
1914 Bruno Taut's Glass Pavilion at the Cologne Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition, sponsored by glass manufacturers Luxfer-Prism-Syndicate. The Glass Pavilion is sited far from the Werkbund's main exhibition building and does not appear on most maps of the grounds. The planning committee's predominant concern with ''economic, political, and export-oriented goals" leads them to favor a restrained neo-classicism. Qohn V. Maciuika, Before the Bauhaus: Architecture, Politics, and the German State, Volume 2, 2005, 271.)
1914 The Gray Cloth with Ten Percent White: A
Near Chicago on Lake Michigan, American sculptors and decorative artists had arranged an exhibition. There were only works of silver on display. It was the middle of the twentieth century. The architect Edgar Krug had built the exhibition hall out of glass and iron. It was opening day and, with lively gestures, the architect fed his friend, the lawyer Walter Lowe, around the enormous halls, pointing out details of the ■Mecture and ornament.
The colossal walls were made completely out ®colored glass, with colored ornament, so that Wly subdued daylight shone into the interior.
Pras raining outside. The sun was not shining.
“Ut the colors of the glass gleamed powerfully nonetheless.
Ladies' Novel, Paul Scheerbart
'I only fear,' responded Herr Lowe, 'that the surroundings will seem to be too big. One has the impression that there are not many works of silver here. They disappear almost completely in the huge hall. You talk about the vast quantity -that seems a little strange to me.'
'Excuse me,' answered the architect, 'there are almost one hundred thousand pieces here.'
'Too few!' shouted the lawyer. 'Your colorfully ornamented glass walls attract most of the attention. Look around you, the whole world marvels at your glass walls. But no one pays any attention to the silver works. You have conquered the silver sculptures. I congratulate you.'
Paul Scheerbart, 1863-1915.
tarr Krug said quietly:
Bleed, the silver sculpture contrasts wonder-the colorful glass walls. One could not ^»feetter surroundings for this quantity of silver / Ce& True, don't you think?'
'Quiet! Quiet!' whispered the architect, 'one of the artists could be nearby.'
PAGE 50
WINDOW
RIBBON VS. PORTRAIT
In the early 1920s, two of France's leading architects fight a public battle over the best way to frame a view: Le Corbusier, advocate of the ribbon window, framing a cinematic sweep of landscape, and Auguste Perret, champion of the traditional portrait format, capable of properly framing a man, and taking in everything necessary at each level - some sky, some garden, some pavement - and no more than that. At stake is more than just personal preferences for a view; Perret believes Le Corbusier's hungry eye "is destroying the fine French tradition"...
auguste
Perret	le corbusier
"I can state that glass will be a characteristic feature of building in the new machine age because it is the most direct means by which we can find one of the essential conditions for life: sun and light. The second machine age will be responsible for restoring mankind to a harmonious relationship with nature, and with the human and the cosmic. The first machine age (1830-1930) had torn this apart. Glass is the most miraculous means of restoring the law of the sun."
"There is a noticeable tendency on the part of Le Corbusier to group his windows together in order to create the effect of volume, leaving large intermediate wall surfaces entirely dead; or, upon some creative fancy, he produced strained window forms by distorting their length or their breadth. That looks original enough from outside, but I fear that the impression inside is less original for as a result at least half the rooms must make do without any light at all, and that is taking originality a bit too far."
"Henceforth the idea of the window will be modified ... Plate glass replaces window panes. The sashes run horizontally, unhampered by the clumsy accessories of the sash window. They make possible the lengthwise window, the source of an architectural motive of great significance. ... History teaches us that technical achievements have always overthrown the most ancient traditions. It is destiny. There is no escape!"
Sources of quotes, in order of appearance:
Le Corbusier, "Glass, the Fundamental Material of Modern Architecture," Tchéco-Verre, Vol. 2, Nos. 1-4, 1935.
"Mr. Auguste Perret reports on the architecture section of the Salon d'Automne," Paris Journal v. 1. 12. 1923.
Le Corbusier, "Twentieth-century Building and Twentieth-century Living,"
The Studio Year Book on Decorative Art, London, 1930.
"A visit to Le Corbusier-Saugnier," Paris Journal v. 14. 12. 1923 Perret, AA, issue 2, 1930.
"Precisions sur un état present de 'architecture et de l'urbanisme,"
Le Corbusier, Almanach d'architecture moderne, 55, 1930, 95-97.
Marcel Zahar, D'une doctrine d'architecture: Auguste Perret (Vincent, Fréal, 1959).
1923 Perret’s Maison Gaut, Paris, with large portrait-oriented window, and a chair for looking out of it.
PAGE 51
■K now Perret's last insulting censure: my windows admit no light. That makes me furious, for the r Itice of such an accusation is more than evident. What on earth is he talking about? I endeavor P Late bright room interiors ... that is my main aim, and that is why the appearance of my façades ;^Bsi	to those who follow the beaten track. An intentional oddness, says Perret. |
^^H|,'intentional': not simply for love of oddness, but in order to introduce into my houses the ^B[0st possible quantity of light and air. The alleged fancy was directed solely by the desire to the inhabitants with the basic necessities of life."
"The vertical window better distributes light, it illuminate the floor, it illuminates the ceiling. You can see yourself reflected in the beautiful polished floors! It highlights the floors, the mosaics, the rugs. The ceiling, which can be beautiful, is well illuminates, it reflects light, and diffuses it. Sitting, your view is not limited by these windows, the garden, the street, the sky: the landscape is fragmented, and is that such a bad thing? A slight shift in your position lets you choose, for everything is not perfect in what we see of the city or even in the country."
Av,	immensity of the outer world into the room, the unadulterated ,
^Hrof a lake scene with its tempestuous moods or its gleaming calm. ... "The landscape is sollose it's as if you were in your garden."
"The horizontal window is not a window at all. (Categorically): A window, that is man himself!"
F Le Corbusier's sketch of August Perret pointedly I sitting facing away from the ribbon window he himself £ installed at his Palais de Bois. Corb's caption drips with I irony: '"Une fenêtre, c'est un homme, c'est vertical'
I dit Auguste." ("A window is a man, it is vertical"
» says Auguste.) Possibly Perret does not consider this I utilitarian structure as Architecture, so he allows himself i L a ribbon window here, though he would also use quasi- | p ribbon windows in some of his buildings of the 1930s.
1923 Lake Geneva from Le Corbusier's 11 meter horizontal window at Villa le Lac, built for his mother.
PAGE 52
WINDOW
WINDOW SHOPPING
"As glass has become clearer and clearer and cheaper and cheaper from age to age, about all that has been done with it architecturally is to fill up the same opening that opaque glass screened before, with a perfect visibility now, except for the use to which the shop-man demands that it be put. The shop! That is almost where glass has come into its own."
—	Frank Lloyd Wright, "The Meaning of Materials: Glass," The Architectural Record, Duly 1928.
"Question: When did the commodity come to the fore in the image of the city? It would be crucial to have statistical information about the intrusion of the shop-window into façades."
—	Walter Benjamin, "Central Park" (1938).
"Important preliminary work for later construction was carried out in the show windows of stores, where, as industrialization continued, ever-larger glassed surfaces were needed. The manuals of iron construction that were published from the eighteen-fifties to the nineties are filled with instructions for supporting the brickwork of the upper stories on iron girders. These iron columns were the only structural elements of the building visible behind the wide display windows. In view of the fact that the set-back pillar is used in so many modern buildings, a continuous account of the evolution of this practice would be most interesting. It was from these store windows that we first learned how to use large glass areas in dwelling houses."
—	Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture (1941), 195.

e®°5 'he Kaw'neer'i
n
system, i-nphjM in Kansas City, us^ I a narrow metal nJ, to allows larger pa 6 Of glass to be instaM .. in storefronts. ^
1906-1909 Solution 1 for foggy windows:
inside / outside temperature differential overcrowding, and p00'r ventilation cause shop windows to steam up, making them opaque' i
and useless. Air vents :
installed at the top of the window allow fresh air to circulate, keeping
them clear.
1961 Children and their guardians look through the very large window of a toys tore in Amsterdam.
PAGE 53

¡PILKINGTON process
, grid of the 1950s, the desire to meet market demand for "shop windows, cars, and mirrors" triggers the most ficant advance in glass in centuries: float glass, an industrial process invented by British glassmaker Alastair Rn for the creation of large distortion-free sheet panes, freed of previous limitations. A continuous ribbon of glass out of a furnace onto a bath of molten tin, a guaranteed flat surface where the glass can be held at a high enough ^Krature for irregularities to literally melt away. Grinding and polishing are no longer necessary. In 1972, just a decade ML. the process's introduction, New Scientist reports: "The process is licensed to 21 manufacturers in 12 countries; ^^^Rlants are in operation throughout the world, and another 12 are under construction or planned." (Michael ■Laid, "Reflections on Glass Research," New Scientist, August 31, 1972, 427-428.) Float glass changes forever the « jlations involved in windowed architecture - previously an expensive luxury and limited in size, flawless and huge of glass suddenly become affordable, and consequently the default...
Nov. 10, 1959 L. A. B. PILKINGTON ETAL 2,911,759
MANUFACTURE OF FLAT GLASS
,Ued Dec. 6. 1954	3 Sheets-Sheet 1

Alastair Pilkington, perfecter of the float glass process, at the Pilkington factory.
1954 Patent for the manufacture of float glass from the Pilkington company, promising to solve no less than four separate challenges in one package:
"A main object of the present invention is to improve the manufacture of flat glass in continuous ribbon form so that a better surface and flatness are obtained for the glass before annealing than have heretofore been achieved at such stage of production.
"A further main object is to obtain a greater rate of producing sheet glass than is at present possible by the usual commercial drawing methods.
"Another main object of the present Invention is to produce flat glass in ribbon form, the faces of which have a lustre of a quality such as that known as fire finish, on emerging from the annealing stage.
"Still another important object of the Invention is to produce by rolling methods that flat glass known as window glass, whereby the finished product is transparent and has a high quality lustre."
1951 The early days of float glass.
PAGE 54
THE PICTURE WINDOW CRAZE
Emerging in the 1930s and enabled by the development of double glazing, the picture window - framing ambitiously large views of suburban gardens - becomes a staple selling point of new family homes in the US, reaching a fever pitch in the 1950s. Housewives are offered tips on inventing a garden view for their window, while those without the all-important window can buy a Scenichrome "picture window" mural of "a scenic photograph that is framed between two layers of clear Plexiglass and then lighted in back by fluorescent tubes." (New York Times, Duly 10, 1947.)
No home is truly modem without TWINDOW!
This windowpane with insulation built in keeps rooms warmer in winter, cooler in summer. It reduces heating and air-conditioning costs... eliminates storm sash.
Duly 1957 Twindow: double glazing system^™ advertised in Better Homes and Gardens, ms *1
ever-larger picture windows feasible, maii^^H a perfectly controlled interior climate.
ca. I960 The picture window, this time photographed by Del Carlo from the outside, B|°ffers more than a peak - virtually a panorama - of the American Dream: husband |i pokes fire, mother reads to daughter, son reads on his own.
ca. 1960 The picture window lives up to its name: photographer Arnold Del Carlo, who spends a career documenting the Santa Clara valley's mutation into Silicon Valley, frames Raymond Triplett, founder of Triplett Financial & Insurance Services, and his family using their picture window.
PAGE 56
WINDOW
ca. 1955 Total picture window: Eichler Homes builds more than 11,000 houses in northern California designed by a variety of modern architects, some featuring entire façades of glass.
WINDOW
PAGE 57
PAGE 58
WINDOW
1955 Eighteen meters wide and 11 meters tall, the giant picture window of the Jackson Lake Lodge hotel lounge frames an American sublime - Wyoming's Grand Teton mountains. While some guests busy themselves with reading or conversation, others are enraptured by the view, frozen inches from the windowpane...
WINDOW
PAGE 59
PAGE 60
W
BACKLASH AGAINST THE PICTURE WINDOW
Already in the mid 1950s, critics and architects react against the automatic use of the picture window: the picture window spreads without sensitivity to its environment, leading to a host of windows without views. The fad becomes the subject of mockery. An architect named "Frank Lloyd Clark" gets in on the debate, and a more traditional form of window re-emerges as the New York Times announces, in an October 16, 1960 article, that the picture window is "Giving Way to More Conservative Designs" in increasingly popular colonial façades.
Architects Aim toNipPictureWindoivFad, Thke Living Room Off Main Street
(We PiniiCAUED Xr paorasnrrate \ IwiNDOwroeeiNreeVr r*m f,wie,wmei£
who wants rue outdoors indoors, /wvwav;;"
(îKTueÈ opTmen carrying rose window u)‘
AWY,fMifc you ass maim Feeuue of eeiN6 whrcHev ??
one company has thou««' 0FAUKIN6 MOffi £WB38ATc FRA«es fDRTWÉM!:
BtAitlFtltJl
ncmRG windows Give one Me.mretz nur cun 'our-or-doors" reeune>'.
me idfai PicraPë window to a	i:
August 8, 1952 The Christian Science Monitor registers the growing skepticism around the picture window. In the accompanying article, an unnamed "New England" architect declares: "It's just about time we called a halt to this picture window fad. And I call it a fad not because the picture window does not have genuine, practical value as a link between the outdoors and the indoors, but because its use is being seriously abused" - by undiscerning builders who install them as a default, even directly facing the neighbor's picture window...
WINDOW
PAGE 61
Frank Lloyd Clark Blasts U. S. ‘Picture Window’ Co
By DAVID J. OESTKEICHER
PHOENIX, Aril. — Don’t be in a hurry to lay that down payment on a new house, advises Frank Lloyd Wright, and make sure you’re buying some privacy.
Hie 88-year-old world-famed architect, interviewed at his isolated “Taliesin West” desert workshop northeast of Phoenix, had sharp words for what he called the "thousands oi little housing communities lined up picture window to picture window” across the United States.
“Refuse to buy a home that doesn't please you,*’ he declared, “wait, wait, wait and wait until you find a bouse that has some space around it and you are in position to buy it. Don’t buy until you get to that point.”
“The most precious and valuable thing in human life,” he stressed, "is privacy and if you are not defended against intrusion where you live you haven’t got a home.”
Wright, always the champion of Individuality and a bitter critic of conformity in modern-day living, lashed out at homes “lined up picture .window to picture window
where you can hear papa spanking the baby next door and mother bawling out her husband on the other side.”
He predicted a trend away from mass-produced homes as Americans take more and more advantage of “modern science” and the “big city becomes less and less important.”
Wright explained:
“Once upon a time the big city was the great necessity. In the middle ages, the city served a you could have culture. It was the only way you could have contact man with man.
“This is not so now. The city is in the way and gradually the flock is moving out into the country. The big freeways take them into the city and the big freeways take them out again and this to-and-fro movement takes up most of the energy and life of the citizens.
“Gradually, this to-and-fro movement will decrease. As people go more and more to the country, the department stores and factories will move in the same direction until perhaps eventually the whole country will become one great city.”
Commenting further on t h e home situation, Wright said “these little housing communities are really a hangover and a disgrace to the advantages that we enjoy —the automobile, the telephone, flight and other benefits provided by modem science.”
He added:
“The whole situation will change and we won’t have these housing communities any more when the American public finally realises that modern science has made distances unimportant.
“However, I don't think very much is going to be done until dissatisfied groups of citizens with higher ideals refuse to buy and insist on better home.”
“We’d have better homes then and we’d have them quick,” he said, adding:
“Here are thousands of persons living in what used to be $3500 homes that now c o s t $15,000. I don't know whose fault that is except their own.
They buy them, they pay for them and they seem to feel they're pretty well off if they get one.”
January 14,1958 "Wright, always the champion of individuality and a bitter critic of conformity in modern-day living, lashed out at homes 'lined up picture window to picture window where you can hear papa spanking the baby next door and mother bawling out her husband on the other side.'" Chicago Defender.
PAGE 62
i/INDOV
STORM WINDOWS: THE TWICE YEARLY RITUAL
In Medieval England, the window belonged to the tenant rather than the landlord, and would be removed from the house and taken away with the tenant when he moved. Later, the glazing of some grand estates would only be put into place when the lord was in residence. The habit of the movable windows re-emerges in the late 19th and 20th centuries in the form of the storm window, a cheap and temporary form of double glazing, as additional layers hooked onto existing leaky windows to seal them shut for winter. The installation of storm windows in the fall becomes a ritual of hunkering down, and their removal in the spring marks the end of the home's veritable hibernation. The adoption of permanent double glazing ends the storm window and its associated greetings of the seasons.
1886 Storm window patent, C. F. Teufel: "the present invention has for its object to provide a storm-window, to be attached to the frame of an ordinary window to keep out the cold air and snow, and also prevent frost upon the window-panes."
The Ritual
Storage: When not in use, storm windows, or "storms," can now be stored efficiently until the fall thanks to the "Stor-a-way" system, advertised in a 1949 issue of Popular Science.
Cleaning: When it's getting close to storm season the windows are retrieved from storage, cobwebs and critters swept away and repairs made if necessary.
Installation: In a group effort, storm windows are fitted in place over existing windows. When the weather turns again the ritual is repeated in reverse.
WINDOW
PAGE 63
|,lled BY double glazing
WfieMrioJbeme
Whjleriiii’n‘me insulating glass puts K (W0 panes and a scaled-in blanket Kf air between you and outdoors. R Makes rooms comfortable, espe-I ¡a||y near windows. Reduces drafts. k peadens outside noise to keep K (Bjorns quieter. Reduces chances of E steamy or frosted windows.
■	Saves fuel—heat loss through Thcr-B)nop“"1' *s a^inl! half that through K.jnglc glass. In summer, it cuts air-Bjjonditioning costs. And no bother I or expense of storm sash.
I: Two kinds of Thcrmopanc
1 1. Made of plate glass for sharp, E clear views. Best for all uses, and | a “must” for picture windows I and window walls. Units are I i/2" or I" thick.
f 2. Made ofshect glass for economy. I Units are Vi" thick.
| Sash for Thermopane
I Windows of every type—fixed or B&entilating—are made for glazing E with Thcrmopanc insulating glass.
:	Also sliding doors.
|. What does Thcrmopanc cost ?
■	About the same as single glass plus ji good storm sash in most areas. In t the average home, its cost adds E only one or two dollars a month to
mortgage payments, as compared with single glass. And your windows are insulated for the life of your house.
I Where to see it — buy it H Thcrmopanc is sold by local L OT*
October 1956 Insulated glass replaces the storm window. Thermopane boasts in The American Home magazine, that, with insulated glass there is "no bother or expense of storm sash."
The lost secret of the
By Dick C.onklin
I FIGURE IT will he a few thousand rears before archeologists make the dis-:overy. They will'be digging on the Wages of an ancient urban complex on he shores of Lake Michigan. Their find vlll be made in a geological layer as-¡oclated with the Interglacial Holocene rerlod.
They will come upon some artifacts, fhe words that once described these noterlnls will have long slipped from the anguage. But some research in cata-ogues of archaic tools will yield ldentlfl-:ations — 0 putty knife, glazing points, a crcwdriver, a paint brush.'
In the surrounding rock, they will find rhemlcal traces ot ammonia, as well as a
Dick Conklin Is Director of Information ferWces at the.University et Notre lame.
Storm Window People
small fragment of a shammy.
THÉ SIGNIFICANCE of the And will be revealed in a scholarly monograph that will confira the existence ot a cultural ritual belonging to a primitive civilization •— replacing screens with storm windows. As clever as archeologists ore, there will be n lot about this earlier society they will not be able to reconstruct.
For example, their Great Lakes Basin slto will.contain no.Stonehenge, no Intricate configuration of rocks by which the Storm JVlndow Age marked thé chang'e'ln seasons. How, they will wonder, did the society know when it was tlme7 I The secret will'have died with the faint chill of an Indian summer night that Blgnaled tho season’s last gin and tonic, with the first withering of the russet -Boston Ivy against a fall chimney, with the scent 0! burnt autumn leaves, funereal incense for a dying summer. These
things, central to understanding tho'ritual, wlU have, left no trace.
October 14,1979 "How, they will wonder, did the society [of the Storm Window Age] know when it was time?" Dick Conklin, Chicago Tribune.
Upgrade double-hung windows to save energy
By Reader’s Digest Books
Associated Press
The main reason to upgrade double-hung windows is to increase their energy efficiency. Upgrading also frees you from the annual ritual of putting up and taking down storms and screens.
Energy loss is greatest at the point where the glass meets the sash (sliding frame) and where the sash meets the window jambs. The simplest way to combat this without replacing the window or sashes is to caulk the exterior of the window, weatherstrip the interior, have transparent heat-reflecting film applied to the glass and use insulating window treatments, such as lined draperies.
More permanent solutions call for
Annual screen ritual is no more
it in place.
A prehung window is also a good choice if you want to change the size or shape of the original opening, or if you are cutting a new opening.
A replacement window consists of sashes and a pair of jamb liners are custom built to fit inside the original frame. Unless you’re an experienced do-it-yourselfer, make sure the cost of professional installation is included in the cost of new windows.
Sash replacement
A simpler — and usually less exbensive — alternative is to find a
or baked-on finish will outlast aluminum that has only a mill finish. Although it is a poor insulator and dents easily, it Is relatively inexpensive, lightweight, low maintenance and doesn’t rot Thermal-break aluminum has the added advantage of being a good insulator.
All-wood, vinyl-clad wood or aluminum-clad wood arc good insulators but they may be prone to rot. Vinyl- or aluminum-clad are low maintenance and all-wood is high maintenance — three versions which are heavy in weight All-wood is low in cost while the clad types are usually high.
All-vinyl is relatively inexpensive, a good insulator, lightweight, low maintenance and doesn’t rot. However, vinyl becomes brittle in
May 9, 1997 "Upgrading (to double glazing] frees you from the annual ritual of putting up and taking^ down storms and screens," Philadelphia Tribune.Ms

PAGE 64
WINDOW
WINDOW PROFILES: 20th CENTURY ARCHITECTURE
A sampling of notable 20th-century windows (anatomized in The Details of Modem Architecture, by Edward R. Ford), reveals a transformation - with some prescient exceptions - from an object deeply embedded in a thick façade, surrounded by reinforcements and shading, to a seamless continuation of the façade's thin surface...
1902 Heurtley House, Oak Park, Frank Lloyd Wright:
- roof overhang, set-back sill
1904 House in Cite Industrielle, Tony Gamier:
- roll down shutters embedded/hidden in façade
1927 Viipuri Library, Vyborg, Russia, Alvar Aalto:
- thinness, narrow sills
1938 Villa Mairea, Noormarkku, Finland, Alvar Aalto:
- sloping sills, small protective overhang on lower level
1948 Equitable building, Portland, Pietro Belluschi: - curtain wall
1950 Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp, Le Corbusier. - puncture
WINDOW
PAGE 65
1955 Maison Jaoul, Neuilly-sur-Seine, Le Corbusier:
-small overhang, several panes
1965 Richards Medical Research Laboratories, Philadelphia, Louis Kahn:
-	steel frame (simpler profile than aluminum)
-elimination of shading devices and reduction of insulation; scientists complain
-	columns moved from corners to perimeter, allowing larger panes
1967 History Faculty, Cambridge University, James Stirling and Michael Wilford
1969 First Unitarian Church, Rochester, New York, Louis Kahn
E-.-t.
^»Srnpshire, Louis Kahn:
^^Pdual carrels articulate separate
'lar9e sills
Michael Graves:
- window a major source of articulation on the façade despite its generic profile
1983 Princeton Gordon Wu Hall, Venturi, Rauch, and Scott Brown: - classical orders flattened decoratively onto façade
PAGE 66
A PHILOSOPHICAL POINT:
BLACK HOLE / WHITE WALL
In Sebastiano Serlio's 15th century elevations, window are drawn as pure black voids, cancelling the actual function of the window: neither a view in, nor, presumably, a view out is afforded. The window - the glass pane, at least - is just a gap in the façade, seemingly not the architect's responsibility, something left for later. This technique of rendering windows suggests a philosophical lesson about the semiotics of the window: theoretically, windows function as openings to the inside, giving visual access to scenes of human activity. Yet before any actual inhabitation, they exist as pure potential, the interruptions that transform a blank wall into something that suggests habitation. This is also why (following Deleuze and Guattari) such blacked-out openings trigger a tendency to read the façade as a face - not just because openings suggest cartoon eyes, but because the imbrication of expressive and non-expressive elements is the very condition of creating meaning in the first place...
ca. 1540s Windows as black holes: "Small dwelling for a Prince," Sebastiano Serlio.
WINDOW
PAGE 67
^KPMtJngers, "House Without Qualities," jgr3ne The conditions of architectural
in pure form: during the day, the ^■¡vs-black void throws the purity of the white |Bln% radiant relief; at night, a reversal, with the radiating light and the wall reduced to
wrky ground.
"Significance is never without a white wall upon which it inscribes its signs and redundancies. Subjectification is never without a black hole in which it lodges its consciousness, passion, and redundancies. Since all semiotics are mixed and strata come at least in twos, it should come as no surprise that a very special mechanism is situated at their intersection. Oddly enough, it is a face: the white wall/black hole system. A broad face with white cheeks, a chalk face with eyes cut in for a black hole.
Clown head, white clown, moon-white mime, angel of death, Holy Shroud. The face is not an envelope exterior to the person who speaks, thinks, or feels. The form of the signifier in language, even its units, would remain indeterminate if the potential listener did not use the face of the speaker to guide his or her choices ('Hey, he seems angry ...'; 'He couldn't say it...'; 'You see my face when I'm talking to you ...'; 'look at me carefully...').
... It is not exactly the face that constitutes the wall of the signifier or the hole of subjectivity. The face, at least the concrete face, vaguely begins to take shape on the white wall. It vaguely begins to appear in the black hole. In film, the close-up of the face can be said to have two poles: make the face reflect light or, on the contrary, emphasize its shadows to the point of engulfing it 'in pitiless darkness.'
A psychologist once said that the face is a visual percept that crystallizes out of 'different varieties of vague luminosity without form or dimension.' A suggestive whiteness, a hole that captures, a face. According to this account, the dimensionless black hole and formless white wall are already there to begin with. And there are already a number of possible combinations in the system: either black holes distribute themselves on the white wall, or the white wall unravels and moves toward a black hole combining all black holes, hurtling them together or making them 'crest.' Sometimes faces appear on the wall, with their holes; sometimes they appear in the hole, with their linearized, rolled-up wall. A horror story, the face is a horror story. It is certain that the signifier does not construct the wall that it needs all by itself; it is certain that subjectivity does not dig its hole all alone. Concrete faces cannot be assumed to come ready-made. They are engendered by an abstract machine of faciality (visageite), which produces them at the same time as it gives the signifier its white wall and subjectivity its black hole. Thus the black hole/white wall system is, to begin with, not a face but the abstract machine that produces faces according to the changeable combinations of its cogwheels..."
— Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia (1987), 175.
PAGE 68
WINDOW
Were Windows Eyes?
By Manfredo di Robilant
0.	ANATOMICAL METAPHORS AND THE MISSING EYE
"The condition of looking through/from the window is typical of Europe, where starting from the 16th century houses were used as cameras thanks to the improved techniques of production of glass."
— Alan Macfarlane, Gerry Martin, The Glass Bathyscaphe:
How Glass Changed the World (2002).1
There is a latent anatomical metaphor embedded in the western notion of the window - developed since the late 15th century, when Europe began subjugating the world - though it is a metaphor that has rarely been fully expressed: the "window as eye" could be a device that selected a view on the world outside, or it could be a puncture through which portions of interiors were exposed. Inhabitants and guests were the beneficiaries of the first condition, passersby and neighbors of the second. The increasing use of glass was not the only factor making windows act, even unconsciously, like the eyes of buildings: the establishment of linear perspective played a crucial role. Perspective was maybe the critical discovery of the Renaissance, allowing architecture, until then considered a mechanical activity, to be subsumed into the higher realm of visual art. Perspective began to deeply influence the character of architecture in Europe. The human eye became the lens through which architecture was conceived as well as represented. The view became a key concern of architects, particularly after Romanticism consecrated the idea of panorama, at the beginning of the 19th century, and the supremacy of the visual in architecture prevailed in the early 20th century's avant-gardes. Despite the preoccupation with optics, the metaphor of the window as eye never took off.
In a plethora of anatomical metaphors from the middle of 19th century that involved bones, veins and skin, the eye is absent. The skeleton2 was the metaphor of choice for architects in a collective attempt at defending their profession from the silent efficiency of structural engineers. Anatomical metaphors reached a peak in the 1920s and 1930s, when the use of some features that had long been used in sanatoriums, such as large sliding windows, flat terraced roofs, and balconies became canonic:3 architecture became a device for promoting the wellness and health of its inhabitants, and modern architects implicitly associated their buildings with healthy bodies. A typically modern argument, such as structural honesty, called for the use of the anatomical metaphor of the skeleton: "Only skyscrapers under construction reveal the bold constructive thoughts, and then the impression of the high-reaching steel skeletons is overpowering," Mies van der Rohe wrote in 1922.4 From the 1870s to the 1950s, circulation, another anatomical image, became central to a heated debate on how to better organize the flow of users / inhabitants within a building:5 "Architecture is circulation" Le Corbusier proclaimed in 1930.6
As European modernism was exported, anatomical metaphors were proposed to cultures where anthropomorphism and the cult of human proportions -western, Humanist ideas - were foreign. Le Corbusier's 1933 Plan Obus for
1.	Alan Macfarlane, Gerry Martin, TheG/a^B Bathyscaphe: How Glass Changed the W Sj -(London: Profile Books 2002), 66.
2.	Adrian Forty, Structure, in Words and i Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modern Archft^^l (London: Thames & Hudson, 2000), 278-2HiB
3. Margaret Campbell, "Strange Bedfellows-Modernism and Tuberculosis," in Imperfect1 Health: The Medlcalization of Modem H Architecture, eds. Giovanna Borasi, Mirko Zard' (Montréal and Zurich: CCA and Lars Müller ln Publishers, 2012), 133-151.
4.	Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, "Hochhäuser"
in Frühlicht, Summer 1922. The translated quota is reported in: Forty, "Structure," 280. Nearly 40 years later, his Seagram building will exhibit -the "skeleton" in the façade, even though the projecting vertical members were not actually J part of the structure, but represented it. ¿A
5.	Forty, '"Spatial Mechanics' - Scientific-3 Metaphors," 90-94.
6.	Le Corbusier, Précisions sur un état présent de l'architecture et de l'urbanisme, 1930. Translated quote is reported in: Forty, "Spatial Mechanics'-Scientific Metaphors," 87.
WINDOW
PAGE 69
Jgcussion of the "organic" ambitions ^^Msee: Michele Lamprakos, "Le Al'.nei ■: The Plan Obus as ^Mfbanism. ' in Nezm Alsap.ad, forms of , Or . tufecturc end Uibenism of Enterprise (Aldershot: Avebury 1992), „ (0ra discussion of the analogies with the pi Idles, 194-195.
Algeria was an attempt to create urban circulation bypassing the heart of the Casbah, and the curves on which the plan was based have been associated with the curves of the Algerian women of Le Corbusier's contemporary sketches.7 Anatomical metaphors played the role of agents of Europe's dominance in modern architecture, and became doubted as the limitations of modernism became clearer in the 1960s- its hierarchical, male, western DNA, its monolithic, distinctly un-human solutions, despite the metaphors. In the last quarter of the 20th century, participatory design processes as well as feminist and post-colonial literature undermined the pseudo-coherent character of the modern movement and consigned anthropomorphic readings of architecture to history. Anatomical metaphors, an important piece in the puzzle of elements that maintained the pseudo-coherent character of modern architecture, returned to the status of single, dispersed pieces.
The metaphor of windows as eyes is the missing piece in this modern puzzle, never reaching the status of an explicit rappel-a-l'ordre. Are the cinematographic qualities of the ribbon window and the clinical qualities of the transparent curtain-wall necessarily at odds with the metaphor of windows as eyes? Did the idea of windows as eyes flourish, under the radar, anywhere? Were these expressions linked more to the idea of looking from the window to the outside - the windows as a kind of prosthetic for the inhabitant, boosting the capacity of his own eyes to select and frame a view? Or were these expressions linked more to the idea of looking at window from the outside -the building itself as a face, dotted with eyes?
1975 "Face blouse" by Kazumasa Yamashita in Kyoto takes the metaphor of windows as eyes literally. The apertures are pupils, the decorative ring around them giving a permanent look of surprise on the building.
PAGE 70
1.	MODERNIST HOSTILITY TOWARDS THE WINDOW
The absence of the metaphor of the eye in modernism is not particularly surprising if we consider that the window as a discrete element was itself negated by the architecture mainstream:8 the Corbusian fenêtre en longueur and brise soleil, Gropius' transparent façade in the Bauhaus in Dessau, Mies' curtain walls in the US. The window was assimilated into the façade-skin, losing its autonomy as an element. The window as a device that selects a view on the outside was sacrificed to achieve abundant light inside or total transparency to the outside. The glass-brick façade of Chareau's Maison de Verre in Paris is an apotheosis of the first desire,9 while Philip Johnson's Glass House was conceived as a perfect embodiment of the second, and both had an immediate and wide circulation in the architectural press.
When Le Corbusier promoted his ribbon windows as devices for panoramic views, he was attacking the romantic idea of the window as a fixed perspective - a frame - that generates a picture of the landscape. The view available from a ribbon window was bigger than the eye could take in. The windows did not mimic the performance of the human eye, but that of a film camera. Hans Sedlmayr, writing in 1948, interpreted the fashion of the continuous ribbon window as a crucial episode in the various "revolutions and revolts" that brought the "abolition" of architecture.10 In Sedlmayr's view, the ribbon window was a "natural consequence" of the prevalence of the "slab"11 in the architecture of the avant-gardes. He interpreted the horizontal slab as a device which implied closure to the above and openness to the sides: the loss of traditional windows marked the defeat of architecture, which lost its boundaries and became blurry.
2.	INDUSTRY STANDARDS
In the face of advancing standardization, and the parallel commercialization of the building elements industry, the window no longer called for refined detailing by the architect. A passage in Michael Rosenauer 1950s canonic handbook on modern offices describes how the window became a dependent variable in the design process, with its framing potential now subordinate to other concerns. The English architect, who created the Time & Life building on London's Bond street in 1951, stated:
"By the time the architect approaches the problem of window design for the office building, the main dimensions of the structural grid will have been determined by planning considerations. The overall dimensions of the site may have suggested a convenient subdivision and this, considered in conjunction with the needs of flexible internal planning, may well have determined the optimum horizontal sizes for windows."12
The window's conception had nothing to do with selecting views for the users of the building. Instead, it was to bring in light to enhance the efficiency of the employees. While Rosenauer had in mind white collar office buildings, the genealogy of the functional window can be traced back to a starting point where it was not clerks but friars who were involved, and where prayer rather than work was the issue.
8.	The anti-window character of the 1920sÄ. ' early 1930s projects by Mies and Le Corb
has the function of negative premise in Venturi's nostalgic essay on the window Robert Venturi, 'Windows,'' in /«.-onograJj^H and Electronics upon a Generic Architectuj^M A View from the Drafting Room, Robert Vent ■ i (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996), 255.
9.	The crucial contribute ; tne translucentf :i of the Maison de Vene lo the transformation5^6 of the house itself into a longtime icon of 1 Modernity is among the negative premisestdH Sarah Wigglesworth feminist reading, see- Sa s - “ Wigglesworth, "A fitting fetish: the interiorsohk. Maison de Verre," in Intersections: Architecture« Histories and Critical Theories, eds. lain Bordai and Dane Rendell (London: Routledge, 2000) gjjl
10.	Hans Sedlmayr, Verlust der Mitte (Salzburg- 1
Otto Müller Verlag, 1948), 94. Hans SedlrttayrSB1 Art in Crisis: The Lost Center (Chicago IL: Henry Regnery Company, 1958).	’
11.	Sedlmayr, Verlust, 106. Sedlmayr, Art in j
Crisis.	'|§
12.	Michael Rosenauer, Modern Offices Buildings n (London: B.T. Batsford Ltd, 1955), 41.
WINDOW
PAGE 71
1926 Window becoming façade: Bauhaus, Dessau.
1953 Predetermined: Michael Rosenauer, architect of the Time & Life Building, London, writes: "By the time the architect approaches the problem of window design for the office building, the main dimensions of the structural grid will have been determined by planning considerations," limiting the design possibilities for the window.
PAGE 72
3.	AN EARLY DEATH IN VENICE
San Francesco della Vigna convent, Venice, 1742
In 1742, the friar Carlo Lodoli remodelled the pilgrims' wing in the San Francesco della Vigna convent, in Venice. This was the only built work of Lodoli, who otherwise focused on the elaboration of his theory of architecture as a mere utility. Lodoli's writings were published posthumously by his pupil Andrea Memmo,13 triggering a critical appreciation that climaxed in the 20th century, when Lodoli was canonized in the militant literature of modern architecture as a pioneer of intransigent functionalism,14 overlooking the fact that he also relied on anatomical metaphors. Criticizing Greek architecture for shaping different building materials into similar forms, Lodoli associated their buildings to the monstrous face of a woman with three eyes or of a man with two noses.15
By contrast, there is no resemblance of a face in the façades of the remodelled pilgrims' wing in Venice. The most recognizable features in this work are the two windows on the extremes of the southwest façade. They look from the first floor onto a small unremarkable courtyard that had no ritual function in the life of the monastery: there was no spectacle to look at from the pilgrim's windows, nor was there any significant architecture to admire. A wider view on the orchards to the northeast was enjoyable from the windows of the corridor, but Lodoli paid no attention to them. Rather, he applied on the corridor wall the inscription "Ex fabrica et ratio(cinatio)ne Vitruvius," a play on words that underlined how the work was done after meditating on Vitruvius' aphorism that architecture should be the synthesis of building skills and of theoretical speculation.16
Despite their apparently traditional form, the pilgrim's windows are anything but conventional. Lodoli designed them with the aim of creating perfectly functional objects, didactic examples of his utilitarian approach to architecture. Though he had state of the art glass-techniques available in Venice, Lodoli focused on the details surrounding the panes. Starting from the top, they are composed of the following: a stone overhang that protects from rain, an arch and two columns that structurally allow the opening to exist, two typically Venetian exterior blinds that protects the opening, and two interior shutters with extensive glass portions that allow light but not air to enter. The most notable components in this assemblage are the windowsills. Made of stone, their horizontal surface is engraved to convey water away. The windowsill to the left (if looking at the façade) features a straight incision in the center; the one to the right features a double-curve incision as well as a straight incision in the center, ending with a hole through which water can drain. These variations, responding to the same utilitarian task, represent the creative freedom Lodoli allowed himself in the margins of his objective pursuit of utility. The U shape of the windowsills is also not reflected on the interior, where only the upper part emerges from the wall: the window is an independent element embedded in the façade: the isolation of the window suggests how Lodoli's functionalism considered architecture as an accumulation of elements conceived independently from each other.
Lodoli's disconnected windows, coming at the very beginning of modern architecture, suggest why the metaphor of the window as an eye never gained a strong footing. On the other hand, buried within modernism there were several cases in which windows get very close to being conceived as eyes...
13.	Carlo Lodoli, Elementi dell'architettur^M lodoliana: o sia I'arte del fabbricare con«J scientifica e con eleganza non cap/vcciosS (Roma: nella Stamperia Pagllarini, 1786)
The following year the same Andrea Memmll published another book based on Lodoli's ° I writings: Carlo Lodoli, Apologhi immaginJMI sol estemporaneamente in voce esposti ao/-8 1 amici suoi dal lu fra Carlo de' conti Lodo/n^H osservante di S. Francesco (Bassano- RPm„
1787).
14.	Emil Kaufmann, Three Revolutionary
Boullee, Ledoux and Lequeu (Philadelphia' Th^ American Philosophical Society, 1952)440 Bruno Zevi, Storia deH'archltettura modwiffl (Torino: Einaudi, 1950), 209-210.	H
15. "Non potevano i Greci ragionare più jjj^H Se fosse rappresentato quello che in verità o nel probabile ed usato non potesse stare' % come per esempio una donna con tre occhl m od un uomo con due nasi, sarrebbe questo' J senza dubbio contro la buona ragione," In Carll Lodoli, Elementi I, 331, quoted in: Marclj^H "Architectural Lessons of Carlo Lodoli (1690-4 1761): Indole of Material and of Self," Ph.D, di« McGill University Montréal, 2005, 96.
16. This phrase is a shortened quotation from M Vitruvius' motto: "Architectura nascitur ex fabrica1 et ratiocinatione" ("Architecture comes from :fl building skills and from theoretical speculation'’). The evocation of Vitruvius was meaningful for 1 Lodoli since he derived his fundamental belief W that function was an expression of truth from m his own Interpretation of Vitruvius, see: Neveu, j “Architectural Lessons", 2005, 89-90. |
WINDOW
PAGE 73
2010s Posthumous reinforcement of LodoliKunctionalism: AC is added, requiring the sacrifice of a shutter.
1742 Lodoli: functional decoration, to channel water from the exterior sill into a small drainage hole in the center.
PAGE 74
WINDOW
4.	RITUALS OF SCHOLARSHIP
Alvar Aalto's Baker House Dormitory, Cambridge MA, 1946-49
"Strong, big, masculine and powerful, it outstepped the small, hermetic, pictorial world of the late 1930s in America and reached toward the possible grandeurs of architectural form."17
When, in 1950, Vincent Scully praised Alvar Aalto's dorm for 310 students18 along the Charles River in Cambridge, Massachusetts, he collected a now provocative array of gender-problematic adjectives. What is more notable though is how Scully emphasized the anti-pictorial quality of a building that was actually expressly conceived to create the most beautiful available view for each student's room. While the building itself was not picturesque to look at, its plethora of carefully placed windows created picturesque scenes when looking out. The Baker House is maybe the most powerful evocation within modernism of windows acting like eyes - perfectly assimilated to the eyes of the students.
The Baker House reflects Aalto's dream of a new humanism that, he believed, would have helped the world to overcome the disaster of the Second World War and alleviate the danger of a new conflict between capitalism and communism. This humanism, like classical Renaissance humanism, was strongly connected to the prevalence of the optical. Vision and windows were central to his MIT classes, though he was also sensitive to haptic qualities in architecture, demonstrated not least by his 1926 essay on the atrium of the Finnish house. His first course at MIT, in 1940, took the design of small villages in rural Finland as a theme: students had to arrange the houses based strictly on visual issues,19 and window views played a crucial role. Each house had to enjoy the best possible views while avoiding a view into the others.20 Aalto's attention to the view from windows became increasingly important in his built work, demonstrated in the bay windows of the bedrooms at the first floor of the Villa Mairea, 1937. Each of these window was conceived to allow a wide view, but without the risk of looking inside the other rooms. This conception of the window as a device that maximizes the visual freedom of each inhabitant, without interfering with the privacy of others, speaks of how Aalto's windows were linked to his ambition to promote a new, discrete and subtle humanism through his architecture.
17. Vincent Scully, "Doldrums in the Subiría in Modem Architecture and other fssaysiB ed. Neil Levine (Princeton and Oxford- 'H Princeton University Press, 2003), 141 l¡
18. Peter Reed and Kenneth Frampton (ed & Alvar Aalto: between Humanism and New York: Museum of Modern Art 1998) 'Srn' (ed. It, 93)
19. Eeva-Liisa Pelkonen, Alvar Aalto: architecture modernity, and geopolitics (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2009), 129. Lee Hodgen Schildt, a former student of Aalto at Ml' testified: "The whole idea [of Aalto's didactics], ' was to cultivate the 'eye' for form, there is no method for this," see: Schildt, Alvar Aalto, 582. "5
20. Pelkonen, Alvar Aalto, 129 and Image 73, 131.
Creeping vine: Aalto's initial façade idea for Baker House would have created a framework for ivy around the windows, if costs had permitted.
Curved façade framing views of the Charles River. Each window is divided in three parts: one tall portrait (left), and an operable sash (right), creating in effect two small landscape windows.
PAGE 75
received the commission for Baker House, immediately after the Second World War, clear to his clients21 that his aim was to infuse the maximum amount of site-specificity into ^Hflding. From the point of view of economics, a linear building would have been most efficient, ^Hjjped on the longest axis of the lot, parallel to the river and with a central corridor distributing ^B^ches of standardized rooms. Instead, he designed a curved façade along the Charles River, ^»which most of the rooms were distributed.22 The goal was to give each room a unique view 3° j^e most attractive side of the site, and, at the same time, to minimize the noise coming from ^K0n the road which runs along the river. The rooms' windows had to be eyes, not ears...
forking
with a stringent budget, Aalto designed the windows of the Baker House with standard ais and components: timber frames, aluminum sills, copper flashing on the upper profile;
maten
jLgble windows had a sliding sash. Aalto originally designed a grid on the façade facing the river ¡¡riling ¡vy, which would filter light, but had to renounce the idea due to its cost.23 The window *LeS. made of timber, had the added benefit of resembling the frame of a painting, making the seem more picturesque.24 The presence of the horizontal bar of the sliding sash, exactly at eye H^'was an unavoidable obstacle to the alignment of the windows with the eyes of the inhabitants; »{he windows of the stairs on the northern side, Aalto's assistant, Veli Patela, advised him to avoid stl windows for exactly that reason.25
the layout of the rooms, on which Aalto concentrated his efforts,26 was organized with the window as the focal Point- From a seated position at the desk and from a lying position on the bed, eye level ¡s more or less level with the lower portion of the window; from a standing position the eye is at the ievel of the upper portion of the window. Each window thereby suggests two possible views of the wer, which he personally enjoyed: "Today I'm in a fairly good mood. The sun has been shining all the day over the snow drifts and the frozen Charles River..."27 Ultimately, ergonomics was key:
Aalto based the Baker House on the relationship between the windows and the eyes of a seated, ofa lying, of a standing body - the three positions that define the daily cycle of the student's life.
Up close: views of Baker House itself.
21 Goran Schildt, Alvar Aalto: His life (Jyvaskyla: Alvar Aalto Museum, 2007), 585.
22	Due an increased number of students to be accommodated,
Aalto had soon to introduce exceptions, putting rooms also on the northern façade.
For the various steps of the room number's increasing, see: Schildt: Alvar Aalto, 584, 588.
23	Schildt, Alvar Aalto, 587. A close-view drawing of the façade featuring this solution is in the Archive of the Aalto Museo, SIGN 42/350, "Typical Detail of Elevation (Over SW Corner of Dining Room)." For a sketch perspective of the whole façade, see:
Reed and Frampton, Alvar Aalto.
24	When the choice was still open between aluminum or wooden frames, Paatela was worried about the thickness of the horizontal bar of the latter, see " Letter to Alvar Aalto," sheet two of the translated version, Archive of the Alvar Aalto Museo,
20.34.
25	"I think they [the windows of the cantilevered part on the north façade] should be undivided because a horizontal dividing bar would end up at exactly eye level." Veli Paatela "Letter to Alvar Aalto, April 28, 1947," sheet 2 of the translated version, Archive of the Alvar Aalto Museo,
20.34.
26	Reed and Frampton, Alvar Aalto (ed. It., 93).
27	Letter of Aalto to his wife Aino, January 3 1946, reported in: Schildt, Alvar Aalto, 579.
PAGE 76
5.	POLITICAL IDENTITY
Mario De Renzi and Saverio Muratori's housing project, Tuscolano,
Rome, 1950-54
Mario De Renzi and Saverio Muratori were well-known characters in the Italian scene of modern architecture when, in 1950, they designed a 64-apartment housing block in the Tuscolano, a new neighborhood for nearly 20,000 inhabitants on the southern edge of Rome.28 They had gained fame as young architects during the 1930s in competitions organized by the Fascist regime to re-design significant areas of Rome.29 The political situation in 1948 was radically different and the Inacasa, the housing program of which the Tuscolano was part, was conceived and promoted by the ruling Christian Democratic Party,30 which had secured power in the April 1948 elections. The party's twin enemies were the memory of Fascism and, more important, the menace of Communism: the architecture of the Inacasa neighborhoods had the duty of being both anti-Communist and anti-Fascist.
To fulfil the first goal, the Inacasa apartments were to be sold to their inhabitants with a 25-year mortgage, in order to augment a growing class of homeowners.31 The second ambition fell to urban design and architecture: rigidity and monumentality had to be avoided. To avoid rigidity, De Renzi and Muratori broke their 200 meter long building with a 30° angle. To avoid the monumental effect of smooth masses typical of Fascist buildings, they made the concrete structure visible in the façade and used coarse tuff blocks for the external walls. The walls were then punctuated by some 450 windows featuring traditional external shutters, in pointed opposition to the rolling shutters prevalent in Fascist architecture.
In making their design decisions, De Renzi and Muratori followed the guidelines of two booklets addressed to the designers of Inacasa, published in 1949 and in 1950.32 Northern European housing neighborhoods from the 1940s were proposed as examples,33 encouraging the Inacasa architects to take inspiration from the landscape, to avoid monotony in public spaces, and to insert as much green as possible. Courtyards were not allowed because they were associated to the dense blocks of old cities, considered unhealthy, and which offered limited horizons for the views from windows. Orthodox rationalist schemes with parallel buildings were discouraged because they were not directed to "real man but to an abstract being."34 Such guidelines suggested the views that were to be seen from the windows of the Inacasa apartments: semi rural picturesque landscapes.
The booklets addressed the form and typology of the windows, the general invitation being to "simplicity and clarity." These two concepts helped facilitate the main goal of Inacasa: to fight unemployment by creating new jobs in the building field. To achieve this goal, the designers of the Inacasa buildings privileged traditional techniques that required little capital and much labor, and avoided préfabrication. "Simplicity and clarity" in windows was in fact translated into the use of traditional windows with double sash openings and exterior shutters. The sample projects illustrated in the booklets all featured shuttered windows with a portrait-like ratio of circa 1:3 between width and height.
28.	The two architects were leading a ardim
which gained the commission (or the	?
of a portion of the neighborhood, the Tuscolano II, see: fonny Farabegoli, "Oltrd^^l neorealismo. II Piano Fanfani a Roma," ¡n; grande ricostruzione: il piano Ina-Casa e /'hLJH deg// anni cinquanta, ed. Paola De Biaai (b a 'a Donzelli, 2001), 419.	a °SM
29.	In 1932-35 Muratori was a member of th i design team of the Cittá Universitaria, ¡n iqí,
he was a runner-up in the competition for th^SB never built Palazzo del Littorio, in 1938 he ex-aequo first prize for the Piazza Imperiale^M Eurarea, see: Giorgio Ciucci, Gli architetti "Y^ fascismo: architettura e cittá 1922-1944 n ■ 3 Einaudi, 1989 and 2002), 132, 141, 188. d6r V in 1926 was a member of the winning groun'Sl competition for the Quartiere dell'Artigianas^M 1933-34 he was selected for the second ph ’ln of the competition for the Palazzo del LittM^^I 1938 he got the ex-aequo first prize for the Ar Palace in the Eur area, see: Ciucci, Gli architettl'V 87, 188, 142.	'
30.	The official denomination was: "Piano di legge per incrementare I'occupazione A operaia agevolando la costruzione di case per lavoratori" ("Plan for augmenting thewgrial^B class employment through encouraging the :| construction of houses for workers"). The plan was approved with law n. 43/1949, published
in: Gazzetta Ufficiale, 54 (7 March, 1949). The denomination Inacasa was due to the fact that employees of the Istituto nazionale di assicuraziori (Ina), a state owned insurance company with offices in all big and medium towns and expertise in real estate management, were used to make the program functioning. The abbreviation Ina was then flanked with the word Casa (house),
31.	Sergio Pace, "Una solidarleta agevolata. *
II Piano Ina-Casa 1949-1963," in Passegna, 54 (1993), 20.
32.	Piano incremento occupazione operaia. Case per lavoratori. 1. Suggerimenti, norme eschemi per la elaborazione e presentazione del progetti. Roma: 1949. Piano incremento occupazione I operaia. Case per lavoratori. 2. Suggerimenti esempi e norme per la progettazione urbanística. Roma: 1950
53. The illustrated cases were: Copenhagen ] Sudparken; Lidingo; Grdndal; Copenhagen | Utterslev Mose; Kungsaldugard, Goteborg; q Oy Vasay, Finland; Blidah, Copenhagen; I
Danvigksklippan, Stockholm; Sandviker,' Sweden, Bispeparcken, Copenhagen, see:	,
Piano incremento, 2., 18-29.
34.	Piano incremento, 1,10.
35.	Ponti in 1928 founded the journal Domus^ that besides promoting modernity in interiors J architecture, also published on modern building technology solutions. The apex of Ponti's technological engagement was the Montecatim headquarter in Milan that he designed as a showcase of state-of-the-art technology, the first fully air-conditioned building in Italy. book presenting the building empahsized its -technological features, see: II Palazzo per ufft M Montecatini (Milano: Pizzi e Pizio, 1938).
36.	Ponti added to the image of the house the * headline "Casa a tutti" ("Flouse to a\Y')-architettura, arti, arredamento: rivista per'a ricostruzione e per la casa di domani, 1,
(Milano: Garzanti Editore, 1945).
WINDOW
PAGE 77
1949-1956 Shutters as an element of local Identity: the only full spread color photo In the official catalogue of the Inacasa housing program Is dedicated to a minor project, a residential building In Pellestrlna, Venice, by architect Benedetto de Scarpls. The program ends In 1963.
Late 1930s Mario De Renzi: quasi-continuous windows with Venetian blinds for a Fascist bourgeoisie, Palazzina Furmanik, Lungotevere Trieste, Rome.
PAGE 78
)OW
Hints to use traditional windows were common in postwar Italy. The Milanese architect Gio Ponti, the most militant 1930s paladin of advanced building techniques,35 included four traditional shuttered windows in the sketch of a home to appear on the cover of the first issue of Stile,36 a journal aimed at directing the reconstruction. The "Manuale dell'architetto," a building handbook published in 1946 with US funds that had a crucial impact on postwar Italian architecture, also featured detailed drawings of traditional external shutters.
The use of typically local shuttered windows37 in the Tuscolano housing unit was not an exception in the Inacasa. Rather, traditional shuttered windows were a rupture in the architects' bios, since their most important buildings in 1930s Rome eschewed them. De Renzi's Palazzo Federici and Palazzina Furmanik, both large apartment buildings, had, respectively, rolling shutters on windows of traditional shape and semi-continuous windows shadowed by cantilevered terraces. In both buildings, the windows played a dramatic role in defining the public façades. Palazzo Federici was built for the lower middle class,38 the Palazzina Furmanik for the upper class,39 and the use of modern windows for both reflected one of the goals of Fascist corporatism: offering to all classes a new, modernity-engaged vision. By contrast, the shuttered windows of the Tuscolano offered to their working class inhabitants the reassuring details of a traditional building, evoking a pre-political identity, Christian, neither fascist nor communist.
De Renzi and Muratori's windows were a defining feature of the façade, as the eyes are a defining feature of a face. Unlike the Baker dorms, the windows of the massive unit in Tuscolano were designed more to be looked at from urban
space than as devices that selected a view on - partly because of the absence of any specific attraction in the surrounding landscape. In the buildings that De Renzi himself designed nearby, the windows have rolling shutters - the task of presenting local identity carried on by other features such as the roof, the tympanum.
The architects sought to offer an alternative modernity, grounded in a vision-centered Western conception of architecture.40 It was too late though: Eurocentric humanism already started to fade in architecture at the very beginning of modernism, when windows ceased to be implicitly considered as eyes for framing views or for representing specific identities on façades.
The windows as eyes metaphor would have no efficiency in presenting or defending a functional, modern approach to the window.
37.	The use of external shutters was diff«^L all Italy, though with significant local variati 'n In describing the windows of the Tiburtino ° a neighborhood in Rome (very similar to the o ü used at Tuscolano), Maristella Casciato
of "outside shutters in the Roman manner"^® see: Maristella Casciato, "Neorealism in Italian Architecture," in Anxious Modernisms.* Experimentation in Postwar Architectural Cult eds. Sarah Williams Goldhagen and Réjean Ure' Legault (Montréal: CCA, and Cambridge Ma and London: MIT Press, 2000), 34. On the otk* hand the only full-color, double page illus$^| in the official catalogue of the Inacasa features! a building in Pellestrina, Venice, with typjd^^l Venetian blind shutters painted dark green, ¿9 Luigi Beretta Anguissola, 14 anni del Piano Ina. Casa (Roma: Staderinl, 1963), 2-3.
38.	Maria Luisa Neri, Mario De Renzi: L'archite* come mestiere 1897-1967 (Roma: Cangemi (g 1992), 40, footnote 7.
39.	Maria Luisa Neri, Mario De Renzi, 57. fi
40.	For a discussion of how the consideration— of the window in Modernity as a mere conveyor -of light affected its "ontology", see: luhani * Pallasmaa, The Eyes of the Skirt: ArchitectufflL and the Senses (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons 2005). By contrast, a statement of the importjf of panorama can be found in an article that is deeply engaged with the idea of window as light-conveyor, see: Donald Dex Harrison, "Window into Wall," Architectural Review644 (1950), 122.
PAGE 79
1950 Mario De Renzi, Saverio Muratori: punctured shuttered windows for a Christian-democrat working class at Tuscolano housing, in piazzale Spartaco, Rome.
Shutters as statement against both communism and fascism...
PAGE 80
WINDOW
6.	WINDOWS AS ABSURD EYES:
JACQUES TATI, MON ONCLE, 1958
A hyperbole of the windows as eyes metaphor appears in the modern villa where the protagonists of Jacques Tati's 1958 movie Mon Oncle live. In a night scene, the heads of Mr. and Mrs. Arpel seem like pupils encircled by the two round windows / eyes of their bedroom. The whole house is transformed into a face, an ironic celebration of anthropomorphism in architecture. At the end of the 1950s, just before the modern mainstream ceased to play a pervasive role in the architectural field, anthropomorphism was relevant in words but not in buildings. Anatomical metaphors were used to present building solutions that were not anthropomorphic. Structure as skeleton, façade as skin, layout as circulation were linked to forms that had no literal relationship with the human body.41 These metaphors were rhetorical devices to present building solutions that were based on abstract reasoning rather than on aesthetic and visual principles.
41. The peculiar eye-quality of the window in S Europe was due to its connection to perspaffl | though other cultures also feature buildings eye-windows, though are often exceptions to " a rule. For instance, the Suchow garden and pavilions complex embodies an exceptional j Chinese example of an architecture that was '! largely based on windows as framing devices W of specific vistas, see: Werner Blaser, Chinese il Pavilion Architecture: Quality, Design, Structure Exemplified by China (Niederteufen: Verlag Arth„ Niggli, 1974), 119-190.	ur
1
T
KimDQWS are not eyes, or »VICTORY 0F THE CURTAIN WALL
WINDOW
PAGE 81
1985 Globalized curtain wall: China World Trade Center, Beijing, enveloped in glass curtain wall façade with no window punctures.
^Kugr looking out of the building (Baker House), or at it (Tuscolano), windows ^»strong connections to the genius loci, to the peculiarity of the place. But ^Meases are exceptions in the mainstream of modern architecture, as the joW was absorbed into the façade, and local specificities absorbed global ^Bces. This process has been interpreted through the lens of nostalgia for a Kne past, but it also resulted in the end of the need to express local identities ^Kjh architecture. The death of the anatomical metaphor - and especially the ^Ktion of the role of the window as something that has to represent the eye ly frame a view, as well as that of the façade as a "face" - liberated the rest world from having to follow a mostly western architectural dogma...
PAGE 82
>o
8. POSTSCRIPT: WINDOWS AS THE EYES OF THE ARCHITECT
Even against the current of modernism, which eliminated the idea of the window as a framing agent in favor of ribbon windows and glass façades, the metaphor of the eye was detectable in the homes of several architects: Konstantin Melnikov's house in Moscow (1929); Walter Gropius's house in Lincoln, Massachusetts (1939); and Leonardo Ricci's house in Monterinaldi, Florence (1949; modified in 1964). These three houses were not only conceived as manifestos, but they have been actually inhabited for decades by the three architects, all of whom had ambitions as writers and/or visual artists beside their role in the field of architecture.
Walter Gropius positioned his desk in front of a horizontal window facing north. From this window he could see towards the street, possibly anticipating who was coming. In the night, with feeble light outside and desk light on, the window would maybe become a mirror in which he could interrogate himself.
Konstantin Melnikov was deeply fascinated by sleep. Fie thought this activity crucial to regaining an inner serenity through the illumination of dreams. He conceived the hexagonal windows of his cylindrical house to save bricks in the construction of the external walls, a utilitarian alibi that helped him transform the urban environment outside into a constellation of dream-like fragments.
Leonardo Ricci wrote in 1960: "You can go to sleep in a room that was conceived as a blind box, or you can go to sleep after looking at a starry sky." From his bed he could see the sky from a big window looking to the south-east, which he nicknamed the "window of the moon."
WINDOW
PAGE 83
1927-29 Walter Gropius, house in Lincoln, MA.
1929 Konstantin Melnikov, house in Moscow.
1949-64 Leonardo Ricci, house in Monterinaldi, Florence.
PAGE 84
WINDOW
ABSORBING MODERNITY:
JAPAN'S GLASSMAKING MISSION
Glass windows are not a part of the repertoire of traditional Japanese architecture, which instead relies on paper shoji screens to allow in light, and, when open, air. The introduction of glass forces Japan to begin differentiating between the window and the door...
In 1867 - one year before the Meiji Restoration triggers Japan's ambitious program to modernize on its own terms - a Japanese delegation travelling to the Paris Exposition is "amazed by the steam locomotive, but even more so by the windows of the carriage. The dresser and hairdresser of the party, called Tsunayoshi, having eaten a peach, threw the stone outside, thinking that it would fly through the window, only to find it bouncing back and hitting a passenger. He could not believe it and stuck his hand through the window, to feel what was between him and the landscape outside that seemed so close. After close inspection he ascertained that it was a transparent wind-owpane. This chonin obviously did not know glass." (Ian Hill Nish, The Iwakura Mission in Europe and America, 1998.)
In 1871, the emperor dispatches the Iwakura Mission to Europe, led by Iwakura Tomomi. The mission is tasked with studying the infrastructure and industry of the West, and visits the Crystal Palace (reconstructed on Sydenham Hill in south London; "the architectural style of the building, and the design of its garden are among the best to be found in this country"), the Pilkington glass factory, and the glassworks of La Cristallerie de Val-Saint-Lambert, Belgium. "The company hires daily 1,700 men, and the glass they manufacture is hollow glass: cups, tumblers, wine cups, bottles, flasks and all kinds of tableware. ... Belgium has been exporting window glass, nails, textiles, candles, paper and other articles. Apart from the glass, these products hardly represented innovative technologies." During the visit, Iwakura decides that "To depend entirely on imports [of glass] is not in the interests of the economy and causes substalti^incfcnveSifcnce, moreover, so that sooner or later we must develop glass manufacturing ourselves."
11th century Pre-glass: two bands of open	16th century Wooden screens, propped un
louvers at Tofukuji Temple, Kyoto.	sticks to create eye-like portals at Nishihoncra1"
Temple Hlunkaku Pavilion, Kyoto.
1872 The Iwakura Mission to Europe: Iwakura Tomomi is flanked by four vice • mbassadors in western- ( style suits.

At a facility to educate Japanese craftsmen in glassmaking, an apprentice learns the Belgian technique of sheet glass manufacturing.
1906 Iwasaki Toshlya, !
scion of the Mitsubi-'T shi family, founds the Osaka Shlmada Glass. .' Company, the first Japanese manufacturer of sheet glass, after studying applied chemistry:1 in London.
1900 Traditional translucent paper screens toD replaced by glass. "The little sunlight from the "* garden that manages to make its way beneath eaves and through the corridors has by then o >. its power to illuminate, seems drained of the - H complexion of life. It can do no more than .acetal tuate the whiteness of the paper. I sometimes^* linger before these panels and study the sumwjj of the paper, bright, but giving no impression |H brilliance." (Jun'ichiro Tanizaki, In Praise ol . Shadows, 1933.)

WINDOW
PAGE 85
Ute 19th century Through a portrait shaped parte (left) and a mini-ribbon window (right), the PUtside can be seen, for the first time, even if Hfceens are closed, isolating the view from tfraphysical sensation of the outdoors.
1908 Hybrid: enormous western-style bay window / turret sits atop Japanese porch roof In Nishitani Ichisuke, Minamitsugaru County, Aomori Prefecture.
19th century Partial intrgration: in a mmka (country house) in Niihefri County, Ibaragi Prefecture, small portions of the shoji screen are given over to glass after the Meiji Restoration.	!
20th century Takeover: gridded façade screen, traditionally filled with paper, given over entirely to glass; Selka-tei, Sapporo City, Hokkaido.
18th century Shoji-screened: façade Billows views when opened, and light ^fcosed; Nara House, Akita City
^Bjfenge employs total transparency.
PAGE 86
WINDOW
ABSORBING MODERNITY II:
SAUDI ARABIA'S WINDOW BOOM
The discovery of massive oil reserves in the 1950s transforms Saudi society, and the Saudi window with it. The influx of foreign oil companies and workers (Aramco is not fully under Saudi control until 1980) brings new architectural styles and practices flooding into the country.
The traditional atrium house comes under attack from new small, subdivided land plots that demand light from all four sides and separation from neighboring houses. Walls are no longer shared with neighbors; set-back and enclosure comes to symbolize ownership. The courtyard is consumed; the space of the atrium is shifted fully outside, to the yard. The result is box-like structures in the middle of walled compounds. The façade then takes on more importance, and the window as ornamental element with it.
19th century Courtyard of a husaniyah (community building) in Qatif: windows hardly present, or necessary...
Courtyard ventilation system
Shelter in Saudi Arabia, Kaizer Talib (1984).
"Cool night air descends into the courtyard and fills the surrounding rooms. Walls, floors, columns, roofs, ceilings, and furniture are cooled at night and remain so until the late afternoon."
"...around noon the sun directly strikes the courtyard floor. Some of the cool air begins to rise and also leaks out of the surrounding rooms. This action sets up convection currents in the rooms which may afford further comfort."
"...courtyard floor and the inside of the house , get warmer and further convection currents :§ are set up by late afternoon. Ivlost of the cool air trapped within the rooms spills out by sunset."
Blind windows: unknown building in Riyadh, with windows painted on.
1950s Saudi Aramco compound, Dhahran, built for American employees of the oil giant and their families, featuring pitched roofs, large garages, and western style windows: large glass panes, causing high solar heat gain...
PAGE 87
Jfcindows traditionally performed more as ventilation K than apertures to afford views and light. The ^^■of window glass necessitates the widespread ^B^entation of air conditioning to compensate for the K natural ventilation. While glass windows and
are prominent, the infrastructure to sustain them ^■fctiiand remains concealed. The palace at Nasiriyyah, ^■¡nF|956, is one of the first completely air-conditioned ^Hlexes. It contained over nineteen miles of cooling to serve 120 structures.
^■can-suburban style developments are transplanted KJdesert with little concern for solar orientation or ¡n the form of brise soleil, or other possibilities, ■prefabricated migrant worker housing, the American ^Uard appears again, but in a cheaper, pared down
version.
Glass curtain wall office building with in-operable windows crop up next to traditional architecture in Jeddah, whose passive ventilation systems now have to deal with solar gain from the adjacent tower...
>1 Air conditioners skmark the glass idows of the Saudi ibian Ministry of fense and Aviation.
PAGE 88
WINDOW
2012 Many-windowed buildings: Abraj Al-Bait hotel complex, Mecca, designed by Dar Al-Handasah, with view of the Kaaba stone. In a refusal to surrender entirely to the global regime of the glass curtain wall, the hotels feature repeated columns of large, individual picture windows. With a small openable sub-window in the top corner, the windows retain a trace, likely unintended, of the Arabian tradition of small, square punctures in the façade.
WINDOW
PAGE 89
PAGE 90
YUANDA, LARGEST WINDOW MANUFACTURER IN THE WORLD
2010 The biggest window manufacturers in the world, according to share of global revenues, according to the Synovate Industry Investigation Report. Yuanda, based in Shenyang and established in 1993, is the biggest of all.
New developments around China equipped with Yuanda windows - some reminiscent of the mid-20th century American "picture window"...
2001 Luban Times Square, Qianghu.
2005 Guanggu Xinyu, Wuhan.
2002 Yaxin Meihao Renjia, Zhengzhou.
2007 Huaxin Haoting, Wuhan.
WINDOW
PAGE 91
Htg's window designs, with
f.-.llm
IfeopV ?
^p0|0gv with fine craftsmanship, good looks
ohnubidsealing inside and outside, with f optional thickness of 9, 12, 15, 18, 20, 25 mm ^K|ow is strong enough to be applicable for ' ^th high rise public buildings and residential
"Thermal insulating outward turning, and outward top-hang window: Adopting American advanced window technology, with fine craftsmanship..."
HHding1
aEfin,l . ... i i can be customised into *kr|ous colors, so as to fit into façade and S&nïctesigns
Window frame is clean-free, fix-free. ^KL, so

"Thermal sliding window Energy saving window, learning from the essence of American and European technology
- The window surface is fabricated
through oxidation, Fluorocarbon coating, Electrophoretic coating and powder coating. It could be made into any color. It can also fake into steel, or wood."
FW?F/P*3«t
Inward turn & trft window
Outward turning window
Outward top-hang window
*¥■*>»*
Horizontal mid- pivoted window
■ ana»»	siee
fr®*1 Divot reversible window	Vertical slidino window
windows, possible views.
«ni p,
Rssible
Outward movina window
»tîæ
Sliding window
PAGE 92
r mm	-w ■»—«—
STANDARDIZED
Numberless repeating windows in Hong Kong's mid-levels; façades painted partly in pink for differentiation.
«
WINDOW
PAGE 93
©Fi
rank van der Salm, Studio, 2006 (original in color)
PAGE 94
STICKER WINDOW
Every apartment in a tower in the Shibei district of Qingdao City, China, has an operable window, but that still leaves large expanses of the façade, around the stair well, without any openings. Rather than keeping the façade homogenous and blank, decals are applied, matching the appearance of the real windows...
sticker window
PAGE 95
PAGE 96
Belgian windows in the Congo: Remi Van Parys and the birth of
Sobinco
1987 Sobinco window factory, Belgium.
During the late 1950s Remi Van Parys became the director of a Belgian ironmongery company in Congo. He travelled throughout the country, visiting window and door makers, and heard the same complaint everywhere: the fittings they could buy came from Germany and did not fit in their Belgian windows. In less than one year, Van Parys conquered 80 percent of the Congolese market with the first fittings specifically designed for the imported Belgian steel windows. In 1961, back in Belgium, implementing the same strategy, he was the first to design fittings for steel and later for aluminum windows, forming the company the family still runs today, Sobinco (Société Belge de l'industrie et de la commerce), in Zulte. Over the past 50 years what began on a small scale in the owner's back garden has grown into a company with 30,000 square meters of production space, offices in Belgium and Portugal and points of sale in Poland and China, and with products exported to over 60 countries. In a globalized market in which factories specialize in particular components, Sobinco is the only manufacturer in Europe capable of producing every moving part of a window - 69 fittings is typical - in one factory.
AMO visits Sobinco to talk to Remi Van Parys and later generations.
Tiffany Obser How did Sobinco begin, and why did you start designing parts and not the entire window frames?
Remi Van Parys My wife and I started the company in 1960. And we are still the two associates. At that time, there were a lot of companies that produced windows and doors, but not that many that produced fittings. They require a completely different fabrication. It was a niche-market.
CONGO & THE STEEL WINDOW
TO Has the trajectory of your company been very closely tied with technological changes?
RVP From the 1950s, I was working as a director for a Belgian company in Congo - a Belgian colony at that time - that produced general ironmongery. They were producing fittings for steel windows, but also everything else you could find in a metal shop, such as cooking pans, and other tools. I never lived in Congo but I went there regularly, once for a research trip of four months, with very primitive means. It took a long time to get from one place to another.
1
1956 Remi van Parys, pioneer of steel windows and their complex components, departs for the Belgian colony of the Congo.
Late 1950s Brochure made for the Congo, ^ featuring center-pivoting window with razor-tni .jj profile; panoramic windows visible in the building opposite.
WINDOW
PAGE 97
Van Pary
tours the Congo in a Volkswagen
Beetle
I already knew a lot about fittings, hinges, locks and suchlike because in Europe I had visited a lot of companies where we bought the materials and systems.
I visited Holland, England, France and especially Germany. There were basically no fittings made for steel windows, only for wooden ones. Then in the 1950s there was suddenly, and especially in Congo, an interest in steel windows. The profiles were made in Belgium from hot-rolled steel. In Congo, steel windows became very popular because timber windows were more expensive and didn't last as long - they needed to be painted every three to four years. This wasn't necessary for steel windows because they had a coating protecting them from oxidation. Another reason for the popularity of steel windows was that architects were very fond of them, because the frame was very thin. They prefer a lot of glass, and less visibility of the frame. But of course there were some disadvantages too. The frames made from hot-rolled steel were not so precise.
^■¡quarters of Socobelaine, Van Parys's Kigolese company, featuring thin steel Iramel windows.
Departure: at Congo's Kinshasa airport; hollow brick pattern behind (alternative to the window), pd thin steel frame visible on the door.
Federico Martelli Would you say that the steel window developed faster in Congo than here in Europe?
RVP Yes, because in Europe we have different seasons, and a different climate. Condensation, typically associated with the early steel window frame, was a difficult problem to deal with here.
TO Was the growth of the steel window specific to the Congo or was this also happening in the rest of Africa?
RVP The same was happening in the surrounding countries. To continue,
I made that trip to find out what the problems were regarding fittings. We visited a lot of window and door makers. Everywhere I heard the same complaint.
The fittings they could buy came from Germany and did not fit in the Belgian profiles. I found out the reason for this problem, and what should be changed to fix it. When I came back from Congo in 1957 I started designing fittings and contacted some companies to produce them, but there weren't very many.
My fittings did not have the disadvantages the German ones had. They were adaptable to the Belgian profiles and could fit in easily. I made a catalogue of the fittings to show how they were made and how to fit them in the profile.
In the space of one year, we had 80 percent of the market in Congo.
TO Were they mostly windows for civic buildings, built by the Belgian government, or predominantly commissions by individuals?
RVP Mostly it was for the local people.
INDEPENDENCE
FM You were producing these fittings in Belgium to be sold in Congo?
to Belgium: a new team assembles, ■^»fabricate components for the new of aluminum windows.
RVP They were made in Belgium, but I didn't have my own factory at that time. The pieces were made by different companies - hinges, handles, locks, all made by different producers. Then in 1960 there was the big catastrophe: the independence of Congo. This was a disaster for the whole continent. It was too early for the independency, the people where not ready for it yet. The country had been growing better and better. After independence I went back two times to save as much money as possible because we were not allowed to transfer money from Congo to Belgium. When I came back here, I did the same research as I did in Congo.
I visited a lot of steel window makers and noticed that they had the same problem as in the Congo, because they were the same profiles produced in the same factory. Again I spent some time designing the fitting, I made another catalogue and I had the same success in Belgium that I |iad inihe CongoB^H
PAGE 98
WINDOW
ALUMINUM
TO When did aluminum enter the picture?
RVP Nearly at the same time, around 1960, aluminum windows came on the market. Until then, aluminum had only been used in cars and other products. But here a mistake was made. For aluminum frames, they just copied the shape and the fittings made for steel windows. Aluminum is a good conductor of heat and cold - which is not such a big problem in Congo, but in Belgium it is.
I have very old aluminum windows in my house, so I know what happens.
The cold from outside is quickly transmitted to the interior side of the aluminum frame. The result is that the frame itself becomes cold, but as the interior space becomes warm because of heating, you get a lot of condensation. Nevertheless, the aluminum window became very popular. I was the first one in Belgium making fittings for steel windows and also the first one making fittings for aluminum windows. I went back to the companies I used to produce the fittings for Congo, and asked them to produce ones for Belgium. In a very short time, I had a solid base of customers. At that moment, there were five companies in Belgium that produced fittings, but only for timber windows.
But now none of these five still exist because they didn't adapt to the times.
through the Sobinco office.
FM They could not handle the shock of modernization?
RVP I immediately had problems with the quality and the delivery times. Then in 1961 I decided to make the fittings myself. I started with two men and now there are over 500 employees here in Belgium and in Portugal. I surrounded myself with highly intelligent people. Now we have 25 engineers working to create better products, new materials, and new techniques. We are the only company in Europe that produces everything in the fittings ourselves, from raw material to finished product. And for at least the first 20 years we never took any money out of the company. All the profits were invested in the company, machinery, buildings...
COMPOSITE
FM What is blatant here is how the modern window is composed out of so many little parts. The window is never made in one place. It is dependent on the type of profiles and according to those profiles the fittings are designed. It's a combination of different aspects, which makes it really difficult to understand the whole window.
TO Indeed, the ingenuity is in what you don't see.
FM How have insulation regulations changed the industry? Did these norms have an influence on the design of the fittings?
Cedric Van Parys Only in the last 10 years. We have a person working for us who follows this very closely. He goes to commissions around Europe to see what will be the new regulations. Insulation is more related to the window profiles than the fittings.
RVP Also the strength is really important for the clients. That's why we have such a large testing area, which is unique in Europe. Also, burglary tests are really important now.
Digital/analog: drawing details for new fitting on the computer, with locks and a file next to the mouse.
WINDOW
PAGE 99
ot the office's ,*dows are operable.
CONCEALED
TO It's interesting to see that all the mechanics that used to be visible are now concealed in the profile.
RVP That's true, nowadays only the handle is visible. In the beginning it was not like that. Forty years ago, when I went to England for the first time to visit some customers, I looked at the windows and fittings there and I said to my partner: "It's like a Christmas tree." It had so many different parts. For every movement of the window they had a different system. It was an overload of fittings. That's why I showed them our pivoting system, which was much simpler. We did really good business with that product. Our pivots were one of our first big moneymakers.
TO Is the emphasis now more on the glass than the frame?
RVP Yes, no one likes heavy, thick frames. Steel ones can be very thin, aluminum is in the middle, and PVC frames are mostly very thick; otherwise they break. For bigger windows, they need to insert a steel tube inside the plastic frame to make it strong enough. But then they found a system in which the profile is made out of two parts held together with a very hard plastic, which is strong enough.
REGIONAL WINDOWS
TO What regional differences do you notice in the window?
RVP In the US they make all their frames far too slim. In the 1970s I made a trip through the US to visit 12 important window producers in 12 different states. The sections there made me laugh - they were so thin you could just break them. But they didn't care at that point, because they made houses that lasted for 10 years. In one of these factories, I was looking at those thin window sections and I asked the person concerned: "Is this strong enough to hold the window?" He answered: "The glass gives the strength." Then I asked him:
"So when the glass is broken, they have to buy a new window?" "Yes," he said.
TO A totally different mentality - obsolescence, even for architecture.
RVP I was very surprised about the Americans, they can go to the moon, but they cannot make a good window. In my suitcase I had some samples of really beautiful handles, but they immediately said that it was much too expensive.
I looked at what they used to make the handles. They had a long rod of metal and they cut it into pieces of the same length and then just screwed it on the side of the window. When I mentioned to him that this was just a roughly cut piece of steel on which people will hurt themselves while opening the window, he said, "They just have to take a file and make it smooth." After this trip it was clear that we couldn't do anything in the US. And even now we are still not distributing that much to the US.
FM If you see a window, can you see where in the world it comes from?
RVP I can recognize the fittings, not the windows.
FM I'm asking because I was looking at the window you have here in the showroom and the size of the window sections is really wide compared to for example the ones in Chile. It is a typical European phenomenon to have proper sections. In Chile, we have aluminum windows as well,
PAGE 100
WINDOW
but they are so much thinner because the environment and climate is so different.
CVP Sobinco makes products mostly for Europe, but even within Europe you can already see some differences: the windows made in Portugal for the more southern countries have much thinner profiles.
FM Recently I was in Lima, Peru, which is a city where it more or less never rains. Here the profile almost doesn't exist. They more or less pin the glass on the wall. From a distance the buildings might look the same as in London. But if you go closer you can see the differences.
TO Windows are still influenced by regionalism.
CVP It is probably a combination of the environment and the presence or absence of regulations.
TO Can you actually order a non-insulated window here in Belgium? Can you specify a window to your liking without considering the codes?
RVPIt is totally forbidden. You cannot do it...
"Beslag voor metalen ramen en deuren / Quincaillerie pour portes et fenêtres métalliques" Fittings for métal doors and Windows.
180° pivot window, models 1800-1840A: Perimeter locking set with 4 locking points.
WINDOW
PAGE 101

(ijndow ventilator: Polished aluminum and ■{feed in natural color, gold, or champagne.
Sliding window: steel frames have less detail, material too viscous for intricate extrusions.
Eedalumin.,.
■>ed , steel.
Sobinco Pivots, type 150°, in special alu-alloy foji steel windows, with built-in adjustable brake sy:

PAGE 102
EVOLUTION OF THE WINDOW FRAME
According to the material archive of Sobinco.
1950s
Steel frames have less detail, material too viscous for intricate extrusions.
1990s
PAGE 103
break with multiple silicon ribs ^^Hpfrooms for better insulation and to
strength of increasingly deep profiles
PAGE 104
WINDOW
0pUCTION PROCESS
WINDOW
PAGE 105
*U aluminum.
...into window handles and pivots.
After being drawn in 'Topsolid' software, and
converted via 'Powermill' to a language CNC machines can understand, designs for fittings are milled at speeds of up to 40,000 revolutions per minute.

PAGE 106
MACHINING
Zinc die
casting.
Plastic injection _ moulding, producing rollers and end caps ^ window fittings.
WINDOW
PAGE 107
inding
j painting and anodizing, fittings are Bin a "round vibrator" with grindstones, cleaned with soap and water.
POLISHING
Manual polishing.
Since 1988, automated stress tests are required under EU law. Depending on the dimensions, windows can be opened and closed up to 25,000 times by pneumatic machines.
PAGE 108
TESTING
Anti-burglary test, in which the "burglar" has to try to break open the window or door within a limited period of time.
r
WINDOW
PAGE 109
LsEmbling
Comer strengthening necessary for PVC frame.
Concealed window hinge (top).
Concealed window hinge (bottom).
All the pa:. :
Concealed link arm at the top for turn-tilt windows.
PAGE 110
HOW A WINDOW OPENS
Each time a turn and tilt window is opened, 69 individual components are called into action, each one hidden inside the window frame. Production sequence of Sobinco's 2013 turn-and-tilt model, the Chrono...

Complete fitting for the Chrono turn-tilt window, consisting of base set (top) and hinge set (below).
Base set Chrono turn-tilt n° 35110			
Corner transmission	30000-500	1	
- corner transmission housing	30000-500.1	1	zinc alloy
- connection leg	30000-500.2	1	zinc alloy
- connection piece	30000-500.3	1	zinc alloy
- mishandling device	30000-500.4	1	zinc alloy
- spring	30000-500.5	1	stainless steel
- leaf spring	30000-500.6	1	stainless steel
- leaf spring	30000-500.7	1	stainless steel
- locking roller	4000-357.10	1	stainless steel
	30000-530	1	synthetic material
Vent run on rest	30000-600	1	synthetic material
Bolt	30000-620	1	
- bolt	30000-620.1	1	zinc alloy
- locking roller	4000-321.2	1	stainless steel
Handle fixing screw	30000-690	2	stainless steel
Connection piece	30000-700 1		synthetic material
Frame run on wedge	30110-610	1	synthetic material
Keep	30140-800	1	
- keep	30140-800.1	1	zinc alloy
- fixing screw	4008-184.2	1	stainless steel
Bolt keep	30140-810	1	
-keep	30140-810.1 1		zinc alloy
- fixing screw	4008-184.2 1 1		stainless steel
Handle n° 30000-659			
-grip -clip -fork -	cover plate -	spring	4000-219.2 4000-217.3 30000-650.4 4000-217.SA 4000-217.6 4000-217.7	HHM 2 2	synthetic material zinc alloy synthetic material synthetic material
			
Link arm n° 35002-550			
- housing	32105-770.1 1 1		zinc alloy
- short arm	35002-550.3	1	stainless steel
-rivet	35002-550.8	1	stainless steel
- locking roller	4000-280.6	2	stainless steel
- stop block	30000-550.6	1	zinc alloy
- adjustment screw	DIN 7984 M4xl2	1	stainless steel
- fixing screw	4000-278	1	stainless steel
- rivet	30000-550.9	1	stainless steel
- anti slam shut device	30000-550.5	1	synthetic material
- connection piece	30000-550.7	1	zinc alloy
- rod	35002-550.4	1	aluminium
- rivet	30000-550.8	1	stainless steel
- keep	30000-550.10	2	zinc alloy
			
Hinge set n° 35140-10 (colour related)			
Vent part top hinge	30000-750-1	1	
- vent part top hinge	30000-750-1.1	1	brass
- clip	35000-750-1.2	1	synthetic material
- fixing screw	DIN916 M5x5	1	stainless steel
Vent part bottom hinge	35000-760-1	1	aluminium
Frame part top hinge	35140-750-1	1	
-frame part top hinge 35140-750-1.1 1			aluminium
- clamping plate	35140-750-1.2	1	aluminium
- clip	4000-120.6	1	synthetic material
- fixing screw	35140-760-1.3	2	stainless steel
Frame part bottom hinge	35140-760-1	1	
- frame part bottom hinge	35140-760-1.1	1	aluminium
- clamping plate	35140-760-1.2	1	aluminium
	35140-760-1.3	2	stainless steel
Cover bottom hinge	30140-760-3	1	synthetic material
			
Hinge set n° 35140-12 (not colour related)			
Screw top hinge	30000-750-2 1 1		stainless steel
	30000-760-2 1		stainless steel
	30140-750-2	1	stainless steel
Bearing piece bottom hinge	30140-760-2	1	
- bearing piece	30140-760-2.1	1	zinc alloy
- adjustment screw	30140-760-2.2	1	stainless steel
Screw bottom hinge	35000-760-3	2	stainless steel
Clamping plate bottom hinge	35000-760-4	1	
- clamping plate	35000-760-4.1	1	zinc alloy
- adjustment screw	DIN 915 M8xl2	1	stainless steel
Rods in synthetic material			
Adjustment rod 100mm Adjustment rod 150mm Adjustment rod 200mm Adjustment rod 250mm Adjustment rod 300mm Adjustment rod 350mm Adjustment rod 400mm Connection rod 160mm Connection rod 365mm	30000-100 30000-150 30000-200 30000-250 30000-300 30000-350 30000-400 30000-160 30000-365		synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material synthetic material
Some figures:			
Total amount of pieces	77		
Total different pieces	69		
Zinc alloy moulds	15		
Plastic moulds	20		
Press mould	5		
Turning pieces (rollers,...)	15		
Production checklist for every part of the Chrono turn-tilt window.
Production flowchart of seven pieces..
WINDOW
PAGE 111
Individual produced pieces Finished product, assembled into different
sets.	- k a
PAGE 112
BELGIAN WINDOWS IN THE WILD
In a nation of de-regulated, expressionists, or "ugly" homes (images here from UglyBelgianHouses.tumblr.com), the window - ribbon, picture, circular, trapezoid, oval, phallic, or absent -plays a pivotal role in the overall levity.

IO
PAGE 113
PAGE 114
Wl!>
WINDOW ANTI-MANIFESTO Undeclared doctrine for the 21st century
As windows increase in complexity, a new crop of experts has emerged to help decipher between the wide range of products on the market. Architects employ "specification consultants" to navigate design and performance requirements for a given program, structure, construction, and territory. Consultants consider a host of variables from wind pressure, permanent and temporary loads, air permeability, thermal properties, solar and light control, acoustic range, and pressure coefficients to determine the adequate size and thickness of the glass and to establish the adequate scale, type, and location of the frame, criteria that are legally and economically motivated. The increasing technicality of glass makes it impossible for architects to match the consultants' expertise in designing a window. A manifesto today would read more like a rule book...
1.	COMPLEX WINDOWS MUST BE PRODUCED BY LARGE MANUFACTURERS
Architect must seek out compatible window systems and combine them in accordance with their stated parameters. Small manufacturers cannot produce windows that accommodate precision fittings or work in a larger façade system.
2.	FRAME IS DICTATED BY GLAZING
Section must be adequately dimensioned for the glass area, wind loads and the system-specific seals. Larger glazing = greater wind loads and more substantial profiles.
3.	COMPLIANCE REQUIRED FOR NON-STANDARD SIZES
Products that are not standardized sizes and have no national technical approval or test certificate must get specific case approval from the highest national construction authorities.
4.	NEW APPROACHES TO PROFILES SHOULD NOT BE PURSUED
Ease of machining offers a wide range of options for profiles; experiments in form lead to commonly encountered defects.
5.	THE STRONGER THE FRAME, THE BIGGER THE WINDOW
The strength of the material enables larger panel windows. Slim profiles have prominent fittings and reduce the proportion of glass-to-frame size. Steel, with high torsion and bending stiffness, allows for more slender frames.
6.	GLASS MUST NOT TOUCH FRAME
Support packers are necessary between the panes and the frame to transfer weight evenly. The glass pane cannot have direct contact with the frame. Weight of the glass must be distributed by the bottom sash hinge. The support packers must be positioned so that the sash frame cannot deform. Packers are 80-100mm long and 2mm wider than the glass.
7.	AIRTIGHTNESS & WATER-TIGHTNESS MUST BE TESTED
All windows must have flexible seals to ensure the joints fulfill requirements for air and water tightness. They must have a one-piece, replaceable, continuous peripheral sealing strip that cannot be displaced. Window sill must have a slope of less than 5 degrees and project at least 30mm.
8.	PROFILES ARE DESIGNED FOR WATER DRAINAGE
Pockets of standing water should be avoided. Profile edges should be rounded slightly on the side exposed to weather. Multicellular plastic profile with metal sections will increase rigidity. Proper positioning eliminates the need for a thermal break.
WINDOW
PAGE 115
WHAT glass can do
frorn Michael Wigginton, jgsiass ¡n Architecture (Phaidon, 2002).
sun protection
chromatized louvers inside the glass cavity (by Okasolar)
radiation blockage
coated film blocks radiation and thermal transmittance
redirect light
mirror surface and acrylic surface change light course (by Siemens)
fire-barrier
clear gel converts into fire-proof crust at high temperature
sound barrier
conventional spacer with molecular sieve
thermal shield
acrylic capillaries inhibit convection
PAGE 116
WINDOW
DEALING WITH SUNSHINE
Left to their own devices, buildings rapidly heat up to intolerable levels. Windows are usually the scapegoats. Increasingly expected to provide transparency for the outside world to surveill the inner workings of a building, and to provide floor-to-ceiling, uninterrupted views from the inside, the net result is a greenhouse, ironically a sustainability nightmare, difficult keep cool with the first appearance of the sun.
The Solar Gain calculation, imposed by sustainability standards everywhere, is treated with almost mystical significance: the architect has to know what she is up against, in order to calculate the raft of measures that will needed - shading, ventilation, orientation, mechanical cooling - in order to make the building inhabitable and sustainable, at least in a perfunctory sense...
Calculating solar heat gain requires understanding all the factors that influence the temperature of a building. All the following heat "loads" are added together - in a set of criteria here determined by the Air Conditioning Contractors of America - to arrive at the final Heat Gain figure that will have to be mitigated:
Building surfaces: (area) x (U-Factor) x (temperature difference) = BTUs* per hour Glass area: (solar gain factor) x (area of window per direction/face of building)
Lighting and equipment load: (kWh total load) x (3,413 BTUs/kWh) = BTUs per hour People load: (number of people) x (200 to 400 BTUs/person per hour) = BTUs per hour Ventilation load: (CFM**) x (60 minutes/hour) x (number of people) x (0.018) x (temperature difference) = BTUs per hour
CFM = as required by code per person per hour of occupancy 0.018 = specific heat of air factor (BTUs per cubic foot per degree F)
Temp difference = outside to inside
* British Thermal Unit: the amount of energy needed to cool or heat one pound of water by one degree Fahrenheit
** cubic feet per minute (measuring the volume of air that moves through a space)
DETERMINING FENESTRATION ENERGY FLOW
Energy flows through fenestration via (I) conductive and convective heat transfer caused by the temperature difference between outdoor and indoor air; (2) net long-wave (above 2500 nm) radiative exchange between tbc fenestration and its surrounding and between glazing layers; and (3) short-wave (below 2500 nm) solar radiation incident on the fenestration product cither directly ftom the sun or reflected from the ground or adjacent objects. Simplified calculations arc based on the observation that the tcmpcratiircs of the sky; ground, and surrounding objects (and hence their radiant emission) correlate with the exterior air temperature. The radiative interchanges arc then approximated by assuming that all the radiating surfaces (including the sky) arc at the same temperature as the outdoor air. With this assumption, the basic equation for the instantaneous energy flow through a fenestration is
«=	SHOC^ptE,
is energy flow, W
- overall codfknent of heat transfer (U-tactor), WAnr-K.)
1„,i ■ intenor air temperature, * ( .tj “ total projected area of fenestn SlKitf, - Overall solar heat gainer
E, — incident total inadiance, W /nr
The quantities U„ and SHGC„ arc instantaneous performance indices- The principal justification for Equation (I) is its simplicity, which is achieved by collecting all the linked radiative, conductive, and convective energy transfer processes into Lr and SHGC. These quantities vary because (I) convective beat transfer varies as fractional powers of temperature differences or free-stream speeds, (2) variations in temperature due to tbc weather or climate arc small on the absolute temperature scale that controls radiative heat transfer rates, (3) fenestration systems always involve at least two thermal resistances in scries, and (4) solar heat gain coefficients depend on solar incident angle and spectral distribution.
Equation for calculating solar heat gain through windows.
1997 Alternative calculation, by the American Society of Heating Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers, for determining the flow of energy through a window.

PAGE 117
2. Internalized mesh: contemporary mashrabiya filters a view over London...
1 Triple glazing with in-built shading.
3-Optical shutters, using "Supertwisted nematic liquid crystal,' 3 type of LCD display that requires less energy.
NANO TUBES
4. Electro-chromatic shading, can be switched on and off.
^■|aers Aluminum CW60 Solar: "a building
fcm«i0tOVOltaic curta'n wa*l ancl ro°^
iB; Recording to the manufacturers.
PAGE 118
"JUST DRAW A RECTANGLE:"
THE LIABILITY OF WINDOW DETAILS
Posted next to the coffee makers at a large, national architecture firm based in the Midwest of the United States, a typed list of tips reminds employees of the company's drawing standards. Mostly populated with unremarkable reminders about dimensioning and line weights, one item sticks out:
"5. Only draw a rectangle for window frames."
By Anonymous Architect X
A senior project architect explains: the guideline is an issue of liability, of not assuming risk for someone else's work. Architectural licensing boards in the United States trumpet themselves as the gatekeepers of the "health, safety, and welfare" of the public, masking their members' fear of litigation under the lingo of social responsibility. The AIA Contract Documents put the Architect solely in charge of the administration of the contract (and its instruments of service: drawings and specifications), leaving the responsibility for methods of construction to the contractor (AIA Document A2012007, 4.22).
The contemporary window is a zone of technological elaboration, its thin profiles containing gaskets, weep holes, flashing, and insulation. With so many opportunities to provide conflicting information, abstraction is the rule. The window detail, designed by somebody else, is best handled in the written addendum of the specification, and verified later by shop drawings outsourced to experts. An architect can make themselves liable should they draw too much.
The replacement of abstract drawings with one-for-one modelling in software like Revit theoretically expands the scope of the architect's responsibility from the virtual to the real, since even elementary components are, by default, embedded with more knowledge than just their shape: extrusions can be assigned thickness, scheduled for quantity, and analyzed for performance. Yet the 'smarter' the object, the more danger for the architect. Sharing the data behind the model - for example, two metals that corrode when placed in proximity due to galvanic reaction - to parties that could build it directly from the model without the filter of further interpretation is an exposure to litigation for negligence. Indeed, firms that claim to "draw shop drawings" often leave a wake of lawsuits, an inevitability amid a proliferation of Revit data that demands management at a level of development that no firm can staff properly (in a context of falling architectural fees). The Revit "drawing" is an uneasy compromise: a collage of smoke and mirrors (or closely cropped viewports) of the "smart" model that barely obscures its dumbness. Until Artificial Intelligence can make up this labor gap, contracts will continue to privilege the two-dimensional work as the true instrument of service, and architects will only begrudgihgly share their models, under a pile of corhraltual disclairhgig and indemnifications.
1687 Hotel de Noialles, Paris, lean Marot. In 16th-century Italy and 17th and 18th-century France, the convention In building elevations is to represent the window as a black hole. The blank rectangle makes an unexpected return in today's Revit families and AutoCAD drawings: the voided window a hint of the omnipresent fear of taking responsibility for the window...
bibliography
AIA Contract Document A201-2007, American Institute of Architects.
Bachner, John Philip. Practice Management for Design Professionals: A Practical Guide to Avoiding Liability and Enhancing Profitability. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1991.
Heuer, Charles R. FAIA, and Arthur Kornblut, AIA. Construction i— Documents and Services. Chicago: Kaplan AEC Architecture, ¿““a
PAGE 119
TRAINED TO ERASE KNOWLEDGE:
In the training guide for the US Architectural Registration Examination (ARE), would-be ¿¿hitects are instructed to remove all evidence of ItieKowledge of a window assembly, which may incriminate them later if windows are not built fording t<§ the drawings and the specification, Hpnction, triggering a lawsuit...
2014 Window section, as provided by the Revit software package. In the popular architectural rendering software, specifics about the element can be adjusted automatically in the program (right). The representation of the window itself (above) - the architect's primary contractual obligation - Is made in the most noncommittal manner, even at a relatively large scale (here, at 1/2" = 1' Scale on the finest resolution level).


PAGE 120
PASSING THE BUCK IN WINDOW DESIGN...
In the US, liability for the performance of windows is a complex, highly regulated risk. The same window passes through several sets of hands at different stages of the design process, looking radically different each time, even at the same scale, as each author minimizes their risk by suppressing information about the window that falls outside of their perceived scope. Architects rely more on the carefully calibrated wording of the specification than on the details of the drawings that are issued to the client...
"Section 084100. 2.8: Fabrication. Fabricate components that, when assembled, have the following characteristics: physical and thermal isolation of glazing from framing, isolation of projecting components to prevent vibration, accommodations for thermal and mechanical movements of glazing and framing to maintain required glazing edge clearances, internal guttering system or other means to drain water passing joints, condensation occurring within framing members, and moisture migrating within glazed aluminum curtain wall to exterior, pressure-equalized system or double barrier design with primary air and vapor barrier at interior side."
— legally binding window specification for undisclosed residential building project in northwestern US city, spring 2014.
Describing performance rather than design, the all-important specification insulates architects from the risk of designing high-performance elements of buildings, particularly when it comes to windows and curtain walls.
The result of outsourcing the risks of design to specialists and suppliers is the legibility of the drawing: since the specification is a legally binding document that carries as much weight (and authorship) as the contract drawing, the danger of translating the ambiguous language of the spec into the concrete reality of the drawing is one that architects often avoid by drawing blank shapes instead of detailed window frame sections. The representational tools of Building Information Modeling (BIM) take this evasion one step further, embedding the performance of elements such as windows in computer code, but producing drawings as the most blank shapes imaginable, ready to be filled in by the window supplier through shop drawings...
By Anonymous Architect X
2.8 FABRICATION
A.	Form or extrude aluminum shapes before finishing.
B.	Weld in concealed locations to greatest extent possible to minimize distort’
discoloration of finish. Remove weld spatter and welding oxides from exposed <s. rf0 0r
by de-scaling or grinding.	' bUI|aces
C.	Fabricate components that, when assembled, have the following characteristics- '
1.	Profiles that are sharp, straight, and free of defects or deformations.
2.	Accurately fitted joints with ends coped or mitered.
3.	Physical and thermal isolation of glazing from framing members.
4.	Isolaton of projecting components to prevent vibration and limit aeroacoustic noise
5.	Accommodations for thermal and mechanical movements of glazing and framina t
maintain required glazing edge clearances.	9 0
6.	Provisions for field replacement of glazing from exterior, unless defined otherwise on the architectural drawings .
7.	Fasteners, anchors, and connection devices that are concealed from view to greatest extent possible.
8.	Components curved to indicated radii.
D.	Fabricate components that, when assembled, have the following characteristics:
1.	Internal guttering system or other means to drain water passing joints, condensation occurring within framing members, and moisture migrating within glazed aluminum curtain wall to exterior.
2.	Pressure-equalized system or double barrier design with primary air and vapor barrier at interior side of glazed aluminum curtain wall and secondary seal weeped and vented to exterior.
2014 Building specification (from an undisclosed project), assigning the manufacturer with responsibility for providing a system that isolates glass from metal, accommodates movement, permits fabrication in the field, drains water, fastens, etc. - essentially all of the functions that are dealt with inside the profile of a window frame. Legally, the spec holds as much weight as the drawings, so this document essentially assigns all the performance aspects of the windows to parties other than the architect; drawing anything else puts the authority of the written spec at risk.
WINDOW
PAGE 121
■nG in the BLANKS: FROM VAGUE ARCHITECT f|L%NGS TO CONSULTANT’S DETAILS
a!N| drawing
farchiteet
Consultant
_Ld along with .¡(¡nations; in the
ing [formation ^-performance Bded in each %parameters, ï drawing itself is | to the most llgry of shapes.
¿Contract drawing by: architect
¿window consultant
deluded in contract cuments along with lespec as a means of biding liability.
3-Shop drawing ^■contractor for architect to aPprove
jBptetailed design
•Outsourced to sPecialist.
PROVIDE NEW SELF-ADHERED WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE AT ALL SIDES OF ROUGH OPENING PRIOR TO WINDOW INSTALLATION-ENSURE COVERAGE TO MIN. 1/2" BEYOND INTERIOR FACE OF JAMB AND BEYOND JOINT BETWEEN MASONRY BACKUP AND EXTERIOR MASONRY VENEER. ENSURE SELF-ADHERED WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE LAPS ONTO AND EXTENDS INTO BOTTOM OF PAN. PRIME SUBSTRATE AS REQUIRED PER MANUFACTURER'S RECOMMENDATIONS. (TYP.)
PROVIDE NEW LCC PAN FLASHING PITCHED MIN. 1/8" PER FOOT TO EXTERIOR, WITH MIN. 2” TALL END DAMS, 3/8" HEMMED EDGE, AND REAR LEG SET MIN 1” BYD INTERIOR FACE OF SASH; SET OVER RED ROSIN PAPER OVER NEW SELF-ADHERED MEMBRANE, AND FASTEN AT EACH SIDE LEG WITH TWO (2) COPPER NAILS OR SCREWS (TYP.)
PROVIDE NEW SELF-ADHERED WATERPROOFING MEMBRANE OVER CLEANED AND PRIMED BACKUP AND LIMESTONE SILL MASONRY; EXTEND TO FULL DEPTH OF FRAME ONTO INTERIOR BLOCKING (TYP.)
FRAMING AND FINISHES
WEEP HOLE

2006	Integrated shading: "Finally we agreed on Integrating the shading in the triple glass, because It still keeps the interior and exterior àppearance of the façade clean and gives us higher thermal performance." SANAA, Fabrikstrasse 4, Novartis Campus, Basel.
2010 "To allow a double layer of this glass - with a walkable space in between to solve the thermal requirements and avoid condensation in the fully conditioned and humidified gallery spaces - we had to control the temperature in the façade plenum..." SANAA, Glass Pavilion at the Toledo Museum of Art, Toledo, Ohio.
"During the summer, the analysis helped us to prove the shading concept, which was developed in close collaboration with Petra Blaisse, combining our physical requirements with art and craft solutions to find a material acceptable for design and function."
PAGE 122
SANAA AND SHADING
PAGE 123
WINDOW
Opening the un-openable window: Matthias Schuler
Despite all the many things windows can do in the 21st century - generate energy, self-tint for shading, insulate - mostly people just want them to open. Matthias Schuler and his company Transsolar use computation simulations to find design solutions that address these most basic window functions while minimizing a building's ecological footprint. Schuler discusses the monetary benefit of operable windows, the invisible properties of modern windows, and the popularity of the merely "rhetorical” window...
Tiffany Obser If the window used to moderate between interior and exterior in a way that was attenuated to local conditions, could we say that the technical advances in window profiles and glass have rendered the traditional functions of the window moot?
Matthias Schuler I would say this depends on the architect. Sejima-san wants to have it as clean and simple as possible, so for SANAA'S Novartis building in Basel we had long discussions about shading because, in a certain way, she just wanted a curtain of glass. Finally we agreed on integrating the shading in the triple glass, because it still keeps the interior and exterior appearance of the façade clean and gives us higher thermal performance.
TO Can you talk about your use of fluid dynamics to model the windows of SANAA'S Toledo Glass Pavilion? Does the level of precision that can be achieved today in terms of predictive analyses of performance increase our expectations of comfort and decrease our tolerance of changes in climate?
MS It started with the climate of Toledo, which has cold winters, and SANAA'S vision of a clear low-iron glass without coatings to maximize the transparency.
To allow a double layer of this glass - with a walkable space in between to solve the thermal requirements and avoid condensation in the fully conditioned and humidified gallery spaces - we had to control the temperature in the façade plenum. We couldn't do this with warm air, because forced air along a surface increases convective heat transfer, diminishing the insulation performance of the glass. So we used radiant heating from the floor and the ceiling, which controls the temperature of the glass but doesn't reduce its resistance to convective heat transfer - which is the only insulation base of an uncoated glass. We finally proved the concept with computational fluid dynamics, which includes the effects of convection and long and short wave radiation, thereby producing a model that could reduce the necessary supply of warm air by a factor of 10. During the summer, the analysis helped us to prove the shading concept, which was developed in close collaboration with Petra Blaisse, combining our physical requirements with art and craft solutions to find a material acceptable for design and function.
j- gj environmeniai iscnnoioçjy Graci
^^Kder of Transsolar.
PAGE 124
HATCH IN THE MULLION
2011	Separation of view and air supply: at the ADAC building in Munich, a hatch in the mullion alongside the inoperable window. Opening inwards, the hatch allows for ventilation without impacting the appearance of the building from outside.
mullion
ventilation hatch in mullion
glass façade
2013 Operable mullions of De Rotterdam: the glass of the curtain wall cannot be opened, but the mullion in between the glass can be.


WINDOW
PAGE 125
PROFITING FROM THE OPEN-ABLE WINDOW
TO What has been your experience with operable windows?
MS: The understanding or the expectation of a façade in Europe is quite different than other parts of the world, particularly North America. For example, in downtown Stuttgart if you put an office on the market, you get typically five euros per square meter more in monthly rent if the building has operable windows. Typical rents are in the range 15 euros/m2, and you gain around 30 percent more if the building has an operable window. So even if an operable window costs 1,000 euros more, the developer will gain it back in three years. We did a refurbishment project of the Zeppelin Carré with Auer+Weber and Michel+Wolf Architects, a block in the center of Stuttgart across from the train station.
The problem we had is the very high noise level, of 78 or 79 decibels, which normally by German codes wouldn't allow for open windows. But even the developer was pushing for a ventilating window, a kind of boxed façade with screened glass on the outside which is permanently ventilated at the top and bottom. A feeling of a connection to the outside is partially about noise. If you open up to the outside and get a breeze, you hear a little bit what is happening outside, instead of sitting in an aquarium with only a visual connection to the outside where your other senses are disconnected.
THE MINIMAL WINDOW
TO The ingenuity in windows now is in what you don't see: the accoutrements and the engineering are completely hidden within the profile. One of the most sophisticated building elements is almost rendered invisible.
MS Windows in the last 25 years were the strongest building element - the coatings, the triple glazing. You don't see that there are three panes of glass - and that two of them are coated with metal films, and that the spacers connecting the three panes are super insulated with thermal breaks. What is interesting is that most of it is hidden. Architects want to have it as pure as possible. It is quite a contrast to the Bauhaus façade, because with Gropius, all the mechanics of the window are totally exposed. Dean Nouvel's Institut du Monde Arabe, from 1987, is an exception to the contemporary trend: there, the windows expose all of their mechanics. Nowadays there is a kind of purity to the window; SANAA would even sometimes put purity above function. This is one lesson we learned from the Novartis building. In this case the position and size of the façade indicated the need for shading. But in this case you have big pieces of glass, which are I think 3.5 meters high and 2.6 meters wide. Sejima-san pushed the width to the absolute extreme that the manufacturer could allow. But people still want to connect to the outside. The approach was to have in the window frame operable cracks, or motorized flaps, but they were removed from the design because they were too expensive. In the end, the building was realized with a fixed, inoperable façade. OK, it has a decentralized ventilation system so fresh air in a certain way comes through the façade, but one of the biggest criticisms of. this building from the people using it is exactly this point: they say, "I cannot open the façade." So the lesson we learned from this project is that we had to be more stubborn or diplomatic in advocating for these operable elements.
TO Looking at the history of the window, we see that it used to be an identifiable place in a room or a building. Do you think the window has lost its potency as a place-making element and become a device?
MS What typically has to be negotiated with the window is the visual connection to the outside, the supply of light into the space, and then some form of mitigation thrbugh shading. When you focus the window on these functions you miss its other functions: providing a connection to the outside through air, sound, and space. If you go to the US the function of air supply has been cancelled by basic mechanical ventilation systems, and by teaching people that they don't need to open the window. In Europe the ability to
Indoor Comfort Temperature, Top(°C)	Indoor Comfort Temperature, Top(°C)
PAGE 126
NDOV
tolerance increases with an open window...
Buildings with Centralized HVAC
At 25 degrees outside inhabitants who rely on
HVAC will tolerate an
interior temperature o| 23 degrees maximum
Outdoor Temperature Index, ET* (°C)
Buildings with Natural Ve^i.^J
mfort
Outdoor Temperature Index, ET* (°C)
At 25 degrees outside, :
inhabitants who are |
able to open their window will tolerate an|
interior temperature o
25.3 degrees, warmer 1 than the outside
PAGE 127
Jt-QpernM	greater
^Hkture tolerance. A study by Knerlcan Society of Heating, liLrating and Air Conditioning *Teers reveals those used to vei>
^Kratures and humidity that find comfortable, whereas jpants who can open their lows can be comfortable at land higher temperatures.
Krti.'l-
"Mitch should change ASHRAE
tandards i'c <'	'
ilslpehdlng on whether •hebuilding Is naturally or mechanically ventilated.
■Based on ASHRAE-funded research this article argues that adequate scientific basis now exists tb amend Standard 55 to include a more 'adaptive' field-based Alternative for application (onaturally ventilated buildings." -Gall Schiller Brager, Ph.D. and Richard de Dear, Ph.D., "A Standard for Natural Ventilation," ISHRAE Journal, 2000.

connect with the outside is a valuable feature that is still demanded. But the need for operability and for ventilation can create a problem with acoustics. In Munich, we just completed the ADAC headquarters building with Sauerbruch Hutton architects, where there is a sound insulated, manually controlled air intake opening in the mullion, parallel to the window. If you look In the flap there is a passage that reduces noise and mediates the difference in air pressure between the Inside and the outside, depending on the wind pressure on the façade. The component automatically controls the amount of air coming through the openings. It is similar to the volume control used In mechanical air systems, where the air flow moves through a hinged flap.
SEPARATION OF FUNCTIONS
TO So there are openings separate from the window that are capable of limiting the amount of air and noise that comes in?
MS Yes. But this system raises the fundamental question: what is a window? How do you define a window? In my opinion the window has two functions: light and air connection to the outside. Often we are talking about the desire of people just to open a window and stick their head out. I would call this an additional function, a physical connection between inside and outside. If you work in front of an open window, you feel like you're working outside. Maybe this Is connected more to houses than offices. But in my office I have employees who like to sit by an open window. I think that's what's interesting about considering the different functions of the window. Historically these functions were all combined In one element. But what we're starting to do in more and more projects is handle ventilation though the mullion. So you skip the physical connection to the outside -it is no longer possible. You divide the functions of visual contact with the exterior, natural light, and ventilation. By separating the functions It is In some ways easier to eliminate the threats from the outside - excessive noise, light, sun, cold, heat, moisture, dust, mosquitos, privacy. You can do them parallel to each other, leaving a fully transparent view through the glass. Or you can take the high-tech approach and try to integrate a lot of these functions into the glass. These functions might include: solar controlling triple glazing with a high selective or electromagnetic coating that solves noise, allows light in - but only half of It as energy - and protects against very low and very high temperatures, while establishing a connection with the air outside by means of an intelligent trickle vent with pollen filter, noise damper, air flow, and humidity control.
OPERABLE WINDOWS = GREATER TOLERANCE
TO Do you feel like your role is to advise clients on how to achieve both an aesthetic purity - like in the case of SANAA - but also a form of operability and connection to the outside?
MS I would say exactly this, it is merging the functions into one. There are German studies which show that the acceptance in offices of higher temperature and higher humidity is much higher as long as workers are able to open a window. In a sealed building the expectation is that the HVAC system's control of temperature and humidity is very precise. Since you have no way to control or influence it - other than perhaps by a thermostat -you expect that the machine Is perfectly controlling your environment for you. But if you have the ability to open a window the tolerance of different temperatures - and especially of humidity - Is much wider. This explains why, in Germany, if you have operable windows you typically don't need a de-humidification system. People accept humidity levels, which, If they were in an air-conditioned building, would make them complain.
TO So you have a much higher tolerance for climate extremes when you have a modicum of control over the window?

PAGE 128
RECLAIMING THE OPENABLE WINDOW
2000 R128, Werner Sobek's self-designed home in Stuttgart. During the day the glass reflects the wooded surroundings, at night it glows. Although it looks like a sealed box, the windows can be opened and closed to regulate internal climate.
OPENING THE CURTAIN WALL
Section through windows of R128, Odorless non-toxic, six times denser than air: argon; sfl efficient insulator, improves the window's r-value by 58 percent compared to double glazing (r-value = temperature value that causes heat to flow through a unit of area of material at he rate of one heat unit per hour.)
Low-e glass used: material with transparent % metallic oxide coating applied to inner surface, [ allows shortwave energy (light) to pass while reflecting longwave infrared energy (heat), 'm improves thermal resistance equal to 10 mm "* slab of rock wool.
2007-2017 Herzog and de Meuron's Elbphllharmonie, Hamburg: small rippling openings In the glass curtain wall.
O'
PAGE 129
MS Even the American Society of Heating and Cooling Engineering has, since 2004, issued a standard called ASHRAE 55-just updated last year-for naturally ventilated buildings, documenting how people accept increases in indoor air temperature if it's hotter outside. With an average monthly outdoor temperature of 32 degrees Celsius - meaning people understand that this is not just a hot day but summer - ASHRAE 55, coming from a country where air conditioning is a given, has found that people will accept 28-29°C indoors, even without humidity control. They would never accept such a high temperature in an air-conditioned building. People have a much greater tolerance for variations in temperature and humidity when they have control.
CROSS-VENTILATION VS. AIR CONDITIONING
TO What have you learned about the expectations of windows in Asia from your projects there?
MS We are working on some projects in Singapore and Kuala Lumpur. What's interesting in the housing there is the very strong demand for cross-ventilation, which was the traditional way to survive in this warm and humid climate before air conditioning. The demand in housing projects, from Thailand down to Singapore and Malaysia, is that high-level apartments should have cross ventilation for the bedrooms. People prefer to sleep in an outside connected space, even accepting higher temperatures and higher humidity, rather than sleeping in a sealed box. There is a very good example of this in a high rise housing project in Bangkok, called the MET. The floor plan is split up so that each apartment can be cross-ventilated at night instead of relying on air-conditioning. This is coming back from traditional vernacular architecture. Another good example is the Design School in Singapore, where people just live with cross ventilation and ceiling fans, and no air conditioning at all. We measured temperatures, humidity, and air velocities and - applying the new ASHRAE 55 - they show full comfort at air temperatures of 28°C and high humidity levels, as long as there are air speeds of 0.4 m/s.
CODED WINDOWS: PUNCHING HOLES IN THE PERFECT SEAL
TO To what extent is the window specified by code rather than designed?
MS What is interesting is that, for example, German codes and Swiss codes are the most rigid.
Most codes still focus on the U value, the insulation value of the façade or the window. This causes a push for triple glazed windows and even for frames that have U values in the range of 0.7 W/m2K. So even the frames must be similar in terms of insulation performance to the triple glazing itself. In the German code you must have a U-value for your envelope of below .4 W/m2K. But they don't talk about openings, so it's only a regulation for a closed window. If you open the window up, the code doesn't say anything about that.
TO So the code is designed for a sealed building?
MS By code you are forced to build a triple glazed window with a very well insulated frame and a very airtight construction. Then you either add a mechanical ventilation system or make the window operable. So we create these sealed boxes but then we have to cut holes in them because otherwise people would be dying inside because there is not enough air coming in.
TO So the code demands a perfect seal but ignores the fact that the seal then, precisely because it is perfect, also has to be broken? It creates a situation of extremes.
MS Yes. The code demands a closed façade, but this ignores the potential, or the necessary operability of the window. The code mainly relates to thermal losses and solar gains but is not so concerned with ventilation. In the Swiss system, depending on the glazing ratio of the façade, you have to guarantee a certain shading effect, to achieve gains below 10 percent, depending on the orientation. So I would say that the thermal losses, the solar gains, and even partially the daylight performance is quite clearly defined by codes. On the other hand, you can still go for a naturally
PAGE 130
WINDOW
Differentiation between window, balcony and façade in the glass curtain wall at Herzog de Meuron’s Elbphilharmonie...
window
PAGE 131
MS Exactly, for them it's more a transparent enclosure. Grace Farms, SANAA'S project in New Canaan, is the absolute extreme. Sejima-san wants, and in a certain way the renderings show this, a nonexistent enclosure. I think her vision is for just a roof and then the landscape floating through the building. Mies or Gropius also had this in mind. But I think that the understanding there, or the partial understanding, is that the window is more than the transparent separation between inside and outside; it is an element. It is a place; you could say: "meet me by the window." In a tall building you can't always walk down and stand in front of the building. So instead you stand in front of the window and you talk, like being outside. That's often totally missing now...
TO Who in the architecture world at the moment is pushing to express the full range of the window's potential functions? There's Diller Scofidio + Renfro's ICA ¡n Boston, where you have a window that projects over the water, or even Lincoln Center where a window of the rehearsal space juts into the lobby.
Or is that just a rhetorical window?
MS It is the rhetorical window and it is reduced to the visual connection, in this case they are clear American architects. They are reducing the window to this kind of visual connection, instead of thinking: wouldn't it be gorgeous at certain times of the year just to open it up? I think at the moment the best use of the window as a location would be the Elbphilharmonie in Hamburg by Herzog de Meuron where they modelled three-dimensional window openings to be integrated in the façade. The façade bows ; out, creating an opening, and you can sit there and hear and I smell Hamburg's harbor.
I^g |'m not so sure. At the moment, in the premier league of architecture, I would say that ([,6 window is really used mainly to achieve a transparent façade envelope.
tilated building and then you would open the window and the air would enter. One joke we have ■ e office is first you build a very tight façade and then you take the rubber seal out of the window Bnsure basic ventilation. Because a big problem of the highly sealed façade today is that the air Behange rate 'n hidings has been going down. You get more and more mold problems in buildings Beause there is not enough fresh air to take out the humidity, which increases by 50 to 70 grams Hperson every hour if you don't ventilate a space. Then at the weakest point of the façade you ^condensation and you get mold growing in your space.
oPEN WINDOW VS. TRANSPARENT ENCLOSURE
to yÿould you say that the window is going through a transition where it wants to be rable and wants to be a place, but it has also been consumed by a high-efficiency, high performance system?
TO So architects don't talk to you about the window so often?
PAGE 132
PERFECT SEAL
In 1930 Le Corbusier writes: "Every nation builds houses for its own climate ... At this time of international interpretation of scientific techniques, I propose: one single building for all nations and climates, the house with respiration exacte... I make the air at 18 degrees centigrade and at a humidity related to the state of the weather." (Precisions, 64.) The idea of a unified global architectural climate comes to fruition in the form of the man-made environment of the hotel chain, the corporate headquarters, the shopping mall, the apartment tower.
The window is by turns a victim and an accomplice in this scheme. In the ubiquitous glass-sheathed buildings of the late 20th century, windows have been permanently shut, deferring to the overarching HVAC system and solar gain calculations. Where windows once provided light and air, fluorescent lights and cooling systems aid in the expansion of floor plates, making interior proximity to the window a negligible concern (or a luxury, in the corner office).
No longer a way to connect with the environment, the window-wall is a way to separate from it.
2010 Ad for the new hotel tower Trump Soho: a surreal, perfectly sealed box that nevertheless insists on an all-encompassing view of the city - but in the form of a wall-mural. In this artistic rendering of the hotel's dream-state, even a real visual connection to the outside world - typically privileged above haptic access - is now sacrificed to create a hermetically sealed arena of fantasy, equipped with a lounging model. One small segment of the relentless "view" is framed in gold, almost in a parody of the former function of the window in selecting a particular vista.
WINDOW
PAGE 133
«The windows of Satyam [Aum Shinrikyo's complex] were completely sealed (by resident followers) in order to keep the air inside unpolluted by air from outside. This window sealing was made possible by the sophisticated performance of architectural materials available today. If we were to see an unusual barrenness in the architecture of Satyam, we should note that the quality of space is guaranteed by the very technology as required for and developed by our society. And this relates to the irony that we must today find 'comfort in closure' inevitably having to seal ourselves off from the surroundings in order to avoid hot exhaust air from neighbors."
-Norihlto Nakatani "Bubble,
Earthquake, Aum," 1995.
Police raid the Aum compound, where sarin gas is produced for the 1995 attack on the Tokyo subway system; sealed windows visible on left.
The Aum Shinrikyo compound in Kamikuishiki: windows sealed from the inside.
BLp|\jG THE SARIN GAS IN
^EAfter their gas attack on the Tokyo subway, the cult Aum Shinrikyo ■Ld to have perfectly sealed windows inside their compound buildings ^Hjlect from external pollutants - a world they consider hopelessly while making sarin gas inside.
PAGE 134
WINDOW
SUPERVISED FREEDOM:
THE GREEN LIGHT AND THE SEMI-OPERABLE WINDOW
Alley24, a LEED-certified mixed-use building in Seattle completed in 2008, has no air conditioning. Instead it relies on strictly controlled regime of human and mechanical passive temperature control. In the commercial part of the complex, computer-controlled blinds and aluminum sunscreens - called "supershades" by architects NBB] -prevent direct exposure to the sun. While 40 percent of the building has operable windows, those windows can only be opened when the temperature outside is between 62 and 72 degrees Fahrenheit (16.5-22 degrees Celsius). Employees are notified via a green light (set into the walls at 18-meter intervals) and by email that it is an acceptable time to open their windows (amber is a suggestion to close all windows).
Compared with most offices, where windows are not operable at all, semioperability offers a closely supervised freedom. The green light, like the first leaf on a tree, also confirms the arrival of spring, triggering celebrations in the office: "People are literally clapping and cheering in NBBTs office when the green light comes on for the first time all season," notes Allan Montpellier, Alley24's mechanical engineer.
Initially intended to be cooled solely through passive ventilation, a raised floor ventilation system is added, in part to quell fears from tenants who might not believe in the cooling power of the natural breeze. Architects NBB3 and Skanska, the project's contractor, both relocate their offices to the building, the latter reporting a 30 percent decrease in worker sick days since moving in.
PAGE 135
Jason B. San Diego, CA
*J 0 friends it 1 review
Amy M.
Grand Rapids. Ml
Elite '14
t 62 friends it 316 reviews
lisa a. Seattle, WA
*' 15 friends it 39 reviews
In the residential portion of the building, there is no green light system but instead seriously restricted ventilation options: only one window in each bedroom can be opened, and toa maximum distance of six inches (15 cm). Without aluminum sun-screens to reduce solar heat gain, the building relies primarily on passive cooling. Current and former residents express their frustration on Yelp.com about "an apartment full of windows that do not open" and "south facing windows, which only opened a few inches."
So I moved In here In July - right before a week of 100 degree weather. Now I understand that air conditioning Is seldom needed here In Seattle, but an apartment full of windows that do not open??? Seriously?? In a 2 bedroom apt only one window In each bedroom opened. That made for a pretty rough time this past summer! Even when It was cooler outside In the sum m er It still felt pretty hot In here - maybe because half of the walls In the apartment are brick? I am not sure but It made for unpleasant living.(
I spent a lot of time rubbing down my dog with a cold wet wash cloth and myself with Ice cubesl! - TMI?!?)
□OOQCi 4/3/2012
I lived here for 18 months. The utilities were very high. As they were a green building, they did not have air conditioning, except In the common area.My south facing windows, which only opened a few inches (It's for Insurance purposes, sorry)made my home an unbearable oven. Every day In the summer I would put a frozen juice container In my puppys crate, and rush home worrying that he might have died of a heat stroke. I asked If the management could put up sun blocking shades, and was told I could purchase them and they would be happy to help. Due to the size of the windows, I would have had to purchase expensive custom roller shades for a rental unit. During the heat wave, management learned that people would take their pets to sit In the air conditioned area, and sent out a reminder that this wasn't allowed. I also lived near the alley, and grew to teel that I was living In a machine, with the loud Industrial noises, and constant garbage trucks. I can't believe people CHOOSE to live here. What an incredible rip oft.
QQOy O 12/7/2013
I lived at Alley 24 for aim ost two years.
QQQQQ 2/9/2010
I
A
Pros: Close to downtown, capital hill, bars and restaurants. Gyms within walking distance. Staff Is very friendly.
Julius S. Seattle, WA
ii 2 friends ♦ 16 reviews
Cons: The building has zero ventilation and window restrictions preventing windows from opening past 6 Inches. In the summertime, my apartment was easily 10 13 degrees hotter than Inside. It would take all evening for It to cool down. Also, the area Is riddled with drug dealers and crime. Do not leave your car parked on the
□ OOOO 1/6/2012 Q
I was initially pretty excited to move in here. The building it pretty nice overall and has a nice roof fleck. Our particular apartment has a nice loft feel to it and is laid out pretty nice. It gets very hot in the summertime ana only has onetiny window that opens for air, which is unfortunate, but livable.
PAGE 136
WINDOW

INTELLIGENT WINDOW: SELF-ADJUSTED TINTING
Windows made out of View Glass will be able to respond to sunlight conditions according to their location on the building. Panes on the north side of a building could self-adjust to a different shade than panes on the south side. The aim is to reduce unwanted solar heat gain, and air conditioning with it...
Means of control: While the network anticipates the sun's position and reacts accordingly, the tint of the windows can be controlled by a variety of devices.
Change in tint throughout the day.
Pre-terminated ™ plug connections
Communication and power on a single trunk line
Locally intelligent window node
More easily ^ located controls
WINDOW
PAGE 137

Mitchell Joachim, principal at Terreform ONE.
MEAT TECTONICS
ARRECTOR P1LLI STRATUM SP1NOSUM DERMA PAPULA BONE
SPHINCTER CAVITY SPHINCTER MUSCLE
VEIN
ARTERY
SEBACEOUS OLA NO STRATUM CORNEUM HAIR SHAFT EPIDERMIS SUBCUTIS MUSCLE FIBERS
The "fitted cured pork" model of In Vitro Meat Habitat.
"We used sodium benzoate as a preservative to kill yeasts, bacteria and fungi. Other materials in the model matrix are; collagen powder, xanthan gum, mannitol, cochineal, sodium pyrophosphate, and recycled PET plastic scaffold. As of now, the concept model consists of essentially very expensive fitted cured pork or articulated swine leather with an extensive shelf life. The actual scale of the non-perishable prototype Is 11" x 3"x 7" [28 x 7 x 18 cm]."
— Terreform ONE
»LOGICAL window
^B"|n Vitro Meat Habitat" by Terreform ONE: ^^Kjlative proposition for a house made of 3D-printed a cruelty free construction method. In a building ^^F0f meat, Terreform ONE suggest the window as a
Jipef-
PAGE 138
REAL RESOLUTION: WINDOW VS. SCREEN
In Things to Come (1936), based on the H.G. Wells novel,
"The Boss" gives a history lesson to his great-granddaughter on the 20th century window, using a window-like high-definition floating screen as his educational device, inside an air-conditioned colony that no longer needs windows...
WINDOW
PAGE 139
2013 Digital surfaces begin to mimic reality with such convincing high resolution that window and screen become indistinguishable in a prank by LG in which the "window" behind an interviewer shows a meteor destroying the city beyond, causing great distress...
PAGE 140
WINDOW
2013 Samsung reveals a transparent touchscreen at the International Consumer Electronics Show which replaces window glass; Samsung claim It will be available within 10 or 20 years.
WINDOW
PAGE 141
PAGE 142
30W
OMMETAPHOBIA:
A short history of the growth and shrinkage of windows in buildings and cars By Niklas Maak
I. DEFENESTRATION
"thurh eiethurles death haueth hire ingong into the soule." J
"Death through these eye-holes has entrance into the soul." :
Ancrene Riwle (guide to monastic life) 1225
Look at these houses. They are typical suburban homes, built lately in the outskirts of Berlin. The most striking element is their windows: nothing but minuscule loopholes and observation ports, almost disappearing entirely. A comparable process can be observed in public buildings: as the point of the building is more and more the interior, façades are ornamented with blind windows -like Berlin's Alexa shopping mail...
Dates Unknown
Houses in Kladow Germany
2007 The Alexa center,
Berlin.
Windows are also shrinking for aesthetic reasons, like in Hans Kollhoff's Delbrück-Haus at Berlin's Potsdamer Platz (2003). Here windows are reduced to mere balistraria, part of a trompe I'oeil in a city struggling with economic difficulties: the windows are made smaller in order to make the building look bigger.
2003 Delbrück-Haus mixed use highrise, Hans Kollhoff, Berlin.
smaller to look bigger
WINDOW
PAGE 143
If modernism was a story of windows that grew from a small framed opening to a panoramic ribbon and eventually took over the entire façade by means of the curtain wall, a counteractive process has been in effect for some time now: windows in the 21st century are shrinking.
This phenomenon has its own cultural history. While the modern desire for a dissolution of architecture into its surrounding environment was at the heart of the window's early 20th century growth spurt, a quiet skepticism has been in place even since the beginning of the 19th century, when the view from the window was, at least in literature, seen as a portal into the realm of the improbable. In some novels and tales of the early 19th century, the view from the window sill is treacherous, likely to trigger a chain of events leading to the destruction of the self. Beyond the cave, instead of the Real that projects its blurring shadows onto the walls, one only finds other illusions. In E.T.A. Hoffmann's "Sandman," the first story in an 1817 collection titled Die Nachtstücke (The Night Pieces), a young man named Nathanael observes a pretty girl named Olimpia through his window and falls for her, even though she has the strange appearance of being asleep, with open eyes. A second difficulty for Nathanael is that he suffers from ommetaphobia, leading to obsessive and anxious thoughts about eyes. Suffering from a childhood trauma linked to the story of the sandman, who steals the eyes of children who don't go to bed, and feeds their eyes to his own children, Nathanael's worst fears are confirmed when he discovers that the longing eyes of Olimpia, which he has only seen through his window, are in fact fake: she is an automaton. The outer world, seemingly a promise of intensified life, turns out to be an illusion. Not much later, yelling "pretty eyes, pretty eyes!" Nathanael leaps over the railing of a steeple to his death.
Btration by Veit ^Briitt of Olimpia
■ e I
■Sandman."
COUNTER-CULTURE
Helweg and ^■Henningsen's ^K>f the Day After •omorrow."

Postwar building exhibitions and ideal homes sometimes surprised with their lack of windows: immersion, withdrawing from a cold and uninhabitable world, as if in a spaceship, was a hidden desire running parallel with the official and virtuous aspiration of the fully transparent house. Öle
PAGE 144
WINDOW
Helweg and Poul Henningsen's "House of the Day After Tomorrow" (1960), a cupola-shaped wooden construction with an acrylic skin, resembles the dome of a nuclear reactor. The view outside is blocked by electric shutters. Inside, a space without daylight is equipped with huge sofas on which the contemporary man of the Day After Tomorrow can "find mental and physical relaxation"1 - perhaps as an escape from the ubiquitous enormous windows with which even the most humble suburban houses of the time were endowed.
SUBURBAN SHRINKAGE
Twenty-first century suburban houses, by contrast, boast a massive reduction of their window sizes. In the US, the window shrinks in inverse proportion to the growth of the big-box-homes that they used to illuminate. Lennar Corporation, one of America's big homebuilders, headquartered in Miami, announced its 375-square meter Himalayan model in Tampa for $270,990, featuring windows that can be optically enlarged with fake shutters painted onto the façade. The shrinkage of suburban American windows is part of an incentive package to flip properties, a practice which endures even after the bursting of the real estate bubble. Bigger houses sell better, but are expensive to build; windows - more expensive than walls - are the first element to be sacrificed or shrunken in order to cut costs.
Contemporary English "rabbit hutch" homes.
In the UK, windows are shrinking in unison with houses, causing alarm in the media. According to RIBA, in 1920, average homes were 150 square meters and boasted four bedrooms, while the contemporary average is three bedrooms and 82 square meters. The average semi-detached house in 2013 is more "cramped, dark and artificially lit" than those built in the early 20th century. Politicians defend families "trapped in rabbit hutch homes,"2 attempting to force developers to build bigger homes with bigger windows. Experts worry that "the lack of space and light in modern homes could cause marital problems and even stop children from reaching their full potential at school."3
- Eric Pickles, UK Communities Secretary, quoted in "The incredible shrinking ; houses," Daily Mail, : August 21, 2013.
Increasingly stringent regulations in the UK also play a part in shrinking window syndrome. Launched in 2004, British Standard 8213-1 dictates that all windows in new housing units "must be cleanable from within, by women aged 64-75, without the use of ladders or cleaning devices and without stretching," resulting in the new standard of low, small, square windows that pockmark the face of England's new housing blocks.4 In Germany, shrinking windows are abundant in a new range of passive house architecture from building company Town and Country, with the claim that smaller windows boost energy efficiency:
Germany's new sustainability legislation - the Energieeinsparverordnung (EnEV) - enforces
"The Incredible Tj shrinking houses, Daily Mail, August 21, 2013.
; "Are building regulations the enemy of architecture?" Oliver Wainwright, Guardian,
February 28, 2013.
’ N N- "DasHauÄ Übermorgen," ¡n jT0"! Kunst und das schti I
:r D*«»T3sj
1960s Picture-windowed suburban I
house (left) and a I
contemporary sma||. 1 windowed suburban I house in Berlin (right); I
WINDOW
PAGE 145

triple-glazing as part of an effort to reduce home energy consumption by 30 percent.
The obligatory use of triple-glazed windows, which are extremely heavy and expensive, makes it harder to cut building costs, so windows are simply designed to be much smaller.
,010s "Town and
Ky* catalogue: ' EJpweo passiv
fones

Die Town & Country Paisivtiauser
FORTRESS
Shrinking window syndrome is also acute in the architecture of embassies, particularly American ones. The US embassy in Athens, built in 1959-61 by Walter Gropius and Pericles Sakelarios, was a mid-century-modernist showcase for a light, Internationalist architecture, a modernist vision of an accessible-to-all pax Americana.
The 1964 US embassy in Dublin, designed by American architect Dohn M. Dohansen with Irish architect Michael Scott was a blend of early Celtic building typologies with contemporary American design, opened up to the city with big windows.
1964 US Embassy, Dublin, John M ^fcisen and Michael ■èott.
1959-1961 US Embassy,
^K, Walter Gropius aÂfœrides Sakelarios
PAGE 146
WINDOW
But these were pre 9/11 buildings. Security measures made windows shrink almost automatically after the attacks, but the disappearance of big windows cannot be explained only by security concerns.
The main façade of the US embassy in Beijing, büilt in 2008 by Skidmore Owings Merrill, quotes a light modernism but adds to the glazed curtain wall a massive grid that can be read as an allusion to traditional Chinese architecture as well as an almost hysterical fortification, or armoring of the window.
The website of the embassy claims that the building represents "the best of 21st century American architecture" and is, above all, "a safe, secure, and functional state-of-the-art facility." Safety and, almost synonymous, security, are the most important qualities of architecture here, functionalism makes only third place; other possible qualities of an embassy, like hospitality, or creating the image of a welcoming, inclusive nation, are not mentioned.
2008 US Embassy“ Beijing, Skidmore Owings Merrill,
2008 US Embassy, 1
Berlin, Charles Moore.
While in Beijing the giant window is cross-barred, in Berlin, the new US Embassy displays to the street a vast surface with no windows. The whole building, designed by Charles Moore and also opened in 2008, plays with the image of a fortress, making it almost ironic that the NSA hides behind these walls to spy on German politicians' phones.
In other cases, the causes of shrinking window syndrome are more complex, as the recent history of car design shows.
2010 Passive House, Germany, Sommer; i Baustatik, Meerbusch
II.	BAD WORLD DESIGN LIVING ROOMS ON WHEELS
You don't have to be interested in cars to see the importance of analyzing car design: in no other area are so many market researchers, psychologists, and designers paid so much money to exploit the tiniest shifts in the pfycho-societal fabric. Given the technological homogenization across the industry, carmakers are forced to seduce customers with aesthetics - making car design a
WINDOW
PAGE 147
canary-in-the-coalmine indicator of changes in society before they reach realms that are slightly slower to react, like architecture.
The 1968 Mercedes Benz 230, called the "Pagoda" due its iconic greenhouse/pavilion appearance, represents the pinnacle of an expansive automobile industry, and an optimistic attitude towards public space. The driver was exposed with glass on all sides, as if in a vitrine; the car's windows were as big as technically possible. Its design, by Paul Bracq, echoed the iconic glass façades of Mies van der Rohe and other architects. But ever since production on the Pagoda stopped in 1971, car windows have been shrinking.
1968	Mercedes 230. Pushed back by muscular sculptural forms and reinforcement devices, car windows shrink to r|	the minimum essential for seeing the road. Why is this? Firstly, for obvious security reasons -
m	rolling over in a Jaguar E-Type meant nearly certain death. But those who bought the car were
B	not primarily concerned with the possibility of deadly accidents, but with the speed and excitement
■	that used to be associated with the driving experience.
Alain Delon and Hpy Maclaine °P®tOpped Ferrai
■ Paris Hiltoi an
out hybrid
fMllac
LIFE, AS CONCEIVED BY DEATH
As a status symbol, the heavy SUV, even if it is not actually meant for off-road use, and even if it is full of contradictions as a tool for life, has largely replaced the sports car. Passengers disappear from public view behind blackened glass. Seclusion, not exposure, is the dominant design motive. While front and side windows are shrinking, and darkening, some carmakers offer large sunroofs, windows to the sky, to avoid a feeling of claustrophobia. The car takes on the form of an open box -heavily protected on the sides, open at the top. Its design premise is the possibility of death, the worst-case scenario, not liberty and pleasure. The Other, to whom the driver of a 1968 Mercedes happily exposed himself, is now seen as a possible adversary.
The design of the current car's face - or "façade" - betrays this hysterical attitude^ Wijé windS/a^ shrinking and headlights frowning, cars look like tragic Greek masks, with the additioreof..¡monstrous single frame grills seemingly waiting to devour smaller cars and hoofed animals, Many now
PAGE 148
WINDOW
automobiles mimic the polyfocal, crystalline, fractured forms of a stealth bomber, which is first and foremost designed to avoid being seen. The result is an aesthetic imbued with cubistically juxtaposed volumes and cross-fading lines - forms that appear as if reality, too, was undergoing a visual interference - an assault on the optic nerve, just as Cubism was in its day.
While intimidating and bellicose from the outside, the interior of contemporary cars are increasingly intended to evoke the cosy atmosphere of a suburban living room, bedecked with generous wood trimmings, thick leather seats, and copious electronic navigational and entertainment devices. The driver, once an active part of the driving process, a machine operator who had to handle a thin steering wheel and manoeuvre stiff gear shifts on a rattling vehicle, is now ensconced in massaging seats. The loud and dangerous world outside is dimmed by "magic body control" suspension, darkened and insulated windows, and Harmon Kardon surround sound. The car, which once represented the promise of an exhilarating, unadulterated encounter with the world, has become a rolling living room for a society that used to trumpet freedom, promise and self-determination but now prefers comfort and security.
MOBILE OMMETAPHOBIA
Dust how much the simple act of looking out of a car's window has changed in contemporary automobiles is illustrated by the increasing use of rear-mounted cameras to replace rear view mirrors. Whatever is behind the car is immediately transformed into a video. Luxury cars exacerbate this imperative for an enhanced view of the world through a so-called night vision system. An infrared camera takes in the road ahead and spots people and objects in the car's path long before the driver can see them with his own eyes. This infrared image is projected onto the lower part of the windscreen. The driver has to choose: either she looks out to reality with her own eyes or she watches the film in the display, which shows a more objective reality than she can see herself. If you want to see something, you can't look at it directly, but rather, at the infrared video - an electronic shadow that is truer than the image a human eye can produce. A generation that has grown up with racing car video games now sits in front of a screen again - rather than a window - as they actually drive.
2006 Siemens' proposed night vision system, an infrared detection system that alerts a driver to heat emitting sources (such as people).
2011 Hofele Desin„- H
Cayster GT 670 9 S based on the P<L_, Cayenne (958) °he
The design of new cam resonates with a new mode of city planning in Europe, oriented not towards an ideal of the metropolis, with its chaotic superimpositions, noise, and darkness, but rather to an ideal of g|fieralizflyj^Drevention: car traffic is reduced, the city slides along smoothly at the pace of pedestrianized zones, access to shopping areas is controlled for security reasons, private security
WINDOW
PAGE 149
staff sorts out homeless people and suspect subjects. The stranger - the locus of quasi-romantic fantasy in urban theories of the 1970s and 80s - is no longer a promise, but a problem. Life is imagined not from the possibility of happiness, but rather from the possibility of death. The nice guy at the bar could be a carrier of diseases, or a terrorist. This shift resonates with fundamental issues of architecture and democracy: from a society oriented towards an ideal of liberty, inclusivity and self-determination, to a society striving to avoid death through comfy immersion in all its spaces and objects, from airbag-stuffed, leather-trimmed, permanently connected SUVs to smartphone-controlled "conscious" houses that collect information about the inhabitants.
III.	NO OUTSIDE
Bje n'apPartiens a MLjnnt et i aPPar,li,|1S Koul la m°nde Vous Liez avant que d'y
Lrer, et vous y serez «.ore quand vous en ^EgZ/' Denis Diderot. le Fataliste.
K-i
|du i mers
Rertino, Norman
2014 Facebook
cartipus, Menlo Park, fraik Gehry.
"You were here before you stepped in, and you will stay here even when you have gone." Denis Diderot, Jacques le Fataliste, 1765-1780.5
For Apple's new headquarters in Cupertino, California, Lord Norman Foster built a giant donutshaped building, just four stories high, capable of hosting 12,000 people, which will be largely hidden behind trees. Half an hour's drive away, Frank Gehry built the world's biggest ever open-plan office, for Facebook, with a single, continuous 40,000 square-meter space - eradicating the need for walls and corridors, and, functionally, exterior windows too. The giant open space features little huts for conferences. Opening their windows must have little effect; you are still inside the sphere. The roof is landscaped, and the workspace underneath also resemble a landscape, with desks and chairs like grazing animals.
Hi an analysis of the Hming white Google Rises with their dark feed windows and the| associated social «fects, see Rebecca
^Blit's "Diary" in the ^Kfon Review of
TsjVol. 35 No. 3, iary 7, 2013, 34-35.
Both Apple's and Facebook's headquarters create a world without an outside. You can spend days, weeks, a life, riding to work in a Google bus with blackened windows,6 you can relax in the Paradise Garden in the empty center of the Appledrome, you can lie on the roof of Facebook's headquarters and chat to your virtual friends. In skyscrapers, there was public life on the street below, and a view from on high. The new headquarters are part of an immersive universe: you walk out (Apple) or up (Facebook), but never beyond the corporate world. The new artificial landscapes are reminiscent of what Robert Pogue Harrison called the "perverse beauty" of Versailles' gardens, where bored-to-death French aristocrats reenacted the life of the poor peasants outside the gates.
^wGoogle
With blackened wf»dows.
PAGE 150
The benign-sounding "cloud" that collects all our information and turns the mobile phone, tablet, and laptop into a kind of remote control for daily life is perhaps the most potent symbol of a decade of the invisible, starting with the insidious threat of terrorism, continuing with the ghostly dissolution of already-ephemeral values on Wall Street, culminating in the imperceptible danger of the radioactivity that escaped the Fukushima nuclear power plant.
Now, the economic powerhouses also hide away, keeping close to the ground, pretending to be part of nature, and replacing public life with strange simulacra. Maybe Cupertino and Menlo Park, worlds without windows, are the new Versailles, where distinctions between inside and outside, private and public life collapse - meaning that windows are no longer required.
IV.	PUBLIC/PRIVATE
But what are we talking about when we talk about "private" and "public" spheres? Architecture suffers from the imprecision of the terms typically used to describe these situations. Someone who steps out onto the street after having spent 12 hours in his room emailing, tweeting, and facebooking may be someone seeking refuge from the public in an intimate space. As a pair of conceptual opposites, inside and outside, once separated by walls, connected by doors and windows, have lost much of their usefulness, if they ever had any. The glazed façade is always a physical partition, its openness to the world only an aesthetic gesture; it fictionalizes the world beyond. A counter-model would be the traditional Japanese house, with its sliding doors that could selectively open up the building physically at the Engawa, the porch-like space between house and garden. Or, on the opposite end of the spectrum, a wall so thick that its window niches are occupiable spaces themselves.
INVISIBLE WINDOWS
Capitalism and communicative technology defies the power of physical partitions; instead we witness a new politics of atmospheres: while cars become more muscular, private, and seemingly secure, the online services, navigational systems, and other data-collecting devices dedicated to facilitating the driver's life in her car actually expose her like never before to all kinds of institutions interested in her data for commercial or legal reasons. Connected driving has its own invisible windows, through which her movements, preferences, moods, and desires can all be recorded and pre-empted. The modern car, while seemingly sheltering the driver from sight, transforms her into a completely transparent being. The darkened window with its endless reflections is a desperate attempt to create an atmosphere of shelter, disguising, in a paradoxical move, exposure as comfort and protection.
PAGE 152
WINDOW
WINDOW
PAGE 153
Sash frame consists of top and bottom rails fitted against the rebate of the frame. Correct rebate pressure ensures that the joint between them is sealed.
Single glazing, double glazing, or multiple pane insulated glazing: maximum sizes dependent on weight of glass and transport restrictions.
PAGE 154
WINDOW
lean be fixed to
^shwit" ■
Weft) or wood / rfbondmg (right).
the
Hhlebate gasket
^■ktwee indow
^Hbuildino protects water vapor on the ^pe and weathering, ^^Bjnd, and ^^Bjenetration on tside
PAGE 156
WINDOW

1
Extruded aluminum profile designed for thermal Insulation and weather-tightness
WINDOW
PAGE 159
2005 Reflections of Tokyo, Hiroya Kawabata.
PAGE 160 bibliography
ASHRAE (American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers. ASHRAE Standards. Atlanta: ASHRAE, 1967. Print.
Agricola, Georg, Herbert Hoover, and Lou Henry Hoover. De Re Metallica. New York: Dover Publications, 1950.
"A visit to Le Corbusier-Saugnier." Paris Journal v. 14. 12. 1923.
Bachner, John Philip. Practice Management for Design Professionals: A Practical Guide to Avoiding Liability and Enhancing Profitability. New York: Wiley, 1991.
"Bay-Window at Lyme Hall." The Lotus Magazine, November 1913. www.jstor.org/ stable/20543491?seq=2 (accessed May 2, 2013).
Benjamin, Walter, and Lloyd Spencer,
Mark Harrington. "Central Park." New German Critique, No. 34, 1985, 32-58.
Bolza, Giambattista. Vocabolario Genetico-Etimologico della Lingual Italiana. Vienna: Dali' I.R. Stamperia di corte e. di Stato, 1852.
Cieraad, Irene. At Home: An Anthropology of Domestic Space. Syracuse University Press, 1999.
Deleuze, Gilles, and Félix Guattari.
A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987.
Ford, Edward R. The Details of Modern Architecture. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.
Giedion, S. Space, Time and Architecture; The Growth of a New Tradition. 5th ed. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967.
Hawthorne, ]ohn G., and Cyril Stanley Smith. On Divers Arts; The Treatise of Theophilus. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963.
Heuer, Charles R. FAIA, and Arthur Kornblut, AIA. Construction Documents and Services. Chicago: Kaplan AEC Architecture, 2004.
Humberstone, M. The Absurdity and Injustice of the Window Tax Considered with Especial Reference to the New Survey. London: W.S. Orr and Compy., 1841.
Kenward, Michael. "Reflections on Glass Research." New Scientist, August 31,
1972, 427-428.
Le Corbusier. Almanach d'Architecture Moderne. Paris: Les Éditions G. Crès et C., 1930.
Le Corbusier. "Glass: The Fundamental Material of Modern Architecture by Le Corbusier." West 86th, Vo\. 19www. west86th .bgc.bard.edu/tra nslated-text/ glass-modern-architecture.html (accessed May 6, 2014).
Le Corbusier. "Twentieth-Century Building and Twentieth-Century Living," in The Studio Year Book on Decorative Art,
London, 1930.
Mack, Frances May, and Arne Zettersten. The English Text of the Ancrene Wisse. Oxford University Press, 1963.
Nakatani, Norihito. "Bubble, Earthquake, Aum," 1995.
"OED Online." Oxford English Dictionary. (Accessed 4 Duly 2013) www.oed.com/.
Official Report on the Debates of the House of Commons, official report. Washington: United States Historical Documents Institute, 1848.
Scheerbart, Paul, and Dohn A. Stuart. The Gray Cloth: Paul Scheerbart's Novel on Glass Architecture. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 2001.
Scheerbart, Paul. Glasarchitektur. Berlin: Verlag der Sturm, 1914.
Shorto, Russell. "Going Dutch." The New York Times Magazine, www.nytimes. com/2009/05/03/magazine/03european-t. html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed May 6, 2014).
"Special Window Issue." The Old-House Journal, Vol. 4, April 1982.
Stevens, Dohn. A New Spanish and English Dictionary. Alicante: Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 2008
Sussman, Herbert L. Victorian Technology Invention, Innovation, and the Rise of the Machine. Santa Barbara, California: Praeger Publishers, 2009.
Tanizaki, Dunichiro. In Praise of Shadows. New Haven, Conn.: Leete's Island Books, 1977. Print.
Valpy, F. E. D. An Etymological Dictionary of the Latin Language. London: Printed by A.D. Valpy, sold by Baldwin and Co., 1828.
Weidu, Ma. Classical Chinese Doors Windows. Springer Vienna Architects 2006. 6'
Wheatley, Henry Benjamin, William Edw Mead, Dohn Stuart Stuart Glennie, and W. Nash. Merlin; or, The Early History 0f ' i King Arthur: A Prose Romance (about 1450-1460 A.D.). London: Pub. for the Early English Text Society, by K. Paul Trench, Trübner & Co., 1899.
Wigginton, Michael. Glass in Architects London: Phaidon, 1996.	L
Wright, Frank Lloyd. "The Meaning of Materials: Glass," The Architectural Reco a Sweeney 211, Duly 1928, 11-16.
Zukowski, Karen. Creating the Artful Home-The Aesthetic Movement. Layton, Utah-Gibbs Smith, 2006.
"were windows eyes?" manfredo di robilant
Alsayyad, Nezar. Forms of Dominance:
On the Architecture and Urbanism of the Colonial Enterprise Aldershot: Avebury 1992.
Biagi, Paola De (ed.) La Grande Ricostruzione: II Piano Ina-Casa e Tltalia degli Anni Cinquanta. Roma: Donzelli, 2001.
Beretta Anguissola, Luigi. 14 Anni del Piano Ina-Casa. Roma: Staderini, 1963.
Blaser, Werner. Chinese Pavilion Architecture: Quality, Design, Structure Exemplified by China. Niederteufen:
Verlag Arthur Niggli, 1974.
Bordain, Lain and Dane Rendell (eds.) Intersections: Architectural Histories and Critical Theories. London: Routledge, 2000.91.
Campbell, Margaret, "Strange Befellows: Modernism and Tubercolosis," in Imperfect Health: The Medicalization of Modern Architecture, eds. Giovanna Borasi, Mirko Zardini. Montréal and Zurich: CCA and Lars Müller Publishers, 2012, 133-151.
Casciato, Maristella. "Neorealism in Italian Architecture," in Anxious Modernisms: Experimentation in Postwar Architectural Culture, eds. Sarah Williams Goldhagen and Réjean Legault. Montréal: CCA, and Cambridge MA and London: MIT Press, 2000.
WINDOW
PAGE 161
■eci, Giorgio. Gli Architetti e il Fascismo: ¡Miitettura e Città 1922-1944. Torino:
JUdi 1989and 2002-
,y Adrian. "Spatial Mechanics: Scientific Eraphore in Architecture," in The E-hitecture of Science. Cambridge MA.
E London: MIT Press, 1999. 213.
Rty, Adrian. "Structure," in Words and Buildings: A Vocabulary of Modem K/i/teciure. London: Thames & Hudson, ¿00.278-279.
Harrison, Donald Dex. "Window into Wall," Architectural Review 644, 1950. 122.
IIpalazzo per uffici Montecatini. Milano: pizzi 6 Pizio, 1938.
Kaufmann, Emil. Three Revolutionary Architects: Boullée, Ledoux and Lequeu. Philadelphia: The American Philosophical Society, 1952.
Le Corbusier, "Précisions sur un état présent de l'architecture et de l'urbanisme," ¡n Spatial Mechanics: Scientific Metaphors jn Architecture, by Adrian Forty, 1930.
Lodoli,Carlo. Apologhi Immaginati, e Sol Estemporaneamente in Voce Esposti Agli Amici Suoi Dal Fu Fra Carlo De' Conti Lodoli Min. Osservante Di S. Francesco. Bassano: Remondini, 1787.
Macfarlane, Alan, and Gerry Martin, The Glass Bathyscaphe: How Glass Changed the World. London: Profile Books, 2002. 66.
Neri, Maria Luisa, and Mario De Renzi: L'Architettura come Mestiere 1897-1967. Roma: Cangemi, 1992.
Neveu, Marc ]. "Architectural Lessons of Carlo Lodoli (1690-1761): Indole of Material and of Self," Ph.D. diss. McGill University Montréal, 2005.
Pace, Sergio. "Una solidarietà agevolata. II Plano Ina-Casa 1949-1963," in Rassegna,
54.1993.
Pallasmaa, Duhani. The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
Pelkonen, Eeva-Liisa. Alvar Aalto: Architecture, Modernity, and Geopolitics. New Haven and London: Yale University "ess, 2009.
Reed, Peter and Kenneth Frampton (eds.) Alvar Aalto: Between Humanism and Materialism. New York: Museum of Modern Art, 1998.
Rohe, Ludwig Mies van der, "Hochhäuser," in Frühlicht, Summer 1922.
Rosenauer, Michael. Modern Offices Buildings. London: B.T. Batsford Ltd, 1955.
Schildt, Göran. Alvar Aalto: His Life. Dyväskylä: Alvar Aalto Museum, 2007.
Scully, Vincent. "Doldrums in the Suburbs," in Modern Architecture and other Essays, ed. Neil Levine. Princeton and Oxford: Princeton University Press, 2003.
Sedlmayr, Hans. Art in Crisis: The Lost Center. Chicago IL: Henry Regnery Company, 1958.
Sedlmayr, Hans. Verlust der Mitte.
Salzburg: Otto Müller Verlag, 1948.
Venturi, Robert. Iconography and Electronics upon a Generic Architecture:
A View from the Drafting Room.
Cambridge MA.: MIT Press, 1996. 255.
Zevi, Bruno. Storia delTArchitettura Moderns. Torino: Einaudi, 1950.
"ommetaphobia: a short history of the growth and shrinkage of windows in buildings and cars."
niklas maak
Diderot, Denis, and Paul Vernière.
Jacques le Fataliste et son Maître. Paris: Garnier-Flammarion, 1970.
N.N. "Das Haus von Übermorgen," in Die Kunst und das Schöne Heim,
December 1960. 116.
Pickles, Eric quoted in "The Incredible Shrinking Houses," Daily Mail, August 21, 2013.
Solnit, Rebecca. "Diary" in The London Review of Books, Vol. 35 No. 3, February 7, 2013, 34-35.
Wainwright, Oliver. "Are building regulations the enemy of architecture?" The Guardian, February 28, 2013.
PAGE 162
image sources and courtesy
P2-3 Jordan Smith / www.flickr.com/ photos/hollywoodplace/2932158922/.
P4 Old House Journal, Vol. 10, No. 2, 1982; John Leeke.
P5 © The Russian Museum of Ethnography, St. Petersburg, 2014.
P10 Bachspics / www.flickr.com/ photos/8430129@N06/8545014218/; wo de shijie / www.flickr.com/photos/d_ shijie/3936652938/.
P11 David Castor; Time & Life Pictures.
P12 Ojisanjake / www.ipernity.com/doc/ ojisanjake/7957435; Lynn Becker.
P13 LusoFox / MayaPortrait Project www. mayaportraitproject.org /; Ezra Stoller /
Esto.
P14-17 Brooking National Collection,
Surrey, UK.
P18 Tom & Liz Cantarine / http:// postcardsfromtomandliz.files.wordpress. com/2013/07/hermitage-thru-window.jpg; Sergio Fox; Tagamira / www.flickr.com/ photos/tagamira/297919911/.
P19 National Museum of World Cultures, Netherlands.
P20-21 Look andLearn
P22-23 Pf runner / 10-photo / http:// architecturelab.net/2010/09/0300tv-trailer-yoshiharu-tsukamoto-interview-atelier-bow-wow/; WlndowScape: Window Behaviorology, Yoshiharu Tsukamoto. 2012.
P24 Lars Tunbjork.
P25 Rufina Wu & Stefan Canham / Janser, Andres (editor) Highrise: Idea and Reality. Museum für Gestaltung Zürich, 2011.
P26 "Nuremburg. Oriel Window of Parsonage." by Janericloebe is licensed under CC BY 2.0; "Castle Acre Priory Castle Acre, Norfolk" by Keith Evans is licensed under CC BY 2.0.
P27 Tony - dedalus1947 / www.flickr.com/ photos/39441480@N02/9497998847/; 2014 Tri-State Window Factory. All rights reserved; Photo by Tony Grant, licensed under CC BY 4.0; "Maison Tassel, 1803" Photo by Victor Florta, licensed under CC BY 3.0.
P30 Photo by William Rolls, 2007;
Copyright © 2005-2014, MAFRA, a.s.
P31 Wellcome Library, London.
P32-34 Courtesy National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., Widener Collection, 1942.9.46.
P34 Print Collector; Barbara Wells Sarudy / http://bjws.blogspot.ni/2012/11/18th-century-womens-work-by-dutch.html.
P 35 VVAB; Doug, caribb / www.flickr.com/ photos/87857621 @N00/534564005/in/ photolist-PeMfM-9cuPgM; Herman Wouters for The International Herald Tribune.
P40 ©The Trustees of the British Museum. All rights reserved.
P41 © 2014 PPG Industries, Inc. All rights reserved.
P42 Michael Wigginton / Phaidon.
P43 Pilkington Group Ltd.
P46 The Building Conservation Directory, 2001.
P47 Corning Museum of Glass; Michael Wigginton / Phaidon.
P48 RIBA Library Photographs Collection.
P50 CNAM/SIAF/CAPA/Archives d'architecture du Xxe siècle/Auguste Perret/ UFSE/SAIF/année; Ruamps. Laurent D. Ruamps / www.flickr.com/photos/ ruamps/5904033657/in/set-72157620712804557.
P51 ADAGP, Société Des Auteurs Dans Les Arts Graphiques Et Plastiques.
P52 Nationaal Archief, CC-BY-SA; © 2014 State of Illinois.
P53 © Copyright 2012 Conradin Media GmbH; Pilkington UK Ltd; Patent /
US2911759 A.
P54 Photo by Pittsburgh Plate Glass Co., licensed under CC BY 1.0; The New York Times, July 10 1947; The Washington Post.
P55 Arnold Del Carlo.
P56-57 Photo by Ernest Braun.
P58 The Christian Science Monitor,
August 8, 1952.
P59 The New York Times,
October 16, 1960.
P60 Popular Science; DGHdeeo / Www ^ flickr.com/photos/dghdeeo/826194877 sizes/l/; Duane Starcher / www f|¡ckr '
photos/97907983@N00/2394007053/°!T'/
photolist-4DxUTF.
P61 © 2013 Tribune Company; 7>,e Philadelphia Tribune© PhillyTrib.com-The American Home, October 1956
P62-63 Ford, Edward R. The Details of Modern Architecture. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2003.
P 64 " On Domestic Architecture", Sebastiano Serlio. Dover Publications ln 2003.
P65 © Stefan Müller.
P67 Architecture DAujourd'Hui N 181 1975.
P69 The Courtauld Institute of Art, London-Glass in Architecture. Michael Wigginton Phaidon Press.
P71 Thames & Hudson.
P72 Alvar Aalto Museum.
P73 Courtesy of Paolo Rosselli.
P75 Filippo M. SaccA: www.bandb-rome.it.
P78-79 Jacques Tati, Mon Oncle. Specta Films 1958; © 2013 Gamania Digital Entertainment Co., Ltd.
P82 Goju Nenshi / Morris, Low. Buildings Modern Japan: Science, Technology, and Medicine in the Meiji Bra and Beyond. Palgrave Macmillan, 2005; Okinawa Soba / www.flickr.eom/photos/24443965@
N08/2338972724/; Kazuhiro, Matsuki. The Form of Japanese Windows. Flat Glass Manufacturers Association of Japan, 1997.
P83 Kazuhiro, Matsuki. The Form of Japanese Windows. Flat Glass Manufacturers Association of Japan, 1997. www.mobypicture.com/user/chikara_
ohno1/view/10678222.
P84 Talib, Kaizer. Shelter in Saudi Arabia. St. Martins Pr. 1984; © Blue Abaya, 2010-2013.
P85 Photo courtesy of Al-Turath;
Talib, Kaizer. Shelter in Saudi Arabia.
St. Martins Pr. 1984; www.wheelerfolk.org.
P86 © Geopolintel 2009-2014.
P87 Shumon Basar.
P88-89 © 2013 Yuanda China Holdings.
91 Photo by Frank van der Salm,
Kl 2006 (Original in color.)
\ gj© 1996-2013 SINA Corporation.
109 Images courtesy of SlNCONV.
p110-111 http://uglybelgianhouses. ^blr.com.
K, wigginton, Michael. Glass in 4wiitecture. Phaidon Press, 2002./
¡¡age redrawn.
P114 American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. ASHRAE Journal, October 2000.
P115 © 2011—2014 by Walter de Gruyter GmbH; Reynaers Aluminium.
P116 Bibliothèque Nationale, Paris/ BnF 2014; Secret Agent by Rémy Médard from The Noun Project.
P117 2014 Autodesk Inc.
P118 Secret Agent by Rémy Médard from The Noun Project.
P120 SANAA, Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa.
P121 BiennaleChannel, Architecture Biennale - Transsolar & Tetsuo Kondo (NOW Interviews. 27 August, 2010.
P122 Sauerbruch Hutton; Transsolar.
P124 American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc. ASHRAE Journal, October 2000.
P126 Werner Sobek; Photo by Roland Halbe; 2014, By Herzog & de Meuron Basel.
P128-129 Oliver Heissner / Herzong & de Meuron, Basel.
P130 trumpsoho.com.
N31 osamu ishiyama laboratory 1996-2014; www.npa.go.jp/hakusyo/h08/ h080103.html.
H32 Benjamin Schneider; Tim Soar; 2014 Hunter Douglas; NBBJ.
E133 Benjamin Schneider.
P134 2014 View, Inc.
P135 Terreform ONE; Mitchell Joachim.
P136-137 Cameron, William. Of Things to Come. ITV Global Entertainment Ltd. 1936; Mundo LG, Ultra Reality: What would you do in this situation? - LG Meteor Prank. September 2, 2013.
P138-139 Vox Media, Inc.
P140 Niklas Maak; "Eingangsbereich des Einkaufszentrums Alexa am Alexanderplatz in Berlin" by VollwertBIT is licensed under CC BY 3.0: Kollhoff Architekten.
P141 Viet Schmitt; Ole Helweg; Poul Henningsen.
P142 Niklas Maak; Ivo Goetz; OLX, Inc.
P143 Town & Country Haus Lizenzgeber GmbH; US Department of State Bureau of Overseas Buildings Operations; "American Embassy, Dublin, Ireland." by Ww2censor is licensed under CC BY 3.0.
P144 SOM; Sommer Baustatik GmbH; Mutter Erde.
P145 John Clark, Mercedes Benz; E-Mags Media GmbH; Time & Life Pictures /
Getty images; SoftNews NET.
P146 TopSpeed; Trans World Exports.
P147 Foster + Partners; Apple Inc.; Frank Gehry/Gehry Partners; Jim Greer.
P149 Rinspeed XchangE concept, 2014 Geneva Motor Show.
P150-153 Hafke, Jan Henrik. Open / Close. Birkhäuser Architecture, 2009.
P154-155 ALCOA.
P156 Kawneer.
P157 Kawabata, Hiroya. Reflections of Tokyo. Design Office K Co. 2005.
FAÇADE
2017 Cladding can be fatal: wrap architecture in combustible blankets of insulation, then cover it with the thinnest possible cladding and the building is transformed into a virtual chimney...
FAÇADE
contributors alejandro zaera-polo stephan trüby
façade
...though 'façade' is a relatively young concept, codified in the 18th century, it has become a metonym for architecture as a whole, the element most invested with aesthetic, political, and cultural expectation... as the classic concept of façade crystalized in Europe, it was defined by decorum, composition, faciality, orientation, profile, embellishment, signification, and rigidity, dictating the relationship of openness and opacity... the codes of the façade insinuated themselves in our neurological wiring, triggering Pavlovian responses to certain types of architecture... technological advances in the 20th century - bigger glass, the curtain wall, silicone, air conditioning - transformed the façade into a seamless and perfectly sealed wrapper, no longer a carefully ordered rhythm of elements (windows, balconies, doors, roof) and functional ornamentation (columns for structure, string-ourses for rain protection) but a monolithic, all-over composition... he contemporary façade remains vested with outsize impor-tance while responsibility for its detailing, performance, and execution is ceded by architecture to more technologically advanced domains... meanwhile 'original' façades are still fetishized - often the only thing left standing after renovation of the rest of the building...
2009 Update on the legendary Potemkin village: Jiahe, Hunan Province, China. A freshly painted, two-story high façade, with no building behind It, is constructed to comply with rural development mandates, since farmers cannot afford to complete an entire building. Inspectors pass by only in a car, oblivious to the adobe huts that remain behind the façade. The façade building sparks ridicule online but also celebration of "Chinese resourcefulness." Similar, slightly thicker façade houses, built In other villages also under stringent development goals and tight budgets, are actually Inhabited...

FAÇADE
PAGE 3
FAÇADE
A metonym for architecture as a whole, the façade is the element vested with the most political and cultural meaning. Hence the rise of "façadism," the obsession with the façade to the detriment of the rest of the building. The façade is one of the few elements that has not been forgotten by architects - even as the design of its increasingly complex details is farmed out to specialized consultants.
façades before the " façade"
Invented and propagated in Europe around the 18th century, "façade" is a relatively recent term and concept. But there was a façade before there was the term "façade." It was the outer surface of a solid mass (or, in architectural parlance, of a "massive" building); it was the thin layer of modular panels or screens; and it was the intricate application of adhesive materials. Few of these practices though were concerned with what became the classical criteria of the façade...
"façade" façades
As the concept of façade becomes crystalized in Europe, it is dominated by orderliness (hierarchy), composition, faciality, orientation, profile, embellishment, signification, and rigidity. The codes of the façade embed themselves in our neurological wiring, triggering Pavlovian reactions to certain types of architecture...
façades after the "façade"
Technological advances in the 20th century - bigger glass, the curtain wall, silicone, air conditioning - transform the façade into a seamless and perfectly sealed wrapper. No longer a careful composition of elements (windows, balconies, doors, roof) and functional ornamentation (columns for structure, string courses for rain protection) the façade becomes a monolithic, all-over composition. Its classical components are absorbed into the high-performance surface or swallowed by the complex layers supporting it, material assemblages determined more by economic and political forces than classical symbolism.
façade futures
As the curtain walls of the 20th century expire and threaten to collapse, and the diktats of sustainability become more severe, the façade as we knew it is still fetishized - to the extent that it is the only thing left standing after demolition - and still vested with outsize powers of signification...
façades before the façade
"façade" façade
r
faciality, orientation, decorum
Feng Shui oriented façade
mass
MODULARITY Chinese residential architecture
RATIONAL ORDER AFTER EGYPT Etlenne-Louis Boulee
FAÇADE
PAGES
FAÇADES BEFORE AND AFTER "FAÇADING"
ENGINEERING'S MIRACLE
envelope
invisible façade
airtight seals
Seagram
'façading'
insulation
parametricism
EIFS ^8 seamless façadèi

façade as assemblage
20th-century facadism Loos, Kahn, etc
Crystal Palace
facades after the façade
façades futures
PAGE 6
FAÇADE
façade
/fa'said/
The face or front of a building towards a street or other open place, esp. the principal front. Also attrib. or as adj., of an architectural design concerned with elegance, etc., in the façade of a building alone.
In 100 AD, Vitruvius describes exterior brick construction as "walls," though he does identify the proper orientation for the placement of brick, expressing concern for the "facings of the walls."
(Ten Books on Architecture, Book II, Chapter VIII: "Methods of Building Walls.") Alberti, in 1726, states that "one thing is proper... for the outward Face of the Wall, another for the cramming and filling up the middle Parts." With this, frontality is established, though it is not until the 16th century that it is applied exclusively to define the exterior of a building. The word "fagade" is a relative newcomer to English, despite its deep implantation into the theory of architecture. The earliest record of the term dates to 1656, where it refers to the representation of the exterior of a house. Since
Kâpa Ancient Greek, head,	cara	gevel	façade
	Latin	Dutch	French
face	foris, foras	12th century	faire
irpoa	Latin, door, gate,	gibil	French, to make do 1370 face Middle French, side
	opening, entrance,	Old Dutch, façade, and	
Ancient Greek, prep-	outside, outdoors	each of the two axis	
osition of direction; forward to, that is,	frons	points of the globe	
toward	Latin, forehead front,	15th century	of an object (1370V
	façade; cover; outside,	gevel	Part of a thing whic'h
TTpÔaOipn	exterior, appearance	Middle Dutch, façade	is presented (1265) 1552
Greek (prosopsi), façade, front, face	facio Latin, 1 do, 1 make 7th century		
9POVTTÇ	facies, facere		face
Greek (frontis), meaning thought, reflection, care	Latin, shape, figure, outward appearance; face, countenance, visage 10th century frontispicium Medieval Latin, to look at the forehead, countenance, face. Classical Latin, forehead, and the verb, specëre, meaning "to look"		Late Middle French façade 16th century frontispice French
at least 1933 in English, the term has also had negative connotations of false appearances. The word is borrowed from the French face, which evolved from Middle French meaning visage, to the "thing which is presented." In other languages descending from Latin, the words for façade relate to countenance (cara in Spanish). In Dutch, gevel existed from the 15th century and descends from the Old Dutch term for the axes of the Earth, with roots in the Old Slavic term for head and skull.
Unless noted, source is: "façade, n."
OED Online, Dune 2013.
FAÇADE
PAGE 7
„alian
.¡ata
18th century cara
façade
English
Vorderseite German 8th century
gebil
Old Saxon, skull and head
Portuguese, face, head jore
18th century cara
Spanish, façade
Old English, front, foreward part of something; foreground
1655
vor
German, before, in front of
"façade, the fore-front forepart, outside or representation of the outside of a house."
(Thomas Blount, Glossographia; or, A dictionary
interpreting all such hard words, whether Hebrew, f°ra
Greek or Latin... as are now used in our refined Old High German,
17th century frontispiece
English, principal face or front of the building, but the term is usually applied to the decorated entrance.
1800
"The façade [of the Cathedral of Orvieto] is a triumph of decorative art. It is strictly what Fergusson has styled a 'frontispiece'; for it bears no relation whatever to the construction of the building." (Dames Dallaway, Anecdotes of the Arts in England; or, Comparative remarks on architecture, sculpture, and painting, chiefly illustrated by specimens at Oxford)
1872
"The whole façade of the Evangelical theology." (Robert Browning, "Fifine at the fair.")
1933
facadism
English, the practice or principle of designing a building with elegance only in the façade.
"[FJacadism holds out a great temptation - it seems, on the surface, to give both sides what they want. The small, older buildings valued by preservationists appear to be saved, while the large new ones developers seek can still be built." (Paul Goldberger, "'Facadism' on the Rise:
Preservation or Illusion?," The New York Times, Duly 15, 1985.)
façadectomy
The act of retaining an original façade while demolishing the rest of the building.
"Chicago's largest 'façedectomy' was performed here in response to public outrage at the proposed destruction of the McGraw-Hill Building. More than 6,000 pieces of limestone were removed, cleaned, and rehung on a new steel frame structure." (AIA Guide to Chicago, 2004.)
English tongue.)
before, in presence of
1933
face (of a person animal); counte-Kce, expression, face; "I-appearance, look; 90 oirietry) face, side
PAGE 8	FAÇADE
TENSIONS OF THE FAÇADE
MORE
1936 Coat Sale, Copenhagen: "Overstocked with a large supply of men's spring and winter coats, a clothier... adopted a unique sales scheme. He erected a scaffolding around his store building and completely covered it from roof to sidewalk with more than a thousand overcoats." (Popular Science, Duly 1936.)
LESS
2006 Apple store cube mark two, New York, Eck-ersley O'Callaghan. The number of glass panels is reduced from 106 upon the opening of the first 5th avenue Apple store in 2006, to 15 In 2011 when it is redesigned for new, larger laminated and tempered glass panels.
REFLECTIVE
2013 20 Fenchurch Street (aka the Walkie Talkie), London, Rafael Vifioly. "Now the Walkie Talkie building is melting BICYCLES: Dazzling light reflected from giant London skyscraper scorches bike seats (and you can even fry an egg)." (Daily Mail, September 13, 2013.)
ABSORBANT
1962 (renovated 2006) Co-operative Insurance Tower, Manchester, Gordon fait and G.S. Hay. After renovation to replace original façade, integrated photovoltaics produce 183,000 kWh per year, the equivalent used by 75 houses.
FAÇADE
PAGE 9
NARRATIVE
1215 Siena Cathedral. Marked by the work of Giovanni Pisano (1250-1315), the façade features a dynamic cast of sibyls and Old Testament heroes instructing spectators below.
ABSTRACT
2013 Pauluskerk, Rotterdam, Will Alsop: distorted copper-clad façade with small windows punched through: devoid of symbolism.
ORIGINAL
15th century Basilica Palladiana, Vicenza, Andrea Palladio. "The windows ought not to be wider than the fourth part of the breadth of the rooms, or narrower than the fifth, and are to be made two squares and sixth part of their breadth more in height. And altho' the rooms in a house are made large, middling and small, the windows, nevertheless, ought to be all equal in the same order or story." (Andrea Palladio, The Four Books of Architecture, 31.)
COPY
1987 One International Place, Boston, Johnson/ Burgee Architects. "I'm a plagiarist man - you see, you must take everything from everybody - you see this is copied from Corbusier, that's copied from Byzantine Churches - this is taken from Jaipur, India. This is, I don't know, maybe this is original ... [Goes to flowers.]" (Philip Johnson interviewed by Susan Sontag, quoted by Charles Jencks in Modern Movements in Architecture, 208-10.)
PAGE 10
FAÇADE
MASS
2560 BC Great Pyramid of Giza, Egypt.
LIGHTNESS
1989 Pyramid entrance at the Louvre, Paris, I.M. Pei.
FACE	FACELESS
1909 Harvard Lampoon Building,Cambridge,	1959 Seagram Building, New York,
Edmund M. Wheelwright.	Mies van der Rohe, Philip Dohnson.
CRAFT
18th century "Architecture Element Workshop,' from Diderot's Pictorial Encyclopedia of Trades and Industry.
FAÇADE
MACHINE
2010s Jinan Parker Machinery Co., Shandong, China: a factory that makes the machines that, in turn, make façades: glass cutters, aluminum frame cutters, aluminum frame bending machine.
PAGE 11
ARCHITECTS
1814-1879 "[l]t is proper for the architect to opt for a type of decoration that designates unequivocally the sacred monuments, the public buildings, the royal houses and private residencies; a consideration too often neglected by our contemporaries until now. All of our frontispieces, our external façades, bear the same Imprint: the ones from our mansions are covered by the same architectural components, and the same ornaments are noticeable whereas they should be reserved for our palaces; as a result this negligence leads to a reprehensible default of propriety (or suitability), but also to a multiplicity of little parts, that will mostly produce a petty architecture and a mess (or disorder) that is felt in almost all productions nowadays, without excluding temples dedicated to divinity."
— Viollet-le-Duc.
ENGINEERS
2008 "Anyone who has marveled at the swooping, jagged, iridescent and crystalline buildings that are being strewn across the contemporary cityscape like diamonds and rhinestones might well have wondered about the jeweler. Who ensures that every facet is precisely cut? Enter the façade consultancy, a new category of expert in which Front is the leader. 'They are wizards at putting it all together,' the architect Neil Denari says. 'They've cornered the market.'"
— Arthur Lubow, "Face Value," New York Times, June 8, 2008.

PAGE 12	FAÇADE
chapter 1. façades before the “façade"
FABRIC
Since long before the European conventions of the façade, a variety of cultures employ elaborate systems for constructing the expressive exteriors of housing, mixing equal parts practical and symbolic demands to create the public "face" of the dwelling.
BUILDING A YURTA
1. Door jams and leafs
are the first components to be put in place.
2. Six keregl (foldable walls) are tied to the door jams In a circle. When folded the height of a keregl Is approximately 1.7 m, and they can be stretched as needed, adjusting the height of the whole structure.
structure, with the help of
a special pole called a
bakan.

5. Ropes and decorated bands are used to pull the structure together and secure.
crafted recess in the edo of the shangarak, the low end is tied to the keregi
1902 Installing a yurta, Turkmens, Trans-Caspian region.
Constructed in two to three hours, yurtas are an integral part of life for Kazakhs, nomadic Uzbeks, and Turkmens as a dwelling, summer home, and for rituals. Manufacturing of a yurta's core parts is done by specialized craftsmen; all other components are produced by women of the family. The structural components can last up to 150 years, woollen coverings up to 100 years. For some 1,500 years, the structural elements of a yurta remain unchanged.
6. The walls are wrapped with thatch braided with colored
7. The whole structure is wrapped in five woollen coverings
1906 Kazakh yurta, Semipalatinsk region.
FAÇADE
PAGE 13
19th century Typical northern Cameroon house, made from compressed sun-dried mud, is called case-obus (shell-shaped hut) by the French.
EARTH
The tall, conical dwellings of the musgum in northern Cameroon are built in shaped mud, a variant of cob. Cob building is a widely used technique, since no tools are needed -hands, earth, and water are enough. The simple process yields complex surface effects, which are more than decorative: the geometric raised patterns help shed rain. The coating and the veins allow people to scale the building for regular maintenance.
1979 Maintenance of mud-built cob exterior is a community ritual.
PAGE 14	FAÇADE
SOLID SIMULATIONS: THE STONE FAÇADES OF PETRA
"The Nabataean architecture of Petra is most fascinating as it displays influences of many styles but is at the same time uniquely Nabataean. It might be expected that their architecture would be highly eclectic since they had no historical architectural origins, as descendants of the nomadic Bedouin. It has been suggested that the Nabataeans did not build any of the architecture of Petra themselves but employed foreigners to do all the work for them. But this would seem unlikely as no single building is built in any single pure architectural style. Essentially the architecture is classical in style, more Greek in the earlier buildings and progressively more Roman in the later period, as reflected in the contact and trade with these two empires. The façades of the Treasury, Monastery, and Urn Tomb are highly classical in style, with correctly proportioned columns supporting architraves and broken pediments. There are several buildings which are truly Roman in style and origin, such as the Tomb of Sextius Florentinus, which were built by the Romans themselves after the Nabataean

FAÇADE	PAGE 15
kingdom was annexed to the Roman Empire in 106 AD (Sextius Florentinus was Roman governor of Petra around 129).
"An Egyptian influence is most noticeable in the earlier monuments, with the striking use of the obelisk. The obelisk is indeed an inherently Egyptian architectural feature; four tower above the aptly named Obelisk Tomb. Obelisks are found all over the site (on Hebei Madhbah for example), but some are thought to represent the pagan Nabataean god Dushara, and are sometimes called djinn ir Arabic (god blocks).
"The Assyrian motif of the crow-step was adopted by the Nabataeans.
This stepped motif has been enlarged and applied to cornices above many of the smaller tombs, especially on the so-called 'Street of façades.'"
— Trudy Ring, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Boda, International Dictionary of Historic Places: Middle East and Africa, Volume 4 (1996), 580.
ca. 100 AD Petra, Ma'an Governorate, Iordan: self-conscious simulation of the classical façade.
PAGE 16
THE FENG SHUI OF FAÇADES
Among its many other prescriptions for optimizing the energy flow of a building, the Chinese discipline of feng shui helps govern the orientation of the front of the home: the orientation of the front door (or most-used door -sometimes the garage in modern homes) is one of the key interests of feng shui. An elaborate matrix of cosmology, folk wisdom, geographical knowledge, and personal assessment determines the ideal direction of façades.
"Back toward the negative side; facing the positive side"
MOUNTAIN
¡S BJ^fa
BACK OF HOUSE
FRONT OF HOUSE
RIVER
"Seven-level" Sanyuan feng shui compass, drawn by Dahong Diang (1616-1714), a feng shui master.
Feng shui basics: figure showing the ideal residential site condition in ancient Chinese architecture. (From Ding Yi, Lu Yu, Yong Hong, Geomancy and the selection of architecture placement in ancient China, 1996, 273.)
"Back toward the mountain, and facing the river"
FRONT
PAGE 17
857 AD Foguang Temple East Hall: frontage composed of operable panels; solid, impenetrable back.
PAGE 18
ANCIENT MODULARITY
"Every house has three parts: above the beam is the upper part; above the ground is the middle part; under the steps is the lower part. ... No matter how tall the columns are, the dimension of the space should follow the proportion. If a column is one Zhang and one Chi, then the length between podium edge to column is four Chi five Cun. Besides, the brackets and cantilever eaves all have their own modules. They compose the middle part of a house."
— Manual of Carpentery, Hao Yu, 980 AD (annotated 1090 AD,
Dream Pool Essays (Meng Xi Bi Tan), by Kuo Shen).

FAÇADE
PAGE 19
"fê-m : rht ,
MJB£"
, iiÄ+EO ,	AB
¥*** , «1»¿s* , ÉB^ÿfé.© , «Æ9ts ¿.fi ,	, J3t*fiS*. ”
---ÄÄ1103 , «SÄSÄ»
"The First Hierarchy: nine cun wide and six cun thick. Palace Type with 9 Ilian and 11 Ilian would use this building module"
"The height and span of buildings, the length and sections of timbers, the sloping-folding of roofs, and the proper use of the carpenter's tools like plumb line and ink-string markings, are classified according to which class of Cai they use."
— Yingzao Fashi, Die Li, 1103.
PAGE 20	FAÇADE
LIFE OF THE FAÇADE
The stately court life of the Han golden age (206 BC-220 AD) Is a frequent subject in Chinese art, but In Ying Qlu's 1540 scroll, Spring Morning in the Han Palace, architecture becomes a central character. An ultra-refined world is expressed via the kinetic, operable, open façade that creates a social milieu...

FAÇADE	PAGE 21
PAGE 22	FAÇADE
WESTERN VS. CHINESE FAÇADE
The façade implies a certain conception of order, distilled from tradition. Yet Chinese houses have a wholly different conception of decorum: doctrine favors the notion that circles and squares are the natural units of geometry, rather than the golden ratio-derived rectangle favored in western architecture. Correspondingly, rather than height, horizontal mass coupled with the imposition of repeating elements on the façade is a symbol of stature.
1954 "First, no matter how big or tall the building, we can use our traditional styles to deal with it. Second, the best way to achieve traditional style is from building clusters and their silhouette, and the proportion of walls, windows and doors. Decoration comes secondary."
— Liang Sicheng, "Architecture of the Motherland," speech at the Central Scientific Conference, Chinese National Science Popularization Society, October 1954.
30°r ttoq
984 AD Guanyin Story-Hall and Gatehouse. The proportion of height to width of the central bay is approximately 1:1, the ideal rhythm within the Chinese system.
Rectangular windows
Circular proportions
Beaux-arts Golden Ratio / Three-Band Rhythm
vs.
Chinese Ratio / Four-Band Rhythm
PAGE 23
1933 Changzhou City Wujin Hospital, Uinpei Li. Proportionally identical to the UTA library, but adhering to traditional Chinese four-band façade rhythm.
1931 Library, University of Texas at Austin, Paul Philippe Cret, respecting Beaux-Arts three-band façade rhythm.
PAGE 24	FAÇADE
EGPYTIAN FAÇADES
Over millennia, the Egyptians develop a gallery of forms that create a legacy for world architecture, beginning with the mastaba, the block-like rectangular tomb of the ancient period, climaxing with the Great Pyramid of Giza, before assuming more elaborate forms in the mortuary complexes of the New Kingdom...
2670 BC Pyramid of Djoser, an example of the "step-pyramid" type, part of the Saqqara necropolis, northwest of the city of Memphis. Egypt.
From mastaba to pyramid:
"Djoser marks the beginning of what might be termed a megalithic age in Egypt, which reached its absolute zenith soon after him with Snofru, Cheops, and Chephren, and was subsequently never equaled. Djoser's step pyramid in Saqqara is the symbol of this cultural turning point.
The various stages of its construction both reflect the process leading up to it and suggest the developments that followed. The apogee of an evolution that began with Nagada, this pyramid also signaled the start of something new that would culminate in Giza and would stand as an exemplar to the end of pharaonic history. Djoser's tomb at Saqqara is, on the one hand, the culmination of the traditional idea of the tomb as a monumentalized palace, complete with the symbolism of the niche-filled façade and the elongated rectangular shape. At the same time, it is the first instance of the conception of the tomb as a place of ascent to heaven, represented by the geometrical symbolism of the pyramid. Djoser's construction combines both ideas; he retains the niche-filled façade and the elongated rectangle in the enclosing outer wall, and initiates the new design with the step pyramid inside it. The enclosing wall is nothing other than the façade of the archaic brick mastaba..."
— Dan Assmann, The Mind of Egypt: History and Meaning in the Time of the Pharaohs (1996), 55.
The niche façade:
"To understand the formal development of the private tomb and its elements in the Old Kingdom, it is necessary to go back to the beginning of Egyptian history. Above ground, the mastabas of the First Dynasty were solid structures with the underground burial chamber inaccessible. The façade round these brick-build mastabas consisted of a series of niches imitating doorways ('palace façade') among which one, in the eastern face near the southeastern corner, served as the focus for the posthumous cult. We can conjecture that this was the place to which offerings required by the spirit (ka) of the deceased were brought and where the ritual of presentation was conducted. A person standing outside the mastaba in front of this niche was facing west, the traditional Egyptian abode of the dead, and although we have no textual evidence from this early part of Egyptian history for this belief, already in the Predynastic Period most of the bodies were oriented towards the west. In the Second Dynasty a gravestone ('niche-stela') was placed at the back of this niche. In the Third Dynasty the niche developed into a small room approached by a narrow corridor, as if it had been withdrawn into the body of the mastaba for protection. This, indeed, was exactly what happened. A rudimentary one-room chapel was thus formed and the focus of the cult was now transferred from the outer face of the mastaba to the far wall of this chapel. The niche, formerly in the outer face of the mastaba, was now reproduced within the chapel itself. Such a transfer of function from one pa of the structure to another without disturbing the underlying logic is characteristic of Egyptian thinking and can be observed time and again in burial customs..."
— Daromir Malek, in the Shadow of the Pyramids:
Egypt During the Old Kingdom (1986), 51-52.
ca. ouuu BO Niche tagaae or Hor-Aha s tome ror Neithhotep, the first queen of ancient Egypt.
FAÇADE	PAGE 25
Tura stone cladding of the pyramids:
"On rare occasions, Tura stone was also used as the substance of the pyramid itself, in some of the vaults of its interiors for example, and for the final critical courses of the pyramid itself, the blocks beneath the apex still showing the distinctive paler white of weathered Tura stone in contrast to the creamy brown weathering of the blocks of local Giza stone that lie beneath them. Ultimately of course the Pyramid's fine white sheath of Tura limestone proved to be the building's downfall, the stone for many a medieval mosque and wall being quarried directly from these fine casing blocks and leaving the Pyramid's core of rougher Giza limestone exposed to centuries of erosion..." — John Romer, The Great Pyramid: Ancient Egypt Revisited, 2007, 182-183.
On the mortuary temple complex type:
"Hatshepsut's clever architects admirably surmounted the difficulty [of the site] by designing a temple on three levels, whose upper steps covered the underlying gravel slope. The three levels were linked by straight ramps along the temple's central axis.... The clever design of the temple of Hatshepsut was never repeated, but its elements included nearly all the essentials met in the later New Kingdom temples of Western Thebes: an axial sanctuary for the barque of Amun; a space open to the sky - either a courtyard or an unroofed part of a room - with an altar for the sun god; a room with a false door for presenting offerings to the temple's founder; and a place for commemorating a royal predecessor or predecessors."
— Byron E. Shafer, Temples of Ancient Egypt (1997), 93, 95.
On the symbolism of the Pylon Temple gate:
"The two flanks of the pylon, formal and imposing, symbolized the mountain ranges that hem in the Nile. Their form was a purely symbolic expression of Egyptian power. Though all architectural forms of the period ... had symbolic value, the Pylon Gates were among the earliest architectural forms that condensed wall, gate, and cosmology into a single declaration of power.
Like huge billboards, they proclaimed in image and text the great deeds of the pharaoh."
— Francis D. K. Ching, Mark M. Jarzombek, Vikramaditya Prakash, A Global History of Architecture, 2007, 58.
1500 BC Hatshepsut's temple, focal point of the Deir el-Bahari mortuary complex near Luxor.
2560 BC Pyramid of Cheops, Giza, originally clad in Tura stone, which would have given it an almost luminous quality in the sun.
1156 BC Pylon at Temple of Medlnet Habu, Thebes.
PAGE 26
EGPYTIAN FAÇADES
Below ground / no entrance:	------------- ----------------
Necropolis Niche	------------
2980 BC Niche Façade of Hor-Aha's tomb: no entrance, and the niche façade is enclosed by another layer of smooth bench wall.
Exposed exterior / with entrance -------------------1----------------
2004-2012 BC Royal Tomb at Saqqara: oldest freestanding monumental mud-brick structure in the world; originally coated with white plaster, with pilasters in a niched "palace-façade."
Multiplied exteriors
+ persistence of the ground-face ---------------------------------------
2670 BC Pyramid of Djoser: stacked pyramid, symbolic transformation of the ground-bound mastaba toward the sky. Surface is smoothed by limestone; remnants of the niche figuration remain on the enclosure wall.
Smoothed composite: abstraction of elements
2560 BC Great Pyramids, Giza, with a form of façade cladding: a block layer of slant-faced, flat-topped, highly polished Tura white limestone on its exterior surface. The smooth surface erases the angles of its predecessor, the step-pyramid.
PAGE 27
„„.¡„e of the pyramid. Easing power of temple ¡rici*
, DC Pyramid of Sahure: smaller pyramid, and temple below becomes |E important, following prolonged warfare in the Seventh Dynasty.
2503-2498 BC Fall of the Old Kingdom: construction during Fourth Dynasty exhausts the country, and causes the political splitting of Upper and Lower Egypt. Priesthoods gain power through collecting the country's resources for building the Great Pyramids.
forced orientation,
|rontal columns
1500 BC Deir el-Bahari: the temple complex, now elevated, finds orientation though an engagement with
landscape.
Learning from historic façades:
Mentuhotep reconstructs several temples during his reign. This reconstruction work influences his own tomb's façade construction, following the former regime's smoothy rectangular colonnades. Located on a hillside - possibly to reduce cost -Mentuhotep's tomb forces a single orientation.
Temple complex: pylon
BC A painted relief on the Edfu Pylon dipicts the union of Horus JPdfu and Hathor of Dendera, in the "Feast of the Beautiful Meeting.'
1156 BC Pylon at Temple of Medinet Flabu, Thebes: Rameses III orders a depiction of his victory at the Nile Delta Battle with the "Sea peoples" celebrating Egypt's only victory as a marine power, glorifying the god-like Pharaoh and his role in achieving this feat.
PAGE 28	FAÇADE
FRENCH EGTYPO-PHILIA
Egypt's monuments cast a long shadow. Eighteenth-century Europe makes ancient Egypt a pole of attraction for the artistic imagination, stoked by the tales of explorers. A growing "fashionable cult of sepulchral gloom" meets "the architectural search for purity of form, with a growing awareness of Egypt as a source from which stereometrically pure forms derived, and as the fount of the primitive." (Dames Stevens Curl, The Egyptian Revival: Ancient Egypt as the Inspiration for Design Motifs in the West, 2005, 173). The fascination reaches a peak in the paper architecture of Étienne-Louis Boullée (1728-1799)
1781 Cénotaphe dans le genre égyptien, Étienne-Louis Boullée. The vast imaginary structure seizes on the Egyptian volume as an image of the sublime for the age of reason.
FAÇADE
PAGE 29
THE EGYPTIAN REVIVAL
"Soldiers, from the height of these pyramids, 40 centuries look down upon you," Napolean barks to his soldiers during his Egyptian campaign in 1798, a military operation to displace the British, staged as a scientific expedition. The size and monumentality of the façades 'discovered' during Napoleon's adventure cement the hold of Egyptian aesthetics on the Parisian elite.
1798 Foire du Caire building, Paris, the earliest manifestation of Egyptian Revivalism: façade adorned with heads of Egyptian goddess Hathor.
1795 Maison égyptienne, üean-Jacques Lequeu.
A wiid concoction of obelisks (intended as seasonal clocks) and invented hieroglyphics.
1809 The Description de L'Egypte, published in nine illustrated volumes, documents the study of the lands traversed by Napoleon's campaign across the Mediterranean, presenting the nonwestern world through the veil of European culture and Enlightenment-era rationalization. 'Discovering' the ruins of ancient Egypt, and the historic monuments of an architectural culture that predates the westernized "façade," French scientists and illustrators struggle to make sense of an architectural language that arranges the elements of the façade in new and unfamiliar configurations. Writing about the Temple of Horus at Edfu, E. Domard searches for a context for the pylon, ascribing it to a mistranslation of similar Greek words to describe the alien concept of a façade that consisted of a large door framed by two blank masses...
PAGE 30
MODERNIST EGYPTIAN
The Egyptian influence continues into modernism, which finds in the ancient mega-spaces a way to approach the architecture appropriate to the vast volumes of the machine age.
"If one looks at the powerful and sturdy treatment of the Hauptbahn-hof (Main Railway-Station building) in Stuttgart by [Paul] Bonatz and Friedrich Eugen Scholer (1874-1949), not only is the Hatshepsut mortuary-temple recalled, but the wall-surface treatment of the temple complex of King Zozer at Saqqara by Imhotel (ca. 2600 BC) is quoted. Now these allusions to and quotations from Ancient Egyptian architecture are too common to be ignored (as they usually are): it should be remembered that the period immediately before the catastrophe of 1914-18 was one of intellectual ferment in which there was considerable interest in Egypt Ancient and Modern (quite apart from the interest shown in many other times and places)." (James Steven Curl, The Egyptian Revival, 372.)
13uu do ivionuary lempie ot naisnepsut,
Deir el-Bahari - a ghost that haunts the façades of the future.
FAÇADE
PAGE 31

1922 Paul Bonatz and Friedrich Eugen Scholer's Stuttgart Hauptbahnhof: modernism oriented towards the ancients.
1922 Niched façade of Stuttgart Hauptbahnhof.

PAGE 32
FAÇADE
FAÇADE
PAGE 33
PAGE 34
FAÇADE
chapter 2. façade façades by Stephan trüby
"The longer you look at a word, the stranger that word appears," wrote Karl Kraus. This is especially true of 'façade,' a seemingly natural member of the architectural vocabulary. One does not have to glance at an etymological dictionary to know where the word stems from - face, the face of a house.
But the animistic desire to discover an echo or even a reflection of one's own face in that of a house is not an anthropological constant. Compared to such elements as the floor, the wall, the roof, the column, the door, or the window, the façade is a remarkably young architectural concept. It was not until the 18th and 19th centuries that architects focused extensively on the façade,1 and quickly after its emergence, came its discrediting - and not just since the heroic modernism of the early 20th century. Could this turbulence be the root of the contemporary paradox in which, on one hand, the architectural profession has discovered a kind of disciplinary réduit, triggering a preoccupation with the façade in so-called "façade competitions"; while, on the other hand, the profession has long since handed over the task of actually designing façades to specialized "façade engineers"? In any case, the relatively young architectural element of the façade has deep cultural ramifications that have even been proven in recent neurological research.
I.	ORDER OF COLUMNS, SUPERIMPOSITION, COLOSSAL ORDER
In Western, classically influenced architecture, façades were built for centuries and millennia without anyone developing terms for them - Werner Oechslin, writing in the 1980s, suggested that the façade constitutes more a "result" than an "architectural form."2 Oechslin believes that the façade is the result of a bottom-up dynamic rather than a purposeful concept: "The term 'façade,' so familiar to us today, lets us forget all too easily that it, unlike a large number of architectural (Vitruvian) terms, has never enjoyed a clear, unequivocal definition short of understanding it as the result of a combination of a variety of circumstances ranging from building regulations to the aesthetic principles of architecture.''3 Before the façade as a whole crystalized in the field of vision of the theoreticians, their attention was centered on the columns, the capitals, the woodwork, and other forms of embellishment. The façade was codified according to its components, rather than holistically. It is not a deductive concept, but rather an inductive one, originating from the particular elements of the façade. Only over the course of a long development, it became something more general.
The column is considered the most important element of the façade in Western, classically influenced architecture. One finds the earliest descriptions of the three orders from Greek antiquity in the writings of Vitruvius. He introduces the Ionic, Doric, the Corinthian, as well as the Tuscan (the first Roman type) in the third and fourth of his Ten Books (ca. 30 BC). At the time, Vitruvius's series did not represent a closed set of canonic rules - a point emphasized by John Summerson. The English architectural historian writes that this task "left for the theorists of the Renaissance."4 In his Ten Books (ca. 1452) Leon Battista Alberti added the Composite order to Vitruvius's four, completing the sequence of five classical column orders.5 But it was almost a century later when the five orders were canonized, by fellow Italian Sebastiano Serlio.
Fig. 1
1537 Sebastiano Serlio's paradigm-setting drawing of the five orders: Tuscan, Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, Composite.

FAÇADE
PAGE 35
% 2
Dohn Shute's de-Wion of the orders.
His fourth book about the orders (1537) begins with a print (Fig. 1), the first of its kind, "in which all five orders are shown standing side by side like ill-assorted nine-pins ranged according to their relative slimness."6 Summerson points to the staggeringly positive reception of this drawing. "[T]he five orders as a 'complete set', all deviations from which were questionable, passed from hand to hand."7 Myriad architectural handbooks of the 17th and 18th centuries carried the torch of Serlio's example, featuring a representation of the five orders after his example - cf. Hans Blum (1550), John Shute (1563), Hans Vredeman de Vries (1565), Wendel Dietterlin (1598), Roland Fréart de Chambray (1650), Claude Perrault (1683), Dames Gibbs (1732), and Sir William Chambers (1759) (Figs. 2-4).8
As the most important elements of what would later be called the "façade," the columns can be arranged in two ways in the surface of the front of a building. The first principle is what Erik Forssman calls "superimposition." Superimposition came into practice in ancient Roman times when, if various orders of columns were mixed into one façade, they were arranged in fixed rows above one other, such as in the Colosseum in Rome (ca. 80 AD) or the Caesareum in Aphrodisias in Asia Minor (1st half of the 1st century AD). The richer orders were placed above the simpler ones: the Doric level at the bottom was followed by Ionic and Corinthian levels above (Fig. 5). This sequence of levels reminds Forssman of a face straining under performance anxiety:
"The columns or pilasters on a tower or a façade demonstrate the strength
1650 Roland Fréart de Chambray' version of the orders, after Serlio.
Fig. 4
1683 Claude Perrault's orders.
PAGE 36	FAÇADE
of the silent wall, so to speak, out of which the swollen arteries bulge under great exertion."9
In the mid 15th century, Alberti was the first to carry over the ancient concept of superposition to the façade of a private palace, namely that of Palazzo Rucellai in Florence (Fig. 6).10 The hierarchy of the orders was often extended to include one more order on the fourth floor, especially in the more modern buildings. Roman architectural mixing was thus taken one step further with the new Composite order, a column with a Corinthian capital, crowned by an Ionic acanthus leaf. The church of Madonna di San Biagio is a prime example: built from the plans of Antonio da Sangallo the Elder in 1519-40 outside the city fortification of Montepulciano, the church tower has four stories, whose pilasters adhere exactly to the hierarchy of orders: Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, and Composite (Fig. 7).
The second central principle of arranging columns on the front of a building is called the "colossal order." In this principle, "a determined order of columns dominates the overall impression detracting from the other orders."11 One order of columns hypertrophies on the façade - growing huge in significance if not also in scale - with all other orders taking a back seat. The difference between colossal order and superimposition could hardly be greater. With the level-bound column orders arranged above one another, the associations of the
Fig. 5
80 AD Colosseum: Doric columns at the bottom, followed by Ionic and Corinthian levels.
Fig. 6
Mid 15th century Alberti's Palazzo Rucellai, Florence: first use of superpositioned columns in a private house.
Fig. 7
1519-40 Church of Madonna di San Biagio, Antonio da Sangallo the Elder, Montepulciano: four stories, whose pilasters adhere to the hierarchy of orders: Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, Composite.
Doric, Ionic, Corinthian, etc. are, so to speak, "kept in check,"12 to use one of Forssman's expressions. But the colossal order allows for "more emphatic possibilities of characterization."13 Its emergence is generally agreed - by Summerson, Forssman, and Dames Ackerman - to be connected to the influence of Bramante's house for Raffael (ca. 1500; destroyed) and Michelangelo's Capitol façade (from 1537), both in Rome (Figs. 8-9). But, as architectural historian Monika Melters states, these structures can hardly be considered a "starting point for the development" of the colossal façade. Rather, they must be regarded as part of a greater development that began with Filippo Brunelleschi's façade for the Palazzo di Parte Guelfa (ca. 1422-1432) (Fig. 10). According to Melters, this building presumably represents "the first tentative, yet surprisingly convincing attempt ta create a fruitful frontal system, motivated by ancient
FAÇADE	PAGE 37
architecture and carried over onto an early modem palazzo front."14 Dust as Alberti transferred the "superimposition of the Colosseum" onto the façade of the Palazzo Rucellai, Brunelleschi conferred the "syntax of an ancient façade onto the early modern palace."15 As the colossal order became more a part of architectural practice (a theory on it at that time was hardly existent16), a frontal system came into the architectural world, integrating the juxtaposition of the building elements and decorative forms into one overriding principle. Later discourse regarding the "façade" only became possible in the wake of the colossal order.
II.	THE EVERSION OF THE CLASSICAL AND THE BIRTH OF THE FAÇADE
The practice of mixing orders in Western-classical architecture led to a stacking of columns on top of each other ("superposition") or the interpenetration of orders under the predominance of one order ("colossal order") on the front sides of many buildings. In The Classical in Architecture, Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre portray this method almost as a cult of purity (Fig. 11), referring to the more or less secret center of everything Classical - the idea of Temenos: "One could demonstrate in many other ways the relation between classical
ca. 1500 Colossal order: Bramante's house for Raffael, Rome.
rig. 9
By Further development of the colossal order: M|chelangelo's Capitol, Rome.
ca. 1422-1432 Emergence of the colossal order: Filippo Brunelleschi's façade for the Palazzo di Parte Guelfa.
PAGE 38	FAÇADE
architecture and society, starting with classical architecture's obsession with rigorous quantification, exactitude, and detail. This obsession has its roots in what anthropologists and historians call divinatory thinking, typical of tribal societies. The Temenos, the meticulously ordered temple precinct dedicated to a god or hero in achaic Greece, is the product of such divinatory thinking, governed as it is by taboos of pollution and the cult of purity."17 The authors derived this idea from Aristotle's Poetics.'11 Although architecture is not an explicit theme in his work on aesthetics, Aristotle's treatise leads to the view that a "world within a world" can be represented not only in Classical poetry and rhetoric, but also in a built artifact. Dust like any other work of art, a classical building is separated from the chaotic environment by the clarity and regularity of its elements, as well as by clear demarcation of boundaries.
In contrast to its surroundings, it is "perfect and whole," appearing as a unit.
A building's proximity or distance from the idea of Temenos has a name: "decorum." This refers to those scales which measure the "weight" of Western-classical cultural artifacts, providing a measure for how strong a speech is, how effective a painting, or even how a building plays a role in a religiously motivated war. In the words of Tzonis and Lefaivre, decorum describes "the fit or felicitous relation between genera and deity, nobility, kinship ties, professional affiliation, social position, occasionally ethnic roots and finally economic standing. In this context an elaborate iconography developed during the Renaissance together with sculptural allegories, emblemata, and devices."19
In his Ten Books, Alberti divides architecture into ranking groups, discerning between public and private buildings,20 which were differentiated by their distinct concentration of decoration.21 Alberti concluded that the most sacred of holy buildings was the city wall: "The ancients would set out the walls of their cities with great religious ceremony and would dedicate them to some deity for protection."22 Alberti articulates no less than an "investigation and typecasting of building forms on the basis of the decorum theory."23 As Heiner Miihlmann formulates, each feature or object is appointed a certain rank between sublime and lowly: "The ranking obtains its characteristics from the defining of the whole by war, i.e., through the sublime. It expresses closest to the war, second closest, etc."24 From the position of the town wall, the entire host of buildings is conceived and integrated into regulatory systems - systems that were discussed up through the Enlightenment and the emergence of modernity as "appropriate."25
Fig. 11
1983 Pursuit of the colossal order portrayed as a cult of purity by Alexander Tzonis and Liane Lefaivre in The Classical in Architecture.
In the 18th century, a movement developed against this historical cultural background, which led to the fading of Temenos, a reinterpretation of decorum, and a kind of "eversion of the Classical." "Do we idolize the blood of bulls and goats?"26 asked Augustus Welby Northmore Pugin, an architect and critic of the classical, in 1841. Whoever protests in such a manner, Pugin seemed to be saying, misses the fact that the relativization of Temenos is as old as Classical architecture. With the ascent of the Roman Empire, the archaic temple lost its divinatory rigor. The endeavor, launched in the 15th century, to return European cities to an antiquity style also played a part in the profanation of the classical. Temenos's ultimate demise occurred when people began to realign streets, squares, and neighborhoods according to a regime of Classicalizing corrections - especially in Paris during Absolutism, for instance in Pierre Patte's plan for the Place pour le Roi (1765) (Fig. 12). At the moment in which the language of classical architecture was supposed to assist in the staging of municipal authority, it lost its traditional point of reference: the sacred Temenos interior of a "world inside another world." While the buildings on the Acropolis or the architecture of the Roman Forum might always have been accused of existing as disjointed solitary constructions, now the strenuously antiquated cities were as artificial as a film set. Contradictions did not exist anymore between the temples, but rather between a temple-like façade and the building
FAÇADE
PAGE 39
Fig. 12
1765 Classicalizing corrections in Pierre Patte's scheme for the Place pour le Roi, Paris, during Absolutism.
behind it. It was as if the secret center of the Classical - Temenos and its memory - had migrated to urban outdoor space. Over the course of time, the decorum doctrine became reinterpreted as a doctrine of caractère, emerging in the form of aesthetic perception:27 "The doctrine of character of the 17th century wants to unify expression and function within the speaking architectural form and prepares the way for modern effect aesthetics, whose instruments include the theory of cognition, physiology and psychology.''28
With that, the façade was born. Especially in Paris in the 18th century, the human face served as the model of the face of the house - above all, the abstract social face of the building contractor in the structure of the city (Fig. 13). In 1765, Dacques-Francois Blondel defined the court architecture of Louis the XV in the Encyclopédie VI: "From the decoration on a building façade, one must be able to evaluate the meaning, the motive from which it was built and the grandeur of its owner."29 Further: "One could say that the façade is for the building as the physiognomy is for the human body: this shows the nature of the soul, allowing for the evaluation of the inner sanctum of a building."30 But Blondel's caractère doctrine turns out to be little more than the classical decorum order, when he writes:
"As a painter, or a sculptor, must vary the expressions of his figures subjects - a soldier should not look like a hero, or mythological Gods should not be too human - the architect must opt for a given type of decoration which clearly suits monuments, public edifices, royal palaces and private houses; an aspect which our modern architects have neglected too much so far. Our frontispieces and external façades of hotels show the same embellishments which should be reserved for palaces. Flence, the result of this is not only a blameworthy attitude contrary to the proprieties, but also a multitude of details which lead to petty architecture and to a disorder of nearly all modern constructions, sacred temples included in order not to give a common soldier the features of a hero or the mythical gods features that are too human, it fits that an architect should choose a type of decoration that clearly distinguishes the holy monuments, the public buildings, the royal palaces and the private homes from one another. This obligation has been disregarded by the Modernists. All of our front walls, our outer façades feature the same characteristics: our hotels feature decoration that should be reserved for the palaces; such disregard invokes not only a reprehensible lack of propriety, but also a tangle of small parts, which add up to little more than tolerable architecture, not to mention a confusion, which clings to all products of our day including the temples devoted to God."31
Rg. 13
18th century Human face serves as model of the face of the house in Paris.
PAGE 40
FAÇADE
III.	FAÇADES IN THE BRAIN
Architectural theory comprises not only reflection on a building after the fact, but also preparatory reflection on what is being planned. Theoreticians constantly have one foot in prognostics. Since the 1960s, and especially in the 70s, planning theory (as part of the wider-ranging discipline of Design Science) has attempted to formulate the future competency of design and its intentional acts from a solely theoretical point of view. During roughly the same period, neuroscience has called into question the concept of intentionality and free will. Design science and neuroscience have hardly been epistemologically connected to one another up to now, with one exception: TRACE, a neurological research group in Germany and Switzerland, has conducted a series of experiments since the late 2000s relating to architecture and design (Fig. 14). TRACE stands for: Transmission in Rhetorics, Arts and Cultural Evolution.
In its neurophysiological examinations of brain electrical responses to architecture, the group uses a remarkable decorum diagram (Fig. 15). If one transfers the implicit architectural ranking of classical ancient architecture according to the decorum doctrine to a bar that goes from left (high-ranking) to right (low-ranking), then the following sequence appears: 1. city gate, 2. Doric temple, 3. Ionic temple, 4. Corinthian temple, 5. vertical sacred building façade,
6.	horizontal secular building façade, 7. undecorated house. This ancient Greek series of buildings, with the exception of the city gate shaped like a triumphal arch, can be considered the source code for all ancient Roman and modern classical architecture. If one transfers two of these building bars to the x and y axes of a line graph, the graph generates an endless number of mutations, in which the features of one building are projected as decoration onto the façade of the other. In Example 1, a Doric temple is projected onto a vertical building (which results in a colossal order); in Example 2, a Doric temple is projected onto a horizontal building (also resulting in a colossal order); Example 3 shows the projection of a simple, undecorated house onto a horizontal building (Figs. 16-18).
The model, conceived by Heiner Mühlmann and drawn by Rainer Gabriel, draws upon hypotheses from evolutionary biology according to which cultural orders
Fig. 14
Late 2000s Neurological research underway in Germany to determine how the brain responds to classical façades.
Fig. 1SB _	_
Graph for producing monst|» "decorum" degenerates from high-ranking (left) to low-r^nkirig (right): 1. city gate, 2. Doric temple, 3. Ionic temple,
4. Corinthian temple, 5. vertical sacred building façade, 6. horizontal secular building façade, 7. undecorated house. By plotting the same on the Y axis, hybrids can be generated...
Fig. 16
Doric temple projected onto a vertical building, resulting in the colossal order.
FAÇADE	PAGE 41
are equipped with a two-channel system, whereby one channel functions as the display and the other as the objective channel. This two-channel model is most easily observed in rhetoric: while the objective channel regulates the "what" of the speech and the semantic and categorical correctness of the language, the display channel carries the "how" of the speech, "figuratively" using recognizable expressions, such as proverbs, quotes from poetry, beginnings of songs.32 Following the example of rhetoric, the decorum architectures in the graph can be regarded as projections of display architectures onto material architectures.
Using this diagram, TRACE has published three architecturally relevant, scientific articles in neurological journals. In the article "Brain electrical responses to high- and low-ranking buildings" (Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, Nr. 40, 2009), the authors neurologically test and confirm the insights made in treatises from the Renaissance (like Alberti's Ten Books) that buildings are invariably ordered - and also perceived - in a decorum between high-ranking and low-ranking.
In "Hippocampal contributions to the processing of architectural ranking"
(Neuroimage, Nr. 50, 2010), TRACE shows that the hippocampus - the part of the brain that plays a key role in the encoding of declarative memories - also plays a crucial role in categorizing architecture within a time-span of several hundred milliseconds. And in the study "Cross-cultural differences in processing of architectural ranking: Evidence from an event-related potential study"
(Cognitive Neuroscience, 2013), the authors demonstrate that the evaluation of architectural decorum is determined by the enculturation of the observer at least in part: buildings unconsciously deemed of high rank in the West do not necessarily trigger the same neurological responses elsewhere.33
a.	"Brain electrical responses to high- and low-ranking buildings"34
For this experiment, a total of 240 stimuli were prepared: drawings produced by an illustrator, 120 of which depicted buildings, and 120 of which depicted random everyday objects that were not buildings, for instance, tools, vehicles, plants, etc. (Fig. 19) Of the 120 buildings, 60 belonged to the high-ranking group, and 60 to the low-ranking group. The question of the experiment was whether the brain could distinguish between high-ranking and low-ranking architecture without explicit knowledge of the respective categories. Thus, the test subjects' attention was distracted by a "wrong question." They were asked: can you, in a very short perception time, discern between buildings and non-buildings? The test subjects were asked to push different buttons, depending on whether they saw a building or an everyday object.

Doric
temple projected onto a horizontal building, resulting in the colossal order.
Fig. 18
Simple, undecorated house projceted onto a horizontal building.
PAGE 42
FAÇADE
To answer this question, the authors recorded event-related potentials from the scalp and found that brain electrical reponses differentiated significantly between drawings of high- and low-ranking buildings. This proved that the brain can discern between high-ranking and low-ranking buildings, even though the awareness is distracted by a false task.
b.	"Hippocampal contributions to the processing of architectural ranking"35
In another experiment, it was possible to further differentiate between two distinct brain electrical responses to architectural stimuli: During an earlier time-window from 200 to 400 ms after stimulus presentation an event-related potential elicited by low-ranking buildings was significantly higher in amplitude than those triggered by high-ranking buildings. Brain electrical activity during this time-window is associated with a cognitive process that neuropsychologists call Electroencephalography (EEG) amplitudes - in this case the so called "negative EEG amplitudes," to be more precise - triggered by the low-ranking buildings are greater than those caused by the high-ranking buildings. This applies to the early reaction that is manifested 200-400 milliseconds after the stimulus release. Neurologists call this "early model selection." That these potentials elicited by high-ranking buildings are reduced in amplitude means that their early visual processing (i.e. the selection of suitable visual models that eventually permit recognition) needs less effort than the visual processing of low-ranking buildings. The varying height of the amplitudes in the early categorization phase means that the brain can discern between high-ranking buildings and low-ranking buildings, even though the awareness is distracted by a false task. Stronger reaction of negative potentials in the early reaction time of 200-400 milliseconds means that the cognitive reaction "early model selection" ensues more easily with high-ranking buildings than with low-ranking ones. From this, one can conclude that, in the early stage of visual processing, high-ranking buildings are perceived as being more familiar; the test subjects seem to have more experience with them. By contrast, a second brain electrical response during a later time-window was found to be high in amplitude to high-but not low-ranking buildings - but only if the participating subjects had normally functioning hippocampi, not when one of their two hippocampi was sclerotic and epileptic. This proves that the hippocampus, which is crucial for the formation of visual and verbal declarative memories participates in visual categorization processes of architecture. In this paper, TRACE proved that the
Fig. 19
120 of the drawings made for TRACE'S neurological experiment depicted buildings; 120 depicted random everyday objects, to test positive and negative instant reactinos to the visual stimuli.
notes
1.	Cf. Fritz Neumeyer, "The Façade - a Recent Concept," Nr. 6: "Fassaden / Façades"
I (December 1982), 33.
2,	Cf. Werner Oechslin, "Fassade - ein später I Begriff," Daidalos Nr. 6: "Fassaden," ¡^(December 15, 1982), 33.
! Oechslin, "The Façade-a Recent Concept,"
("Fassade - ein später Begriff," loc. cit., 33. John Summerson, The Classical Language of Architecture (Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1963), 9.
5. Cf. Summerson, The Classical Language Of Architecture, 9.
^■Summerson, The Classical Language of Architecture, 10.
Ibid.
j^HSummerson, The Classical Language 01 Architecture, 11.
* Erik Forssman, Dorisch, Jonisch, Korinthisch.
Studien über den Gebrauch der Säulen-^■ordnungerr in der Architektur des 16.-18.
ImJehrhunderts, (Brauschweig / Wiesbaden:
I Vieweg, 1984 [1961]), 37.
"• Cf. Monika Melters, Kolossalordnung-Zum K "olastbau in Italien und Frankreich zwischen IJ20und 1670, Berlln/München: Deutscher Kunstverlag, 2008, 10.
'S "orssman, Dorisch, Jonisch, Korinthisch, loc- cit., 38.
[ Forssman, Dorisch, Jonisch, Korinthisch,
„ 'oc. cit., 33.
r I Cssman, Dorisch, Jonisch, Korinthisch,
14 ™c- A- 37ff.
15 2!' Melters, Kolossalordnung, loc. cit., 43. V* Melters, Kolossalordnung, loc. cit., 46.
FAÇADE	PAGE 43
hippocampus participates in the categorization process; in other words, whether we know it or not, we have a storehouse of architectural associations from which we instantly judge the value of a façade.
c.	"Cross-cultural differences in processing of architectural ranking"36
Using the same experimental paradigm in Beijing with Chinese test subjects, the early categorization of high-ranking and low-ranking did not occur. The later (slower) categorization, however, did take place with the Chinese test subjects, meaning that subjects from non-European-enculturated cultures also discern between high-ranking and low-ranking, also without previous mention of the respective categories. But a certain enculturation is necessary for the early (fast) assignment of architectural decorum, namely a European enculturation. This enculturation can be traced back to cultural environmental influences. That could mean that European-enculturated people react as they do because they have seen Western European architectural decoration more often, thus stimulating a more pronounced memory storage in this respect. The fact that certain material forms trigger corresponding reactions in only certain populations makes it clear that neither brain function nor building function and their façades can be plausibly explained when observed as separate entities.
Despite the relatively short-lived reign of the Western-classical façade, its arbitrary development, and its composite nature, the neurological experiments of TRACE prove that westerners are already hardwired to assign rank to architecture even without knowing the concept of decorum. The façade is so powerful - like a face - that it triggers an almost pavlovian response, a cascade of judgments about hierarchy and value. Modern attempts to destabilize the hierarchy perhaps need a few more hundred years to embed themselves in the western brain.
16.	Cf. Melters, Kolossalordnung, loc. cit., 74ff.
17.	Alexander Tzonis, Liane Lefaivre, Classical Architecture. The Poetics of Order (Cambridge, / London: The MIT Press,
1986), 1.
18.	Tzonis, Lefaivre, Classical Architecture, loc. cit., 4.
19.	Tzonis, Lefaivre, Classical Architecture, loc. cit., 245.
20.	Cf. Leon Battista Alberti: Zehn Bucher über die Architektur (Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,
2005 [1452]), 179.
21.	Cf. Alberti, Zehn Bücher über die Architektur, loc.cit., 411.
22.	Alberti, Zehn Bücher über die Architektur, loc.cit., 342.
23.	kleiner Mühlmann, Ästhetische Theorie der Renaissance: Leon Battista Alberti (Bochum 2005 (1981)), 11.
24.	Heiner Mühlmann: The Nature of Cultures.
A Blueprint for a Theory of Cultrue Genetics (Vlenna/New York: Springer, 1996), 119.
25.	Cf. Alste Horn-Oncken, Ober das Schickliche. Studien zur Geschichte der Architekturtheorie (Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Rupprecht, 1967).
26.	A. W. N. Pugin, The True Principles of Pointed or Christian Architecture (London 1841), 54.
27.	More regarding the caractere term cf. Hanno-Walter Kruft, A History of Architec tural Theory from Vitruvius to the Present (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1994), 145.
28.	Fritz Neumeyer, "Nachdenken über
Architektur," in (ders., Hrsg.) Quellentexte zur Architekturtheorie (München: Prestel, 2002), 32.
29.	cited from Oechslin, "The Façade -a Recent Concept," loc.cit., 34.
30.	Cited from ibid.
31.	Cited from Oechslin, "The Façade - a Recent Concept," loc.cit., 35.
32.	Cf. Heiner Mühlmann, "Foreword," in: Stephan Trüby, Exit-Architecture: Design between War and Peace (Vienna/New York: Springer, 2008), 1.
33.	Here and in the following paragraphs, broadly adhere to the text of Heiner Mühlmann, Kants Irrtum: Kritik der Neuroästhetik (München: Fink, 2013), 107 (with kind permission from the author).
34.	Cf. Han Oppenheim, Heiner Mühlmann, Gerhard Blechinger, Ian W. Mothersill,
Peter Hilfiker, Hennric Jokeit, Martin Kurthen, Günter Krämer and Thomas Grunwald,
"Brain electrical responses to high- and low-ranking buildings," Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, Nr. 40, 2009.
35.	Cf. Nan Oppenheim, Manila Vannucci, Heiner Mühlmann, Rainer Gabriel, Hennric Jokeit, Martin Kurthen, Günter Krämer, Thomas Grunwald: "Hippocampal contributions to the processing of architectural ranking," Neuroimage, Nr. 50, 2010.
36.	Cf. Axel Mecklinger, Olga Kriukova, Heiner Mühlmann, Thomas Grunwald: "Cross-cultural differences in processing of; architectural ranking: Evidence from an event-related potential study," Cognitive Neuroscience (accepted 30.11.2013).
PAGE 44	FAÇADE
FAÇADES BEFORE AND AFTER "FAÇADING"
Façading: widespread Western practice (the term itself is coined in the 1930s) of demolishing an entire building but leaving its façade standing, to become the frontispiece of a new, usually larger building behind it. An orgy of respect for the façade as the standard bearer of capital-A Architecture, while at the same time eroding any possibility of authenticity for the beloved element...
1878 Toronto Stock Exchange
1993 Toronto Stock Exchange
1890-1989 Securitate Secret police headquarters, Bucharest
2003 Romanian Architects Association
FAÇADE
PAGE 45
H» Boston Penny Savings Bank	2007 Boston Penny Savings Bank
FAÇADE
PAGE 46
chapter 3. façades after the façade
concept and direction:
alejandro zaera-polo,
princeton university school of architecture
technical and historical expertise:
ignacio fernández solia,
arup
research coordination: jeffrey anderson
research:
jeffrey anderson, phi van phan, erik hermann, ian starling, and esther choi
executive text editor: gavin keeney
Disclaimer:
This is not an academic paper, but a historical speculation, a technological fiction not suitable as an exhaustive source but as a trigger of ideas in which we firmly believe. It is not thoroughly researched nor peer-reviewed. It is partial, opinionated, and inexact. But we hope it will fertilize many minds, spin off different forms of scholarship, and originate a new form of thinking about façades. It is, in short, a standard type of architectural writing, aimed at the construction of a new reality, rather at the faithful reproduction of a pre-existing one.
FAÇADE
PAGE 49
material Wm
assemblage^,
and literal^» embodiments*
PAGE 50	FAÇADE
A material and environmental perspective
by alejandro zaera-polo
Traditionally the façade has been understood as a composition, a surface to be designed primarily through proportional laws and linguistic codes.
element), but that its performance occurs through literal and material embodiments rather than through the ■ dialectics of superficial, ornamental representation and ' obliteration. Given the state of current architectural 'ts science, the aesthetic and affective performance of the façade must, arguably, become re-integrated with its associated economic, technological, cultural, and polif ecologies in order to reconstruct a proper contemporary discipline of the façade, or, as we would rather say, th^ building envelope.
1970s Economics and insulation have always been intimatelv connected. Economic waxes and wanes have seen a periodic thicken ing and thinning of the
envelope over the last
century.
Energy crisis causes insulation pinch
By HICK ORLOV	log of customers for the insulating tomers to only a few firms.	fairly with the •
For some 30 San Fernando Val- llrms	"There is no way any private try. he said. msuwton in**,
ley firms, the energy-crisis came Most firms indicated this company can compete.” he said. Delbo added he does not
While the façade as an element of architecture is one of the most thoroughly theorized, the idea of the façade has been called into question since the end of the 19th century. As such, the liberation of the façade from structural and climatic performances, facilitated by modern building technologies, may have inadvertently triggered its progressive devaluation. The traditionalist understanding of the façade is driven by faciality and focuses primarily on semiotic and compositional operations (proportional laws and linguistic codes) that are generally deployed on the envelope's surface. The exponential development of building technologies across the 20th century, coupled with the large scale of modern construction has disabled the compositional and ornamental approaches to the façade in favor of the material, quantitative, and constructive aspects of the building envelope. Rather than a surfacial understanding of the façade, a micro-sectional analysis is, therefore, required to transcend traditionalist forms of reading its history.
The hypothesis is, then, that the façade remains a crucial element of architecture (in fact, perhaps the most crucial
1981 Mike Davies' diagram of a futuristic computer-aided Smart Pane: an ultra-thin membrane, but densely layered and understood in section. Increasingly, the façade is understood less as a surface, no matter how thin it is, and more as a "thick" composition of layers.5
The material embodiment of economic, social, and cultural processes, rather than their superficial representations, has become the crucial aspect of the façade as contemporary architectural element. This implies the reconstruction of this element, not as a history of inventions, but as an anthropological study of the processes, ecologies, and tectonic assemblages that have evolved in parallel with the technical and technological development of this building element. These processes are primarily driven by the diffusion and application of dynamic ecologies of materials and technologies. Materials such as glass, systems such as curtain walls, and assembly logics such as rainscreens are not representations of cultural or political concepts, but are, in themselves, literal embodiments of larger ecologies, politics, and cultures.1
Each material aspect of the contemporary façade has direct attachments to the complex ecology of economies, politics, and social structures to which it belongs. The repurposing of the military industry after World War II, both in the United States and in Germany, in many cases toward the building industry,2 the tendency toward the use of opaque and insulated façades after the 1973 oil crisis,3 or the widespread use of titanium face-sealed envelopes after the collapse of the Soviet Bloc in 1991, are all examples of the evident connections between the technologies and materials of the façade and their diverse socio-political or cultural ecologies.4
FAÇADE ASSEMBLAGES
The concept of façade assemblage describes the incorporation of a variety of materials to form a singular ensemble. Façade assemblages such as curtain walls, double façades, or vegetated façades address environmental equilibrium comprehensively, drawing
PAGE 51
l|tip|e attachments into their processes of production K fnodes of use. A façade assemblage presents a ILiporary moment of equilibrium within the conditions of a Particular building environment (and by "environment" we Kggn a whole set of technical, climatic, social, economic, nCj political conditions affecting a building).
cgçade assemblages compound the complex set of agents d forces that determine a façade. For example, we can talk about the degree of environmental adaptation of a façade assemblage in order to understand its performance and how changes in the environment may affect the overall design and our aesthetic perception of it.
1950s Without Lever Brothers soap, Post-War architecture could have had a very different story. Charles Luckman, CEO of Unilever, brought the skyscraper back to New York, inventing the curtain wall as we know It.
In articulating environmental inputs, a façade assemblage may adopt a standard form, capable of being deployed to a wide range of projects, or a specific mode, designed for a particular situation. The range of possibilities between generic and specific, cheap and expensive, local and global types sets out probable performance standards that a façade assemblage may utilize in response to differing environmental conditions. However, a high degree of environmental adaptation in a façade assemblage is not equivalent to good design. A perfect environmental adaptation is also an index of the near-total submission to predominant epiphenomenal environmental forces and may endanger the species in the event of a sudden, subsequent change in such environmental conditions. This willing or unwilling capitulation may, indeed, be the cause for the extinction of the assemblage, just like the ignorance of the greater complex of environmental forces at play is often a reason for the failure of a solution.
Just like natural species, façade assemblages undergo a process of development, proliferation, and—sometimes— extinction. Unlike details, assemblages are never architectural singularities; they mobilize, instead, an evolving fabric of elemental and impersonal forces associated with architectural materials and their attachments. For example, the enormous success that double façades enjoyed in Germany during the 1990s, was due to a political ecology that combined the prominence of we Green movement, the fact that employment laws made °Perable windows and direct sunlight mandatory in eRiployrnent spaces, and an extraordinarily prosperous 'Oonomy. A weaker economy, the pressures of space 6Wciency, and the availability of affordable and superior alternative technologies have now considerably reduced 116 appetite for such double-façade technologies.
There is, clearly, never a singular, dominant representation attached to any façade assemblage; these representations are serial. Instead, there is a multiplicity of conflicting narratives and sub-narratives encompassing multiple ecologies, some of which are intrinsic to architecture, while others are external. Façade assemblages, such as precast concrete façades, face-sealed envelopes or media façades do not appear suddenly and evolve in a smooth historical continuum, following some inexorable path toward perfection; they do not have a progressive evolution whatsoever. They may lie dormant for decades, migrate from a parallel industry, or mutate in response to new environmental pressures or simple accidents and fateful errors.
1911-1913 The characteristic black steel-framed windows of Walter Gropius's Fagus Factory.
1929 Opting against steel profiles, in Le Corbusier's Villa Savoye, Poissy, France, the wood-trimmed windows are painted black to resemble steel frames.
If architectural history presents us with a sequence of canonical buildings and heroic architects, a narrative punctuated by instances of convergence, when everything momentarily reaches a state of apparent equilibrium, our approach here dissolves these moments into a dynamic evolution of assemblages, where we might follow their rise and fall. Most heroic figures of modernist architecture pale in the wake of assemblers such as Albert Kahn or Pietro Belluschi. Avant-garde architectural agency, as such, once in the hands of a few heroes (drinking from the fountainhead of inspiration), nonetheless disintegrates into a myriad of what might be called "sub-altern players," in this case apparent non-human actants, with names such as Corning Glass, H.H. Robertson, Tyvek... What would have become of Mies van der Rohe without Pilkington's float glass? And what fate might have befallen Frank O. Gehry without the final collapse of the Iron Curtain and the Soviet Union, plus the seemingly innocent or unrelated emergence of Dupont's advanced waterproofing membranes? How do such things converge?
THE SHIFTING SEMIOTICS OF FAÇADE ASSEMBLAGES
The façade has been understood (or misunderstood, by reduction) throughout the history of architecture as a face
PAGE 52
FAÇADE
possibilities, both past and future. Façade assemblage establish and feed these constraints, without preclude future evolution. They produce a "design space,"7 a a collection of intrinsic qualities of material components (such as tensional strength, thermal conductivity or flexibility), but also environmental factors (such as sunnl and-demand chains, markets, political economies, aesthetic trends, regulatory frameworks), which delimit th possible iterations of a material assemblage.	1 ~
These environmental factors do not only modify the actual design of the material assemblages through technological development, but also their semiotic performances and the way we experience them. Materials and material	'
assemblages become attached to multiple architectural narratives and representational systems over time. For example, in the early 19th century, steel windows became appreciated for their strength, slenderness and, in contrast to wooden windows, resistance to decay.8 They were immediately associated with modernist aesthetics and with the obsolescence of the traditional solid façade. While originally used for purely functional reasons, the material became imbued with ideological "merit." Steel windows entered into a rapid technical evolution, which made them even more desirable for the modernist cause. Yet the technical performance of a façade assemblage is not sufficient to guarantee its persistence as a species. The high consumption of steel during World War II led the industry to a return to wooden windows, as steel fabricators were pressed into military production. In wartime Italy, seriously afflicted by the League of Nations' embargo on coal shipments to the Axis powers, the use of steel windows came to be seen as a form of treason.9 Both the signification and the experience of a façade assemblage may be dramatically affected by the socio-political environment as much as by raw material advantage.
1995 The appearance of brick masonry construction in Mario Botta's San Francisco MoMA is actually a thin veneer of brick over precast concrete panels hung from steel, a necessary deception to meet seismic regulations.
While architectural culture remains often captive to outdated symbolic constructs embedded in both material and canonical forms (regimes of prestige as much as functionality), signification is, today, increasingly determined by performance (for example, insulating capacity), production (for example, how much embedde energy a material contains) and by relation to other materials and economies (for example, whether materia

that expressed the status of humans in relation to their environment, natural or cultural. It was addressed as a type of organism, but only in the most superficial sense. This resulted in a series of practices marred by their recourse to symbolic interpretations of the façade as an ersatz pictorial field. The "semiotic turn" of the 1960s continued this tradition by approaching the façade as a sign or code to be deciphered. With the growing interconnectedness of architecture to the complex gamut of social, geopolitical, and economic vectors that affect it, the conception of the façade as a simple surface of representation seems to be an inadequate method for determining its contemporary agency. To reclaim the discourse of the façade and propel it forward, we must first acknowledge the façade as a material entity subject to complex environmental processes.
Layers, not Surfaces: Typical frame wall with exterior rigid insulation, air cavity, and masonry veneer. When seen this way, the surface treatment matters little, only the logic and performance of the assemblage of materials.
Buildings are never experienced in a void. Experience is also contingent to the cultural ecologies of a material assemblage. Our perception of a façade is affected by the economic, cultural, and political regimes that inform its reality. The instability and dynamism of those experiences unfolds primarily on or within the buildings' material assemblages, where politics and economics have their most direct attachment and expression. Gehry's super-iconic Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, would never have existed if certain political and economic factors at play in the Basque territories in the 1990s did not require that the project present a radically experimental image, alien to any preexisting forms of local identity. Yet it is also attributable to the collapse of the Soviet Bloc, which made aerospace technology affordable to architects, plus titanium available at drastically reduced prices. While those sets of political conditions are now embedded in the building assemblage, and probably associated with the building for a certain generation of architects, they do not preclude the re-interpretation of the building by a different generation of "users"; for example, those born in the post Cold-War world, and post-ETA politics, or, all who are driven by present-day social media, the hyper-commoditized international economy, plus the attendant threat of rolling global financial crises.6 In this sub-narrative of rolling crises, one set of issues displaces or replaces another.
Buildings and their environments are permanently changing, but they are also constrained by a limited set of
FAÇADE
PAGE 53

B,ear as solid and/or expensive). Although it is certainly Pssible t° speak about the evolution of materials in some ■L such as the progress from plate glass to float glass, c development of high-strength varieties of concrete Kd steel- a genealogy of material assemblages per se is a 3 re effective means than normative architectural narrative it addressing material culture as a dynamic process ffected by incessant environmental change. Material Kgernblages evolve sometimes through alteration in their composition- but mostly through their combination with otf,er materials, which may decisively affect their eiformance and behavior. Façade assemblages have
'	• -	11 KYi/'-vz-lcio rvf Qviotonro^lO onrl ovnorionno o onnef
various
"modes of existence"10 and experience a constant
ocess of becoming or elaboration; they are not isolated from the flow of history, and they are capable of operating with a large degree of semiotic ambiguity, adjusting over time to environmental changes. The shift from a theory of materials to a theory of material assemblages is, arguably, crucial to produce a new "ontology" for situated façades.
1940s The efficiency of the Quonset Hut, a prefabricated corrugated stainless steel structure, led to the production of over 150,000 units during the Second World War. Postwar, these structures were sold as military surplus where they were used in many unintended public and commercial applications.
Moral claims have been common through architectural Mstory, particularly in modernism: Louis Kahn honored the honesty of bricks and the authentic expression of the arch; i-e Corbusier spoke about the sincerity of Béton Brut; and Mies van der Rohe praised the transparency of glass architecture. However, the complexity of the contemporary world precludes any assumptions on behalf of the singular authenticity or propriety of any privileged material or rT)aterials; the material ecologies operating today have become so complex that it is difficult, if not impossible, to Pass judgment on their moral, cultural, or technical aPpropriateness. Materials can no longer be easily bound ,0 certain "constants" or constraints measuring how they should be used, but are, instead, driven by invention and axPerimentation regarding how they might be used. Recent Prick applications, such as those developed by Gramazio
and Kohler,11 or concrete, in the work of Herzog and de Meuron,12 introduce entirely new properties to conventional materials. The capacity to simulate material effects and qualities allows values associated with materials to be perpetuated, even if so-called authenticity is absent. Neither the brick on Mario Botta's San Francisco Museum of Modern Art nor the stone in Dames Stirling's Neue Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart is load-bearing; they are, in both cases, thin veneers applied to precast concrete panels and hung with steel clamps. Yet most people will assume that these buildings are "brick" and "stone" and associate with them qualities of solidity and permanence.
2003 The curtain wall of Herzog and de Meuron's Prada Flagship Store in Tokyo is antistandardization, a distinct cultural trend. The glass skin is composed of flat glass and unique dimpled glass bubbles.
2000s The contemporary trend of mass customization allows any consumer to design any aspect of their shoe, supposedly expressing their unique personality.
Materials are constantly in movement; not only do they expand, contract, erode and decay, but they are affected by the changes in their own environment, plus by their engagement with changing values relative to other materials and their respective ecologies. As long as architecture remains a field where multiple forces crystallize in material formations, buildings will remain a field of decisions, conflicts, and negotiations over material selection, application, formalization, and even substitution. In the world of material assemblages, there are no inert, timeless materials, such as the self-conscious bricks of Louis Kahn or the transcendental glass of Mies van der Rohe. Everything shifts elsewhere, Incessantly, from ideation to new pragmatics, back to ideation and so forth...
The question is no longer about the authenticity of materials, but rather about the circumstances surrounding the conferral of certain qualities and effects, in relation to technical constraints and cultural ecologies. What cultural and political values do material choices uphold, both at the time when they are made but also when their products are subjected to changing values? The agency of architecture can no longer be maintained within the privileged and narrow sphere of the architect-author. Architectural decisions comprise a growing field of agents, with differing interests that change over time. This expanded constituency includes also non-human agents, such as materials themselves. Architectural agency is increasingly vested in materiality, which in turn acts as conductor-of
PAGE 54
political, economic, and social charges: the role that companies such as Dow Chemical, DuPont, or Rockwool play in the construction of today's built environment is enormous and unprecedented in the history of architecture. Their engagement with the historically constructed forms of the discipline is problematic and needs to be resolved.
THE EVOLUTION OF FAÇADE ASSEMBLAGES
Façade technologies often evolve or migrate from parallel industries. Their shifting material alliances within assemblages can be studied in terms of their adaptation to specific environments. A façade assemblage may exist for a long time in a latent stage, before it finds an appropriate environment to flourish. For example, the Exterior Insulation Finishing System (EIFS) was developed in the early 1950s in Post-World War II Germany as an effective and economic system for reconstruction and retrofitting of inadequate buildings during an energy-scarce time. Flowever, EIFS would have to wait until the early 1970s, and migrate to the United States, to find its ideal environment; that is, the large residential suburban developments in the United States that became the perfect niche for this technology, which was able to provide a well-finished, crafted appearance at a relatively low cost.
1970s The Glass Block Department Store In Deluth, Minnesota, torn down in 1981. After a series of highs and lows including a near industry collapse in the 1980s, glass block has seen a resurgence in the last two decades.
Environmental adaptation is crucial to these processes. The invention of a particular material, often transferred from another practice, is only a step in the process of its creation. Its transfer to façade assemblages is another step in the evolution of artificial ecologies. Extruded aluminum technologies were developed in the military aerospace industry well before migrating to the Post-War building industry and becoming the predominant technology in the construction of high-rise curtain wall assemblages. But there was also a combination of different environmental factors that tilted the renascent building industry toward extruded aluminum: for example, its superior resistance to corrosion and its price competitiveness.’3 Not unlike the emergence and battle for survival given to animal and plant species, over aeons, it takes a similar combination of
complex factors for any architectural species to prevail The difference in time scales hardly matters.
Attempting to understand material assemblages in this manner requires searching beyond their innate propert' toward the context of a permanently changing or mutat^ environment of various and sundry attachments. Innate ^ properties are obviously important: asbestos, for examnl was for decades a semi-mythical material, both insulatin * and durable, or apparently "unassailable.''14 Its full mate' impact, specifically its long ignored—or suppressed— incompatibility with the respiratory systems of humans became, subsequently, an exceptional example of the” catastrophic implosion of a single material species.
Flowever, innate material properties do not account exclusively for a material assemblage's vicissitudes: an immaculate technological, environmental, or economical performance does not guarantee its survival as a species The divergent evolution of glass products is a good example of this. Both are perfectly viable façade systems tried and tested through extensive use, but they have quite a different aesthetic effect. The intensive use of glass blocks in residential developments in the 1980s made it so ubiquitous that its utilitarian appeal rapidly faded, foremost in comparison to the contemporaneous multiple and simultaneous applications that sheet-glass technology developed. The glass block industry became a victim of its own success, a type of architectural-material pop star, and decline followed quickly as the fashionable appreciation for its youthful "workmanship" faded.
The rise and fall of materials that captured the interest of a certain time is a well-known narrative: mirror coating in curtain walls after the 1973 oil crisis, corrugated-steel cladding in the harsh economy of the early 1990s, perforated and expanded metal rainscreens during the "spectacular" late 1990s and early 2000s... Façade assemblages have a much higher metabolic rate than façade materials, and none of their honorable stability and permanence.
Legal and regulatory frameworks are often an important factor in the dynamics of façade assemblages. The prosperous economies of Post-War America, which largely sponsored the explosion of suburban, single-family housing, produced a massive development and deployment of allied technologies, including the incorporation of air-conditioning systems into the typical American home. In order to provide the necessary internal controls (for example, regarding humidity and temperature), headlong research into waterproofing membranes, moisture barriers, and insulation systems, concluding in the ASTM insulation standards developed by Committee C16, made thermal insulation and moisture restraints compulsory elements in standard wall assemblages for all suburban houses of this decades-long period.15 Such changes in the economic an regulatory environment always act as powerful environmental incentives in the creation of façade species-

The
different modes of adaptation between a façade
Kginblage and its environment can take multiple forms. E/hile highly customized assemblages designed for a very Becific application tend to have much less evolutionary tential than those designed for wider use applications, El ambition to produce unique architectures has often Kgered the creation of new façade assemblages, which, . turn, have become broadly used.
Like a purebred dog, a highly integrated assemblage Ljntairis a form of hypertelia, an extreme adaptation to a unique environment that curtails its evolutive potential.16 For example, the POLA Ginza Building Façade, a project jggignëd by Chuck Floberman to provide adaptive shading ¡s |ess likely to become a dominant species precisely because of its sophisticated and highly specialized technologies, and, therefore, it is likely not to originate a substantial evolutive process. On the contrary, unitized, double-glazed curtain wall systems or slip-form concrete façades have gone in the last two decades through a shocking development in terms of insulation values and speed of construction, precisely because of the scale and ubiquity of their markets.
The other extreme is also true: the development of point-fixed structural glazing assemblages in the late 1960s by Pilkington, or the development of LED façades from the early 2000s17 emerged as very sophisticated technologies aimed at producing radically different visual effects, and became mainstream as these technologies developed low-cost possibilities.
1990s Following the widespread application of EIFS assemblages In suburban housing developments throughout the US, mould Issues In poorly detailed wall assemblages lead to a class-action lawsuit agalns the major suppliers.
2011 Peter Eisen-man's Aronoff Center,
Cincinnati, built In 1996 and clad In EIFS, went through a "Façade Improvement and Roof ¡«placement" In 2011 Mued at $21 million) to ^correct the exterior detailing" of the building.19
^ere are even more complex situations where some highly Megrated assemblages that contain the latent potential for a broad dissemination are deliberately prevented from sPfeading because their commercial potential as façade assemblages is much smaller than the revenues obtained from their uniqueness outside the building industry. For Example, Apple's "proprietary" details of the Apple Stores demonstrates that the company understands the
FAÇADE	PAGE 55
commercial potential of their custom-designed assemblages, and that it is trying to control the dissemination of the species through legal means (patenting), in order to preserve its uniqueness.
2012	Patent for the new Apple store in Shanghai, with monolithic 12 meter-tall curved glass, unique joints, and vertical and horizontal glass structure.
no, Pub. No.: US 2012/0090251 A1 „I, Pub. Date:	Apr. 19. 2012
In any case, the stronger the relationship between a particular assemblage and its environment, the greater its potential for further evolution. This environmental-aesthetic perspective on the development, spread, and extinction of building technologies supports Banham's disdain for Giedion's "firsts" (or patents) as truly transformative vehicles.18 For Banham, arguably, what mattered foremost was the Darwinian side of all of this; the arc and sweep of a species in "full flight," versus its emergence from the primeval soup of creation itself.
CONCLUSION
What follows Is a survey of 12 façade assemblages which we have identified to illustrate this theory. Probably there are others; maybe some of them could be rejoined. What these case studies have in common is that each represents an evolutionary path which, beyond their technical prowess, involved a broader range of socio-cultural and political values. Each one of them gravitates around a certain semiotic field whose evolution tracks certain changes in the overall environment. Some, such as curtain walls are grounded on their ubiquity and transformative capacity; others, such as double façades, are extravagant experiments that remain in the architect's imagination, despite their chronic failure. Some base their success on economics or changes in lifestyle, like all-glass environments or media façades. Their evolution demonstrates the environmental forces that drove the architectural decisions that formed these assemblages. Every one of those choices had and will have a crucial effect on the understanding and experiences associated with those assemblages.
PAGE 56
FACADE
ICIAL CRISIS FIF
i ANCIAL CRISIS FINAN
NANCIALi
KYOTO
OCOL KYOTO PROTOC
, KYOTO PROTOC
KYOTO P
KYOTO PROTC
WALL FÄLÜ
ilS ENERGY CRISIS ENER I ■
CRISIS ENERGY CRISIS
liter1 CRISIS ENERGY CF IS
.CRISIS OIL CRISIS OIL Cl H
WW2 ENDS WW2 ÉÑDS WN2ÆÛl E<!lMrt!ltf a«_ i
ENDS VWV2 ENDS WW2 ENDS
ENDS WW2 ENDS WW2 ENDSI
IDS WW2 ENDS WW2 ENDS
EGINS WW2 BEGINS WW2 BEgI
I 2 BEGINS WW2 BEGINS WW2 E |g if _ Stoor* b'Süí Ids.
: BEGINS WW2 BEGINS WW2 BE
ill S WW2 BEGINS WW2 BEGIN!
. -Pslucws
ASH STOCK MARKET CRASH STO
SET CRASH STOCK MARKET I
! MARKET CRASH STOCK MARI El CRASH STOCK MARKET CRAslj
ENVIRONMENTAL
STRESSORS
CURTAIN WALL PRECAST
AIRTIGHT WATERTIGHT RAINSCREEN INSULATED
2015
2010
• LCR«is
2000...-
Æf PsrttMs Com.
■ 3L KYOTO PROTOCO
/
YOTr,
1995
1990


1985
F**iQF
1980

1975
OIL CRtSK
1965
5****"*«»
1960
iWbSsHHn
1955
I qsns JYa'2'B.'SPÜPfl
1950
1945
WW2ENDS
BEGINS WW2 BEGINS
1940
1935
1930
7T CRASH STOCI
STOCK MARKET
1925
1920
DS WWI ENDS WWI ENDS
1915
1910
______QrwtD Dal S'asi
I
— -faiWWB&W»*-	s’.:"
1905
1900
1895
1890
1885
1880
1875
1870
1865
1860
1845
FAÇADE
PAGE 57
glass
DOUBLE TENSILE
MEDIA
GREEN
KINETIC
ENVIRONMENTAL
STRESSORS
2015
2010
2005
2000
1995
1990
ML OF THE BERLIN
1985
1980
f CRISIS ENERGY C
1975
IS OIL CRISIS OIL C
1970 1965 1960 1955 "J950"
i ,v/1 945
1940
W2 BEGINS WW2 BE
1935
1930
H STOCK MARKET C
1925
1920
3S WW1 ENDS WWI
1915
l/WI BEGINS WWI BE
1910
1905
1900
1895
“4806
1885
1880
1875
1870
1865
1860
1855
ESS BESSEM&TPRC
1850
1845
1840
1835
1835
PAGE 58
curtain walls: currency of the modern façadè
The curtain wall is the epitome of the modern façade and is widely identified with aspirations of transparency, mobility, lightness, and efficiency. As perhaps the most potent symbol of modernity in architecture, the curtain wall is typically associated with an ambition for total transparency and spatial continuity. However, the real driver behind this assemblage is the productivist ideal: the success of the curtain wall was determined by its capacity to replace long-dominant, heavy-masonry construction techniques with an equally universal façade system capable of reconstituting the image of the built environment, a transformation that first took form via the lightweight skin, all the while seeking a transparent whole.
PAGE 59
gRAVE NEW AND ARTIFICIAL
fue typical curtain wall is constructed with two of the most rtificial building materials ever produced: aluminum and 31 sS 20 Both require highly energy-intensive production and refinement processes. Aluminum is manufactured from bauxite ore via the Bayer and the Hall-Heroult processes. These techniques, developed at the end of the 19th centu-involve an electrolyzing bath that consumes vast quantities of energy.21 The industrial development of these processes and increasingly lower electrical prices helped drop aluminum from the status of precious metal to common commodity in the mid-to-late 20th century. Through another gnergy-intensive process, float glass is produced on a bed 0f molten tin. Sir Alastair Pilkington revolutionized the production of glass when he first developed this technology in the late 1950s.22 The residual environmental impact of both processes is well documented and includes particularly high levels of embodied energy, especially in the case of non-recycled aluminum.23
1850 The ridge-and-furrow glass roof of Paxton's Crystal Palace covered 28,000 square feet. The team of 80 glaziers Installed the roof glass panes at a rate of 18,000 per week.26
ALUMINUM STAINLESS STEEL STEEL
GLASS Bi 15 MD/kg CERAMIC TILE BRICKS MARBLE CONCRETE CONCRETE BLOCK
Embodied energy In bulling materials: aluminum and glass, the main components of traditional curtain wall systems, each require large quantities of energy In their manufacturing.
155 MJ/kg
1851 The main elevation of Joseph Paxton's glass marvel in London welcomed visitors into a world of clarity, lightness, and industrial rigor.
THE PRODUCTION OF TRANSPARENCY
B® Schematic diagram of the Bessemer Converter, a machine that C|litated the first inexpensive industrial process for the mass production steel in the 19th century.
Curtain walls do not so much aim at an idealization of transparency (which is certainly the underlying myth of glass architecture) but at an idealization of productivity and efficiency in mass production. At the core of the history of the curtain wall is the expression of industrial repetition. Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace in London was an iconic example of this association. It featured glass walls that were suspended from identical, prefabricated elements. Delivered and assembled as a kit of parts, the building's thousands of identical glass units were installed in only five months.24 Curtain-wall technology allowed for the production of the myth of the modern, globalized, transparent, and democratic world - yet another layer of modernist ideology, for sure, but one generally subsumed into architectural taste, globally, by mid-century. Notably, the original technological purposes for such innovations were subverted, or reified, mostly for cheap iconographic or scenographic purposes and the support of the general latency of modernist architectural hegemony.25
PAGE 60
FAÇADE
FANCIFUL BUT FAKE
OUUtO £ TtPtlO-
\ c"'f ton THM>U6« (OMlOnTAL STM t
''SCUW
mm1
njn<t concur i — num twin mu
ßißjsjHttrj-
n'tHHAUltHT
IT STUF
br?l Hjmct'concttTt W* Hum
M PLOUGH
sins/
1932 Axonometrie detail showing the cladding of the Daily Express Building, London: sheets of black Vitrolite are fixed to a concrete wall with aluminum strips.
reinforced concrete wall
birmabright joint strip
glass sheet
1932 The Daily Express Building, London, designed by Ellis and Clarke along with Sir Owens Williams, is commonly misunderstood as an early curtain wall. In Europe, the ideal of the curtain wall preceded its genuine realization.
1926 Early attempts at curtain walls such as Gropius's Bauhaus in Dessau are more related to a traditional window system than a curtain wall.
With a highly charged intellectual and aesthetic vision of the modern world, Giedion and Gropius, the critic and th architect, staged the emergence of the curtain wall throu\ the design of the Fagus Factory and the Bauhaus Buildin ' in Dessau. Gropius designed and promoted the curtain 9 wall, while Giedion ensured that the narrative entered criti cal literature, maximizing its socio-cultural effect.
The construction techniques used in early European allglass façades were not exactly curtain walls, but more closely related to variations on a traditional window system.27 The "curtain wall" of Gropius' Fagus Factory was constructed as a glass membrane composed of large floor-to-ceiling windows while the Dessau Bauhaus, designed ten years later, was developed as a four-storey glass membrane with an iconic, fully glazed corner.28 The façade of Ellis and Clark's 1932 Daily Express Building in London, designed with Owen Williams and constructed with a concrete backup wall covered in a glazed surface, was also meant to look like a curtain wall.29
1911-1913 Walter
Gropius's Fagus Factory, Alfeld on the Lelne, Germany, would Introduce the modernist trope of the glazed comer to emphasize the appearance of lightness.
FAÇADE
PAGE 61
1941 The endlessly repetitive curtain wall of Albert Kahn's massive Chrysler Tank Arsenal In Warren, Michigan.
1938 The Interior of Kahn's Dodge Truck Plant shows the ample light and air afforded the modern factory worker.
1938 Albert Kahn's Dodge Truck Plant In Warren, Michigan, with a fully glazed corner similar to the Fagus Factory.
THE REAL DEAL
Meanwhile, in the American Midwest, Albert Kahn produced millions of square feet of glass-and-steel façades, creating industrial environments that were superior to white-collar working spaces at that time. The prolific Kahn, responsible for an astounding 2,000 buildings, was an innovator in many building technologies which are now common.30 A very serious businessman, most of his advances were born of pure pragmatics and an industrialized approach to architecture.
PROVINCIAL SMART
In 1948, Pietro Belluschi completed the Equitable Building in Portland, Oregon, a truly advanced structure.31 This façade benefited greatly from existing aluminum stockpiles following World War II and features a double-glazed envelope, insulated aluminum spaniels, and green-tinted glass that absorbs solar heat and reduces interior 9lare. The flat, taut skin with no operate windows ushered in the era of the hermetically sealed building. Addition-% the building was fully air-condi-ùoned, with heat pumps and ground-s°urce heating and cooling, a system net would take several decades to achieve widespread usage elsewhere.
1948 The mullion details for the Equitable Building In Portland, Oregon reveal the reasons for its taut, sleek appearance: there is hardly any relief or indication of depth in the façade.


PAGE 62
1952 SOM and Bun-shaft, Lever House. Wall section showing the first fully formed curtain wall.
spandrel glass panel floor plate
vision glass panel
1952 The cleaning apparatus of the Lever House, New York, features prominently on the façade.
1952 Quality through repetition: Lever House celebrates mass production, repetition, and clarity.
The Lever House hailed the arrival of the definitive canon of the curtain wall through a momentous convergence of three technologies: plate and tinted glass, stainless-steel profiles, and automatic window cleaning. In addition, the hermetically sealed interior allowed another advanced technology to find its way to world domination: air-conditioning. As the curtain wall advanced, it would benefit heavily from technologies appropriated from other industries, including Kaiser Aluminum from the Post-War retooling of the aerospace industry, EPDM rubber gaskets borrowed from automotive technology, and silicone for weatherproof and structural sealing.3|These innovations demanded new levels of exactitude or precision engineering that resulted in a reduction of construction tolerances to 1/1 Oth of an inch.
THE BIRTH OF COOL: THE PARK AVENUE CANONICAL PERIOD
In 1951, Skidmore, Owings & Merrill (SOM) integrated R
/"i-f-f ¡/''Ci i n+/-\ fkoiK \A/oc>+ Pnoot cvr'icn-o + i/-'»*-.^ . . i
luschi's office into their West Coast operations while
at the
same time moving his smart-fagade concept to Park Ave nue, New York, New York. The Lever House on Park Ave' synthesized the first canonical curtain wall, featuring Bel^6 luschi's advances, with the introduction of a fully automat ed cleaning cradle.52 There was to be no more faking ¡t so it seemed then... The Ideal was now, indeed, the Real While Belluschi's Equitable Building already featured an ex tenor cleaning system, Lever House institutionalized the cleaning cradle. Charles Luckman, the newly appointed American CEO of Lever Brothers (a division of Unilever) and an architect by training, insisted upon fetishizing the cleaning system within the design: it was the perfect opp0r tunity to market the company's products (primarily soap) and have them shine on Park Avenue.35 Unfortunately, some of Belluschi's best inventions (such as insulated glazing and ground-source heating) were left behind in Portland.
1952 The façade cleaning gondola of Lever House, an important device for showing off Lever Brothers cleaning products.
1950 Charles Luck-man, CEO of Unilever America, brought the skyscraper back to New York and developed the first genuine large-scale curtain wall system.
FAÇADE
PAGE 63
following on the success of the Lever House, two more fa-"ous curtain-wall corporate HQs popped up on Park Ave-e. the Pepsi-Cola Building and the ever-popular Seagram Ruilding- The former, also designed by SOM, is the generic, gllable, corporate tower.35 Built eight years after the Lever uouse, the Pepsi-Cola Building still featured single glazing unitS/ and in some ways consecrated the use of curtain-wall technologies for the following decade.
^¡es van der Rohe's Seagram Building was the arty, Euro-ean variety of the curtain-wall species. Dark glass, empty eorners, and bronze brought a new desirability and dignity, if not probity, to the curtain wall and originated an aesthetic ¡het would become the paradigmatic representation of American Post-War architectural development.36 As opposed to the delicate, graphic aesthetic of the Lever House framework, both the Pepsi-Cola headquarters and the Sea-gram Building played with the notion of an H-shaped metal extrusion as an expressive, external ornamental structure that perfectly embodied the productivist nature of this ge-nus of assemblage. The quintessential High Modernist genotype had arrived, and it would spread around the planet regardless of climatic "ecotones," cultural differences, or its later, most-loathed status as symbol of rampant, internationalist corporate power.
■ fP
1958 Mies van der Rohe, Seagram Building, New York, corner detail. The expressive potential of the generic curtain-wall detail.
structural
column
glazing
ornamental
extrusion
I960 SOM and Bunshaft, the Pepsi Cola Headquarters in New York. This type of mullion was to become the default curtain-wall detail for the following decade.
t-shaped mullion
PAGE 64	FAÇADE
SAARINEN'S SUBURBAN CURTAIN WALLS
With huge commissions to build suburban headquarters for General Motors, IBM, Bell Labs, and John Deere, Eero Saarinen effectively transplanted Park Avenue cool to the suburbs.37The return of a flourishing American economy following the Great Depression and World War II led many corporations to opt for suburban campuses to accommodate their gargantuan scale and giant workforces. The curtain wall had become the new corporate standard, and Saarinen had the opportunity to investigate the industrialization of curtain-wall technology. His definitive contribution to the curtain wall involved the use of EPDM gasket technology adapted from automobile windows in place of less durable mastic joints.38 These façades featured louvers, reflective coatings, and opaque spandrels to obfuscate the interior. Saarinen's sprawling suburban boxes synthesized the corporate curtain wall, expressing the desire for the embodiment of enduring transparent and democratic ideals during the heyday of the Cold War. Nevertheless, corporate aesthetics evolved from an interest in transparency and the repetition of units to an increasingly opaque composition focused on the whole and the container. If the transparency of the original curtain wall rid the façade of the traditional solid/void duality, the corporate curtain wall achieved the same with opacity, turning buildings slowly into inscrutable corporate boxes. As the requisite expression of transparency decayed during this period, so too would the expression of the mullion itself in the years to follow.
1962 "The Biggest Mirror Ever." The Bell Labs building in Holmdel, New Jersey, by Eero Saarinen, earned this appropriate nickname from Architectural Forum.1'3
1958 Curtain wall mock-up, IBM's Manufacturing and Training Facility, Rochester, Minnesota. The lightweight curtain wall panels were, at the time of construction, the thinnest exterior walls in the world.
Saarinen's first and most innovative use of the curtain wall was at the corporate campus for the General Motors Technical Center in Warren, Michigan. Here he tested the limits of thin construction, designing one of the first curtain walls that utilized porcelain-enameled metals.39 The apotheosis of Saarinen's quest for thin walls came with the design of the IBM Manufacturing and Training Facility located in Rochester, Minnesota. The panels designed for this curtain wall feature an asbestos cement core between two layers of porcelain-enameled aluminum. At 5/16ths of an inch thick, the panels were so thin and light that they could be lifted by a single worker. Upon its completion in 1958, the exterior walls of the IBM Manufacturing and Training Facility were the thinnest in the world.40
FAÇADE
PAGE 65
tHE 73 OIL CRISIS AND THE OPAQUE CURTAIN WALL
plowing the '73 oil crisis, neither transparency nor K insistence on industrial production was considered ; necessary or even desirable. The mullion rhythm disappeared under mirrored glass and silicone joints,
SfeultinO in sleek, taut façades. Buildings became monolithic and chiseled, as seen in the Allied Bank Tower ¡n Dallas, Texas, the Pennzoil and Wells Fargo plazas in Houston, Texas, or the Pyramids in Indianapolis, Indiana. a whole range of usages for smoked and mirrored glass proliferated as a new sun-shading aesthetic, giving rise, jn turn, to a slightly paranoid aesthetic.41
1970s The culprit: The John Hancock Tower's original double-glazed façade utilized a resilient bonding that transmitted thermal stress to the exterior glazing, resulting in failure.
clear inner glass clear outer glass
silver reflective coating
solder connection
continuous lead spacer
metal edge clip
1970s "The Plywood Palace": The John Hancock Tower's base underwent a face lift before even opening as thousands of double-pane window units were replaced with single-pane counterparts that wouldn't fail.





1986 The Allied Bank Tower in Dallas, Texas, by Pel Cobb Freed & Partners. Upon completion, this was the tallest building in the world to feature a curtain wall with structural silicone glazing.44
With the failure of its innovative insulated glazing curtain wall, the John Hancock Tower in Boston, Massachusetts, became the Pruitt-lgoe of curtain walls. Even before the end of construction, 500-pound-windowpanes detached from the façade and shattered on the streets and sidewalks below. Later analysis revealed the faulty detail: the resilient bonding between the inner and outer glass panes was so stiff that it transmitted stress caused by thermal differentials to the outer glass, resulting in failure. The whole façade, consisting of 10,344 panes of glass, had to be rebuilt with single-pane glazing. Known as "the plywood palace" for the duration of its reconstruction, the building eventually opened in 1976 following five years of setback^
PAGE 66
THE POST-FORDIST CURTAIN WALL: DIFFERENTIATION'S POLITICAL UNCONSCIOUS
After the Cold War era episode of the opaque curtain wall and the demise of the corporate whole as a prevailing image, high-performance glass treatments and highly selective coatings allowed architects to return to transparency. Human scale, local attachment, difference, and transparency inaugurated a new age of politically correct curtain walls. Partially motivated by the growing discontent with global corporations and the phasing out of corporate aesthetics, it was the availability of a whole range of new glass technologies that enabled architects to explore curtain-wall aesthetics that were no longer inspired by mass production, industrialization, and corporate values, but by new aesthetics with distinctive political connotations.
The availability of high-performance (solar control and low-emissivity) coatings, ceramic fritting technologies, and multiple sheet and layered assemblies enabled the return to transparency without the drawbacks of excessive heat gain and solar radiation.45 Chemical bonding, silicone, warping and curving technologies, 3D modeling, and CNC manufacturing processes enabled architects to explore curtain walls with effects that are very distant from the canonical, repetitive, and orthogonal productivist qualities of old.46
2004 John Lewis store in Leicester, England, by FOA, uses a double layer of mirror-fritted glass with a differentiated textile pattern to gradate transparency and erase framing.
2004 UN Studio's La Defense office complex in Almere, Netherlands, features dichroic film with spectacular effects.
2007 The glazing system for Frank Gehry's IAC Building in New York was manufactured as flat panels, then "cold-warped" to shape on site. There are 1,349 panels in the system, each with a unique shape and twist.47
FAÇADE
PAGE 67
2003 Herzog and de Meuron's Prada store in Tokyo, Dapan, is a taut glass skin punctuated with dimpled glass bubbles.
2008 Barkow Leibinger's Trutec Building in Seoul uses prismatic, trapezoidal, reflective panels that radically alter its appearance throughout the day.
In the post-Fordist curtain wall, taut skin has been replaced with an augmented, mutating palette of molded, bent, warped, and folded possibilities. A politically unconscious desire to manipulate transparency, be it through coloring, veiling, tilting, or warping, has become the new curtain wall standard. The ideal crystalline transparency at the heart of the original curtain wall assemblage has recently been replaced, yet incrementally, by the acknowledgment and celebration of a necessarily distorted, diverse, and heterogeneous mix of effects and affects—a new reality. Concentration on multiple aesthetic and phenomenal effects has supplanted the focus on effectiveness and production. The seriousness of these new architectural wonders will be judged, as always, with the further passage of time.
2007 Herzog and de Meuron's Bond St. Apartments in New York use moulded glazing to cover the mullions of the curtain wall.
2004 OMA's Seattle Public Library is shrouded in a glazed dlagrld wrapper that negotiates both wall and roof.
2013 Herzog and de Meuron's Elbphllar-monie in Hamburg, Germany, features a curtain wall that combines advanced glass warping technology with gradated fritting.
lljj^Jean Nouvel 100 Eleventh Ave. in New York r'V'eaU.'es a curtain wall which Is differentiated IZes< glass pane inclination and glass color.
PAGE 68
FAÇADE
Precast-concrete assemblages have been morally questionable since their very beginnings. The technology behind precast concrete effectively grants the ability to artificially reconstitute stone, the very material essence of architecture, into a multiplicity of unnatural forms and qualities. Perhaps attempting to redeem itself from this unnatural act, the history of this assemblage involves a succession of associations with a variety of social programs and humanitarian endeavors, most of which inevitably ended in failure, and none of which resulted in a convincing alibi. Ultimately, precast concrete has only excelled through artistic performance - or, through exuberance. Only its most artistic applications, unapologetic about the falsehood of its materials, seem to have succeeded.
-a*
precast concréte: sin and redemption
PAGE 69
FACADE
2900-2600 BC The Callanish Stones are amongst the most iconic of the Ejgalithic stones and circle formations dotting the Scottish landscape, for 5000 years, the strength and durability of these sacred stone objects have been on full display.
TAMPERING with the sacred
Stones have long had a sacred aura. From the megalithic structures in northeastern Europe, to the Kaaba Rock in Mecca, to the Mo'ai on Easter Island, and to the Ise Shrine ¡rOapan, stones have been vested with apparent transcendental powers—the archaic surviving to this day. Whether igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic, stones have long been understood, universally, as the product of mysterious cosmic processes. Strong, durable, and sculptable, stone has been called upon to perform in almost all consequential human-built endeavors.
The Romans were the first to subvert natural stone through the innovation of opus caementicium, a hydraulic cement that could be poured into any form and would set into a stone-like material.48 Used extensively during the Late Republic for architectural and infrastructural work, it was employed most notably in the dome of the Pantheon. This example illustrates the structural and sculptural potential of the new, though false, material, and marks the onset of a proverbial curse that still besets the building industry today.
After the fall of the Roman Empire, artificial stone technology was, for the most part, lost. In 1756, John Smeaton, tasked with rebuilding the Eddystone Lighthouse, in Devonshire, England, required a binding material that could cure mwet conditions, and invented "hydraulic lime." This hydraulic-curing, cementitious material, commonly known as Portland Cement, is still the primary cement in use well into the 21st century. Some 120 years after Smeaton's interven-t'on, cracks began forming in the rock on which the tower ¡*,as rebuilt. Workers attempting to disassemble the lighthouse were unable to take apart the base of the tower due to the strength of the Portland Cement's bonds.49 Conse-guently, and as a testament to the lasting strength of Sme-a‘°n's invention, the base of his tower remains undisturbed as a monument to his contribution.
126 AD Monolithic deception: the coffered ceiling of the Pantheon in Rome masks the building's engineering marvels. The density of the cementitous mix lessens as the walls ascend. At the oculus, a mix of lightweight tufo giallo and scoria spans the ceiling's thin apex.
kitchen
store
store
1756 The cementitious "hydraulic-lime" was used to weld together the dove-tailed, granite stones comprising Dohn Smeaton's brilliant lighthouse foundation. It has beguiled the destructive forces of both man and nature ever since.
granite blocks reinforced with
high water
pw wate
PAGE 70	FAÇADE
THE FIRST PRECAST
In the 1770s, Eleanor Coade and her daughter began to manufacture Coade stone, a kind of artificial, stone-like fired ceramic, which was supplied in molded blocks for stone plaques and string courses. Sacred stone had been milled and reconstituted into fake, ornamental elements.60 Coade's stone substitute was embraced by the leading architects of the time, such as Robert Adam, John Nash, and Sir John Soane. During the 1910s, cast stone was developed extensively as a cheap substitute for expensive stone carving. Molds allowed for the repetition of classical ornamentation in department stores and institutional buildings in Europe and the United States, proliferating fake classical details and Art Deco motifs.
In 1906, John Alexander Brodie, a Liverpool engineer, tried to redeem reconstituted stone by inventing a system for casting concrete panels for industrial and residential use. In 1907, at Walton in Liverpool, he built the Tram Stables one of the first examples of comprehensive precast concrete building construction.51 That same year, Otto Wagner built the Österreichische Postsparkasse in Vienna, using natural stone as a thin veneer, which had to be fixed to the walls using aluminum-clad iron bolts. The assembly mechanism of these denaturalized sheets of stone, available through machine processing, became an ornamental motif. Whether by milling and reconstituting stone into a new assemblage that included steel, or by processing natural stone into impossibly thin elements used for the purpose of ornamentation, denaturalized stone initiated a dangerous path through modern architecture upon which only certain architects dared to tread.
1906 The exposed bolt heads of Otto Wagner's Postsparkasse in Vienna, Austria, leave no doubt that its cladding is literally tacked on.
1t770S,?°ade S'one „
stone-like fired cenf' 3
Is one of the firs, ^ Pies of mass pro^, precas stone, UseUdC6d
primarily for ornam» details. name"ta|
1906 John Alexander Brodie's innovative precast system extended beyond the engineering of panels; the complexities of material handling, on-site coordination and assembly all had to be considered.
FAÇADE
PAGE 71
fetrM^8 Precast blocks, panels and slabs became readily available, the profession of architecture °led with a host of innovative construction systems and assemblies.
PAGE 72
FACADE
1923 The Millard House in Pasadena, California, is a tour-de-force of a modest material, the first of four textile-block houses clad exclusively in what Frank Lloyd Wright once called "the cheapest (and ugliest) thing in the building world."56
PERRET, SCHINDLER, WRIGHT, AND THE MEANING OF CONCRETE
Frank Lloyd Wright inaugurated the lineage of modern ar chitects who dared to use precast concrete. Architects ' such as Walter Gropius, Mies van der Rohe, or Dean Pro never touched it. One needed a certain "will to art" to involved with this sinful technology (which Wright, and lat Marcel Breuer, certainly had). Wright spent a few ext renter intense and productive years between 1923 and 1926 in ^ California experimenting with ornamental concrete units known as textile blocks. Subsequently, in August 1928 h6 published an article in Architectural Record entitled "The Meaning of Materials: Concrete," in which he conveyed the "message" of precast concrete block: "If this material is to have either form, texture, or color in itself, each must artificially be given to it, by human imagination."52 The tech nique of casting concrete blocks favored by Wright was in fact, not very different from ornamental glass blocks. Wright had been involved with glass blocks as early as 1900-1906 and even held a number of patents.55
Rudolf Schindler, a Wright disciple, took on the master's interest in concrete and explored precast technologies to build his own house in Los Angeles. Dissatisfied with the industry's capacity to produce minimal joints, Schindler went so far as to articulate the separation between panels with slits of glazing.
1923 A lattice of tie rods and mortar connects the interior and exterior shells of Wright's textile block houses.
WHISHT
1922 Detail drawing and tile from the Freeman House in Los Angeles, illustrating the articulated edge of the textile block for the tie rod and mortar packing.
1923 Pixelization: Wright's textile-block houses were constructed on a block module. In later systems, the problem of the comer connection was solved with special folded tiles to wrap corners.

FAÇADE
PAGE 73
Ëj anwhile, in France, Auguste Perret was completing work T the 1923 Church of Notre Dame du Rainey, in which he Bperimented with precast concrete panels as permanent buttering. Perret's 1928 Villa Aghion in Alexandria, Egypt, demolished in 2014, explored the use of precast concrete ne|s to replicate the local mashrabiya (projecting window), aimed to protect the façade from solar radiation.54 perret continued experimenting with precast concrete panels in several projects, such as the reconstruction of Le plavre after World War II.
y^ile designing his apartment block in Rue Raynouard, Par-js perret discovered a logical modification to his method of using precast infilling units as load-bearing walls. Perret combined in-situ and precast concrete elements in the same building, using the in-situ concrete as a monolithic structural frame while the precast concrete served as an infill system.55 Fixing precast elements between the slab edge beams of the buildings produced Perret's characteristic vertical fenestration patterns. He developed secondary window frames and secondary structural members out of concrete in order to optimize his construction system.
1937 Auguste Perret's
Villa Aghion in Egypt
1922 Tilt-up: Rudolf Schindler, a Wright disciple, built his own residence in Los Angeles using tilt-up precast panels.
features a brise soleil of his signature precast triangular tiles.



precast unit
stained glass _______ caulk
1923 The envelope of Auguste Perret's Notre-Dame du Rainey near Paris is dematerial-ized as light shimmers through tessellated precast panels suspending fragments of glass.

1952 Clearly designed with steel in mind, the frame of Le Corbusier's Unité d'Habitation confronted the realities of postwar shortages.
PAGE 74
1952 I he precast brise soleil and rail infills ot uorDusier s unite d'Habitation, Marseille, help lighten the rigorous, heavy façade.
LE CORBUSIER'S REDEMPTION ATTEMPTS
Le Corbusier, too, dared to explore precast concrete technology, despite his obvious preference for the in-situ variety. Although an early adopter of the technology, he consistently refused to engage Its ornamental potential, choosing instead to focus on its capacity for industrialization and mass production.
Le Corbusier's first foray into precast concrete occurred in the Pavilion Suisse at the Cité Internationale Universitaire, Paris, in 1930-1932. Using precast concrete as a modest cladding material, he deployed a pattern of staggered blocks that is reminiscent of stone construction, an ironic "epitaph" to the skilled masons displaced by the technology. The panels form a taut skin on the elevated volumes, working in stark contrast to the in-situ pilotis and rusticated masonry wall at the building's base. Le Corbusier continued to specify precast stone as a cladding material, very much as a replacement for stone, in a variety of projects including the Unité d'Habitation at Marseille, the Durand Apartments in Algiers, Morocco, and the Clarté Building in Geneva, Switzerland.57 No decoration was explored in these iterations (other than the aforementioned staggered panels, an articulation that was very unlike the gridded systems used in the past by other architects).
PAGE 75
■FjThe warped grid of Le Corbusier's Philips PWion at the 1958 Brussels World's Fair is a ruled ape, ready for the mounting of regularized panels.
Musée National d'Art Occidental in Tokyo, 3apan, shimmer in light.
Two advanced precast assemblages from Le Corbusier in the 1950s demonstrate a more experimental approach to precast concrete. The first is the Musée National d'Art Occidental in Tokyo, built in 1959. The origin of the technique is unclear, but the panels take on a pattern produced by washing the outer layer of the concrete prior to curing, revealing a layer of tiny black pebbles suggestive of Japanese Zen rock gardens. The technique became widely used in Post-War Japan, both in precast and in-situ concrete details, perhaps an attempt to return some of the legitimacy lost in precast concrete's original de-naturalization. In contrast, Le Corbusier's Philips Pavilion at the 1958 Brussels World's Fair, designed in collaboration with Iannis Xenakis, was an attempt to develop a system of ruled surfaces, allowing the production of large, irregular geometries out of regular, precast elements.
1958 Ruled geometry: sketches illustrating the geometric derivation of the Philips Pavilion, a complex surface made of precast parts.
PAGE 76
SOVIET ATONEMENT
In Russia, some architects had begun using precast technology during the Stalinist period, promoting a new architecture of the people in the socialist style. However, precast technology would see a massive boom of a very different character after the Second World War. To ameliorate the severe postwar housing shortage, Soviet architects in the late 1940s sought technology that could reduce the time and cost for completing residential construction. At the Soviet Architect's Convention in January of 1950, Nikita Khrushchev, soon to become leader of the Soviet Union, declared rapid, low-cost construction technologies the ultimate goal of Soviet architects. Experimental designs including in-situ concrete and various forms of préfabrication were tested and in the end, prefabricated concrete panel systems were deemed most effective. This was the dawn of a golden age for precast concrete, finally redeeming the assemblage from its sinful beginnings; it's supposed illegitimacy, and its dance with ornament and all things frivolous.
iuhu vjrnameniai precast panels such as those in Andrei Burov and Boris Blokhin's Apartment Block in Moscow would be denounced by Khrushchev. Burov would go on to develop large panel systems similar to those in the K-7.
"Our country is engaged in building industrial enterprises, residential buildings, schools, hospitals, and other structures on a large scale. This construction program is of vital importance. We have an obligation to significantly speed up, improve the quality of, and reduce the cost of, construction... There is only one path, and that is the path of the most extensive industrialization of construction."58 — Nikita Khrushchev at the Soviet Architects' Convention (1950).
1955 Nikita Khrushchev: as First Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union from 1953 to 1964, Khrushchev attempted to solve the Soviet housing problem using precast assemblage strategies.
reinforced
concrete
columns
precast partition panel
1950s-1960s Vitaly Lagutenko and his team standardized mass housing in the Soviet Union with precast component systems like K-7.
As Khrushchev assumed his position as leader of the Soviet Union, he forbade unnecessary ornament in architecture in an attempt to purify precast concrete from its original sin. Khrushchev criticized craft-based building methods that he considered "backward, advocated the abandonment of block construction, and encouraged the building industry to replace "craftsmen" with "technicians." He had two goals: to increase the housing stock in the Soviet Union and to overcome the shortage of skilled workers in the Soviet construction industry.59 Khrushchev sent experts to the United Kingdom, France, and even to the United States to observe and study public housing projects and the utilization of precast systems.
metal framed windows
FAÇADE
PAGE 77

UolTi 1954 to 1961, under the orders of Khrushchev, Vitaly Iggutenko, an engineer and chief planner of Moscow, be-En to experiment with mass-produced, industrialized con-truction techniques, relying on factory-produced, precast-L,rcrete panel technology to meet rapid assembly felines. In 1961, Lagutenko's research institute produced L K-7, a five-storey building made of prefabricated elements that would, after being deployed in massive quantities, become known as the "Khrushchyovka." A stunning
64,000	K-7 units were built within the next decade in Mos-c0w alone. For later iterations of precast-concrete housing unjts in Moscow, space limitations necessitated the development of 9- and 12-storey buildings with elevators. This program lasted until 1971 in Moscow, but the rest of the USSR continued building Khrushchyovkas until the fall of ¡tilSoviet Union in 1991. This trend of concrete préfabrication grew so rapidly that from 1965 to 1977, new housing in the USSR, which almost exclusively used large-panel construction, grew from 25 percent to 50 percent.60
The proliferation of Soviet precast housing models would not be limited by the Soviet Union's borders. In the 1960s, the USSR gave plans for the K-7 housing type to its South American allies, Chile and Cuba, dispersing the Soviet concrete residential model throughout the world. Millions of such units are now well past their design lifetime but still occupied, despite their substandard, post-Utopia conditions. Many of them have been recently retrofitted with insulation, which was previously nonexistent, using the profits extracted from raising an additional floor above the typical five floors of the type.61
1960s No carpenters or masons are in sight as two technicians maneuver a massive precast K-7 panel into place.
1958 Models of the Khrushchyovka, which promoted the Soviet housing project at fte 1958 Brussels World's Fair.
t,®0s Model or city? The prefabricated panels of ^Khrushchyovka give it a dollhouse-like quality. <„_er units °t this type were built between SS™1 and 1968 in Moscow alone, creating end-Bf1 repetitive fields of mass-produced precast concrete housing.
PAGE 78
FACADE
ROMNEY'S OPERATION BREAKTHROUGH, RONAN POINT, AND THE FAILURE OF WESTERN REDEMPTION THROUGH THE WELFARE STATE
In the West, precast construction was also the object of several attempts at redemption, which, as in the USSR, were inevitably linked to social housing programs and the problem of population growth on the thriving capitalist side of the Cold War divide. In the United States, socially driven policies were represented by the 1965 Housing and Urban Development Act, which made provisions to improve the lives of low-income homeowners, such as home-improvement grants and rent subsidies.62 The goal was to sustain urban renewal instead of forcing low-income Americans to move elsewhere. To augment these goals, the 1968 Fair Housing Act established a federal commitment to reduce segregation in residential areas.
During the Nixon Administration, George Romney, an automotive industry executive turned governor, became the US Secretary of Housing and Urban Development. Romney's experience in the automotive industry led him to surmise that housing costs could be lowered using modular, factory-based construction techniques. Relying on this way of thinking, HUD constructed an unprecedented amount of housing for low-income families. Romney's "Operation Breakthrough" (which was phased out after Romney left HUD) was fairly successful in spreading prefabricated construction throughout the United States and improving building codes.63 During Romney's time as secretary, much of HUD's research funding was devoted to Operation Breakthrough. While serving as secretary, Romney oversaw the demolition of Pruitt-lgoe in Saint Louis, Missouri. Though this housing project was not built with precast concrete, it shared many of Operation Breakthrough's ideals of industrialization in the building industry.
1968 HUD Secretary George Romney and President Nixon. Romney would advocate heavily for the use of precast construction to relieve housing scarcity in the United States.
the
Meanwhile, in London, the Greater London Council was trying to apply the newly formed British Welfare State to housing construction. Concrete préfabrication was soon identified as a vehicle to supply part of the boom in tower block construction in 1960s London. Ronan Point Tower, built by Taylor Woodrow Anglian in 1968, used Large Panel System (LPS) building, a technique that involves prefabricating large sections of the building and bolting them together on site. Ronan Point opened in March 1968, but soon after, in May of the same year, an accidental gas explosion demolished a quarter of the tower. Four people were killed in the incident and 17 were injured.64 Though partially rebuilt using strengthened joints, confidence in t safety of LPS residential towers was damaged beyond repair, and the use of precast concrete largely abandoned m the public housing sector in the United Kingdom.
1968 The Ronan Point Tower, London, may have substantially survived a blast in May 1968, but it might as well have been considered a total loss: what the gas leak started, the Newham Council would finish in 1986 by electing to demolish the building.
FAÇADE
PAGE 79
1963-1964 Deep cuts: Marcel Breuer's extensive catalogue of precast panel projects includes the Torin Corporation Factory in Nevilles, Belgium, where the expressive, prismatic folds of the precast panel façade create a solar-shading device.
ARTY PRECAST: THE EXPRESSIVE LINEAGE
At the same time as these failed attempts to redeem precast concrete through incorporation into massive social-welfare housing schemes, a number of primarily eclectic and experimental architects explored the ornamental side of this assemblage and developed a remarkable set of experiments in the Post-War era.
1962 The subtle egg-shell coloration of the former Pan-Am Building in New York comes from quartz within the 9,000 precast panels that clad 1(5 façade. The critics were less subtle, declaring it "gigantically second-rate.''68
I63 Skin and bones: at Gordon Bunshaft's Yale University's Beinecke Rare °k and Manuscript Library, a muscular, geometric frame of precast stone spends the infill of Vermont Woodbury granite. From the outside, a stoic ■P,r°m the inside, an elaborate jewel box.
The Pan-Am Building in New York City (now the MetLife Building) was built in 1962 by Walter Gropius and Pietro Belluschi. The use of precast concrete for the façade elements is likely due to Belluschi, an architect with an ambiguous penchant for concrete and stone as building materials, as seen in his building for the Duilliard School in New York City and St. Mary's Cathedral in San Francisco.65 It seems unlikely that Gropius was the main protagonist in the use of precast concrete in the Pan-Am Building.
This rare escapade of Gropius and Belluschi in the annals of precast concrete is, nonetheless, overshadowed by the contemporaneous experiments of Gordon Bunshaft from SOM in the Lambert Bank in Brussels and the Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut, both of which used cross-shaped, structural precast façade systems.66 In both cases, the structural performance of the façade system is used as an alibi to produce unprecedented geometric complexity out of prefabricated building components.
Marcel Breuer also showed interest in a modern stony materiality, and is the most successful figure in the exploration of precast concrete building techniques. Moreover, Breuer had a long engagement with complex stone-cladding systems and denaturalized stone, developing custom fixing systems in order to support thin stone veneers with complex geometries, such as in the 1959 American Embassy in The Hague or in the 1957 De Bijenkorf Department Store in Rotterdam.67
PAGE 80	FAÇADE
FURTHER EXTRAVAGANCE
The extremist practitioner in the lineage of expressive, precast concrete architecture is none other than William Pereira, the first partner of Charles Luckman, after the latter resigned as the CEO of Lever Brothers (the United States subsidiary of Unilever that commissioned Park Avenue's Lever House). Pereira's extravagant and cinematographic precast buildings include the 1965 Hack Langson Library at the University of California in Irvine (which served as a stage for the Hollywood blockbuster Planet of the Apes), the 1972 Los Angeles Airport, and 1972 Transamerica Pyramid in San Francisco. Dorn Utzon's 1973 Sydney Opera House, 1976 Bagsvaerd Church, and 1982 Kuwait Parliament are further examples of a more artistic use of precast-concrete panels.69
Postmodernism would serve as an ideal opportunity to explore many building technologies, particularly precast concrete. Similar to the original use of precast concrete to replace expensive stone carving in civic buildings, the historicist branch of postmodernism would see in precast concrete an opportunity to produce classical moldings on façades within budgets. Ricardo Bofill is probably the most successful representative of this approach. The 1979 Antigone district housing scheme in Montpellier, France, and the 1983 Les Espaces d'Abraxas in Marne la Vallée, France, are some of the best examples of this classicist exploration, where the use of precast concrete façades on an unprecedented scale has ceased to seek redemption for the betrayal of stone. Or, perhaps it has continued to do so, but in a very postmodern version of the "urban" as a collection of pseudo-historical objects.
1972 A crushed-quartz aggregate within the concrete lightens the color of the precast panels in the TransAmerica Pyramid, San Francisco, California.
Dorn Utzon's Sydney Opera House shroud a cage of precast, pre-stressed concrete elements.
1983 Bofill's enormous housing scheme Les Espaces d'Abraxas in Marne la Vallée, France, toys with classicist motifs made from precast concrete.
This period saw many varieties of surface treatment. In Philip Dohnson's AT&T Building in New York City, built in 1984 and now called Sony Tower, the cladding is made of thin granite slabs between two to five inches (50 to 125 mm) thick. The slabs are mounted on a floor-to-floor, steel-frame substructure, guaranteeing their rigidity.70 With the texture of concrete having ceased to be desirable, Botta's 1995 San Francisco Museum of Modern Art uses a contemporary variation of the precast concrete panel; the façade, which resembles masonry construction, does not use dimensional bricks, but one-inch-thick brick veneers. These veneers are mounted on nine-inch-thick panels made of precast concrete, which are then hung from the structure.71 More recently, SHoP Architects' 2013 Mulberry House in New York City has explored not only the materiality, but also the geometrical textures of bricks mapped onto precast concrete panels.72
FAÇADE
^APOLOGETICALLY ARTIFICIAL
•rther de-naturalizations of stone and more extreme as-^blages with precast concrete panels can be found in ^application of photographic motifs to precast concrete Panels- For example, Herzog & de Meuron's 1998 Eberswal-Technical School Library, designed with photographer thornas Ruff, is one of the first buildings to use photo-con-rete on such a large scale. In order to achieve this effect, specialists produced shuttering stencils that serve as the ^Ids for the concrete. Made from silicone and polyure-Aane elastomers, the stencils' flexibility allows them to be easily applied and removed from a variety of forms.73
Literal photographic representation, computer-aided dynamic surface texturing, thin veneers of other materials, and color manipulating and performative aggregates are n0w an integral part of concrete, a material that has, finally, found its place in contemporary architecture as the embodiment of a willful artificiality. With the advent of such technological advances, and their final acceptance and broad dissemination, any modernist and utopian aspiration toward the "honest" use of materials is currently considered strangely reactionary, if not completely fruitless and, probably, very expensive. Vernacular architectures may still display such intentions, yet for different and obvious reasons. On a grand scale, such has now passed into the annals of architectural history as a passing flirtation with the equivalent in architecture of a longing for primeval innocence.
PAGE 81
2013 Masonry returns to the façade, laminated as a thin veneer on top of a precast panel in SHoP's recent Mulberry House in New York City.
2004 In Enric Miralles's Scottish Parliament, Edinburgh, the sacred objects return to the scene of the crime, embedded within precast concrete panels.
2011 LAN Architects' EDF Archives Center, Bure-Saudron, France, under construction. Steel plugs embedded in the concrete reflect the environment, abstracting the precast panels and making the skin appear paper thin.
1999 Herzog & de Meuron, Eberswalde Technical School Library. The concrete panels in this façade utilize a photo-lithographic process to transfer an image onto their surface."
PAGE 82
FAÇADE
breathless: the airtight envelope

WL
pPriK
The airtight envelope emerged in the early 20th century as a result of a momentous convergence between a series of political, social, and technological processes that led to a complete separation between inside and outside. The combined threat of industrial pollution, urban epidemics, chemical warfare, and even class and racial divisions, along with the development of mechanical ventilation, synthetic membranes, and silicones, triggered the rapid development of building technologies for sealed envelopes. The development of industrial-strength weapons industries, the new technologies of the Space Race, the paranoid-schizophrenic behavioral patterns of the Cold War, the rapid suburbanization of cities in the developed world, and, more recently, Sarin Gas attacks, SARS epidemics, and PassivHaus technologies have fostered the implementation of "hermetically sealed" mentalities and technologies. Many of these technologies have even developed their own overt or latent pathologies, such as the infamous "sick building syndrome."75 The breathability of buildings has, as a result, become a conundrum, to be carefully weighed and parsed, jn light of new environmental and security risks, both real and imagined.
:AÇADE
PAGE 83
absolute separation
ftie surface barrier system is an assemblage that attempts halt the infiltration of any water, vapor, and air at the very ! ytermost layer of the envelope, effectively making many of *he layers ^a<?ac*e proper part of the interior environ-ent. Also called "the perfect wall," the single-surface bar-jgf emerged after World War I as the new technological aradigm of the building envelope. There are two technological lineages of air-tightness: one that focuses on the ex-terior membrane as an all-encompassing and all-enveloping membrane, and a second, which focuses on the joints between panels.
The idea of completely sealing off interior air from the ur-han environment came at a time when cities were increas-¡ngiy perceived as toxic. A century of industrialization and the rapid rise of the automobile created unprecedented levels of pollution and noise, resulting in an obsession with sealing out environmental pollution. With the rise of air-conditioning, the age of the hermetic seal would call for an interior environment maintained at a perfect 72° F (22° C), all year round.
1920s A resident secures the tar paper on his Hooverville shack. Exposed bituminous building papers served as the most economical watertight façade during the Great Depression in the US.
1906 Sealed and ventilated: Frank Lloyd Wright's Larkin Administration Building in Buffalo, New York, as seen through the duct plan. One of the first sealed buildings, the drawings specified an "Acme Air Purifying and Cooling Apparatus."
PREDECESSORS
Tar paper and building felts were first produced during the early 1800s' California Gold Rush, as quickly deployable membranes for temporary structures. They immediately began to compete with sheet metal and shingles as a permanent, vapor- and water-resistant cladding material.
Frank Lloyd Wright's 1906 Larkin Administration Building was one of the earliest fully sealed buildings, designed according to the client's desire to keep the soot of industrial Buffalo and the nearby rail yards from penetrating into the work environment.76 Wright designed the building with sealed, double-pane windows and a mechanical heating and ventilation system, one of the first air-conditioned buildings in the United States.77
1925 Toxement Mortar Paste: zoning laws produce stepped building profiles that require new waterproofing solutions.
When early 20th-century zoning regulations required Manhattan skyscrapers to adopt receding profiles to encourage light and moving air to reach the city streets, architects had to come up with new ways to keep out the water, now both vertically and horizontally. Waterproofing and sealant manufacturers used these new regulations to promote their materials. As a result, new laws produced new architectural forms with new problems to be solved by new products.78
Standing-seam metal roofs and other metal-roof cladding systems, widely used in the 19th century, reemerged in the mid 20th century in the form of aluminum and stainless steel prefabricated panels, not only for roofs (where historically there was a reason for careful waterproofing), but also for façades.
PAGE 84	FAÇADE
WARTIME DEVELOPMENTS
Sealants have been part of façade assemblages for centuries. Prior to the development of synthetic polymer sealants, oil-based putties and caulks, as well as direct varnishes of oils, served as sealants and waterproofing solutions. However, with the wide commercial availability of synthetic polymer sealants, translucency and "seamlessness" became a ubiquitous architectural detail in the United States and, soon afterward, in parts of Europe. The transformation began in the 1930s as General Electric and Corning Glass Works first used silicone for its resistance to high temperatures in electrical insulation. During World War II, silicone paste was used to prevent electrical sparking in airplanes and as a sealant for fuel tanks in vehicles.
1958 Edwin "Dr.
Glue" Plueddemann developed the first silicone adhesive that can "stick anything to anything."81
ELASTOMERIC SEALANT
With the rise of synthetic sealants, the ability to completely seal the envelope to air penetration, while still permitting the movement of components within an assemblage, resulted in façades that were flat and monolithic for easier fabrication, assembly, and cleaning.
However, problems would soon arise. Walls with external seals are insulated on the interior of the sealed surface.
This forces the sealant system to be exposed to solar radiation, radical changes in temperature, and capillary action, stressing the joints and seals. Sealants are not effective for nearly as long when they are exposed to these dynamic conditions. Although elastomeric sealant technology rapidly improved, façade designers relied too heavily on sealants for connections between substrates. The design flexibility and affordability of elastomeric sealants made them highly popular and allowed designers to do away with through-wall flashings and other durable, secondary defense barriers. Over-reliance on the sealant-to-substrate connection is the main cause of failure in curtain walls made after the Second World War. The single-surface barrier is a boundary that relies on an absolute and total seal. Once the seal is breached, pressure differentials, capillary action, and surface tension draws water and vapor into the interior environment, with no way to escape.
1943 Pilots pose in front of an aircraft whose fuel tanks can now be sealiM with silicone. Dow-Corning's first silicone product, 4 Compound, was uspH as an ignition sealant that made high-altitude flight possible.	“'
AIRPLANES
During the Second World War, "corona discharge" resulting from moisture in aircraft electrical systems made high-altitude flight impossible. The development of silicone grease, Dow Coming's first product, solved this problem and, in the 1950s, the aerospace and aircraft industries continued to push the development of the silicone industry Chemical and Metallurgical Engineering in August 1944 heralded this material as "the most propitious single wartime development in the entire resins and plastics field" for its high dielectric strength, solvent-resistance, and ability to absorb the stresses of thermal cycling.79
In 1958, only how good its
NOW EVERYONE KNOWS For over eight years, architects and contractors have relied on MONO to weather-proof construction joints on thousands of buildings of every type the world over. This wide acceptance and proved performance provide proof that the powerful adhesion of MONO offers
1958 Advertisement for Tremco Mono Elasto-Meric Sealant.
Tremco knew MONO was
, LASTO MERIC .
IPllt Airyl* Tcrpolym«r S**l*nt
will seemingly resemble the performance ch*g* , ua^q MONO. But none can hope to provide the rel,ab‘' * jfe tim Why not? Experimental acrylic ,ormula,'°n\’"',J!;0n m»! consuming research and extensive field app'lC.,„tj(ttl»oun< job sites. It could be costly for you to become a t
FAÇADE
PAGE 85
aHERMETIC SEAL
»was during World War II that Pietro Belluschi foresaw the gsibility of aluminum (manufactured on a vast scale for Eg military) suddenly becoming available for building. He conCeived the cladding for the Portland Equitable Savings aIid Loan Building on this basis. Completed in 1948, it is first building with an exposed aluminum-and-glass, continuous curtain wall and also the first hermetically sealed building: the double-glazing could not be opened, as air-conditioning, used on a scale rarely seen before, demand-gd a perfectly controlled environment. Studies in the early 20th century would provide evidence that workers in a controlled atmosphere, exposed to the natural daylight afforded by glass façades, are significantly more productive than those at the mercy of a changing climate. Noting the problem of cleaning the new style of flush-surfaced buildings, particularly in the rainy Portland climate, Belluschi proposed a window-washing device suspended from the roof, circulating around the building on a track.
The inoperable windows that created this atmosphere of comfort were intended not only to keep the weather out, but also to seal regulated air in. Because employees are not reliable guardians of the air-conditioned office, the architecture took control for them, making inoperable windows a norm.
double
glazing
1945-1955 A plan detail of Saarinen's General Motors Technical Center In Warren,
Michigan, showing thejneoprene gasket sealing system at a column.
neoprene
gaskets
factory applied sealant
distribution cleat stainless steel fixing pressure equalization chamber
support sheet
1970-80s H.H. Robertson's Forma-wall 1000H sandwich panel with factory applied sealant between panels.
neoprene
gaskets
1948 Belluschi's Portland Equitable Savings and Loan Building in Portland, Oregon, is the first curtain wall with a perfect seal. The building features many firsts and signalled the arrival of a new era of extruded aluminium mullions.
1948 A face-seal wall assembly attempts to halt the infiltration of any air, vapor, and water at the outermost layer of the façade, effectively making the many other layers of the façade part of the interior environment of the building.
THE CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY
The car not only influenced planning and architectural forms, but architects also drew heavily from automotive technologies. Many architects, including Gropius, Wright, Le Corbusier, and Breuer, gained first-hand experience designing cars in partnership with companies.
Eero Saarinen's Post-War partnership with General Motors and his design for the GM Technical Center in Warren, Michigan, resulted in the introduction of neoprene gaskets, similar to the gaskets in car windshields, into his façade assemblies. Nearly a decade later, his design for the IBM Manufacturing and Training Facility in Rochester, Minnesota, used similar gaskets to hold vibrant blue panels in what was the world's thinnest wall assembly to that date.
Unitized panels with gaskets made assembly easier, but H.H. Robertson Company's pre-sealed and insulated panels were among the earliest airtight composite panels. First used in factory façades, the panels minimized poor on-site craftsmanship with factory applied sealant and compressible gaskets.80
\____column
insulated
honeycomb
core
PAGE 86	ADE
SILICONE: ENABLER OF A NEW ARCHITECTURE
Designers of new façades, desperate to develop a single exterior surface with a perfect seal, found their greatest ally first in polysulfide sealants during the '50s and, finally, in silicone after the early '60s.82 Silicone forms an impermeable, web-like membrane, which is able to fill seams and gaps between materials. Silicone sticks strongly to nearly any modern construction material, including metal, concrete, masonry, vinyl, and plastic; yet it is flexible enough to absorb the movement of thermal cycling. When traditional oil-based caulking compounds would no longer fit the bill, the universal panacea became "sealant."
g The first practical synthesis of organosilanes by F. Stanley Kipping in 1904 used the Grignard reaction to form silicon-carbon bonds.
The earliest work on silicones: the synthesis of « silicon tetrachloride initi-o ated by Swedish chemist «- Dons Jacob Berzelius.
Silicon
14
Si
28.086
"A convenient laboratory apparatus for the preparation of methyl magnesium iodide or other Grignard reagents" from the Chemistry of Carbon Compound,
1936. Apparatus used to mix com-	jo
pounds for the earliest organic silicone. «-
"The most propitious single wartime development in the entire resins and plastics field is the recent commercialization of the silicone," Chemical ? and Metallurgical Engineering,
2 August 1944.
The Dow Chemical Company and C° Glass Works developed high-tempera electrical insulations, founding Dow-Corning Corporation to carry out eary production of silicones.
PAGE 87
silicone sealant
« "The Total Visions System" and other products ra allow for structural glazing, bonding glass panes i- to glass mullions and eventually pane to pane.
A true low-modulus, one-component silicone sealant £; finally emerges that allows for unprimed adhesion *" and increased movement capacity, vastly increasing the role of silicone in structural applications.
Introduction	Sealant	Base Polymer	Behavior	Applications
Mid-1940s	Butyl	Polyisobutylene; isobutylene/isoprene copolymer	Thermoplastic hot melt; Elastomeric	Construction, DIY, automotive, electric applications
Late 1940s	Polysulfide	Mercapto-endblocked poly(bis(ethyleneoxy) methanedisulfi de) backbone	Elastomeric	Construction, civil engineering, aerospace
Late 1950s	Solvent-borne acrylics	Copolymers of acrylate esters and other comonomers	Thermoplastic	Construction
Eariy 1960s	Silicone	Poly(dimethylsiloxane)	Elastomeric	Construction, DIY, aerospace, electric and electronic applications, automotive
Mid-1960s	Waterborne acrylics	Copolymers of acrylate esters and other comonomers	Thermoplastic to elastomeric	Construction, DIY
Late 1960s	Polyurethane	Polyether (typically polyoxypropylene); Polybutadiene	Elastomeric	Construction, DIY, civil engineering, automotive
Mid-1980s	Waterborne acrylics (plasticized, “siliconized”)	Copolymers of acrylate esters and other comonomers	Elastomeric	Construction, DIY
Early/ Mid-1980s	Silicon-curable polyether	Dimethoxymethylsilyl endblocked polyoxypro pylene	Elastomeric	Construction, DIY, automotive, aerospace, electric and electronic applications
Eariy 1990s	Silicon-curable polyurethane	Di- or trimethoxy-methylsilyl endblocked polymer (typically polyoxypropylene)	Elastomeric	Construction, DIY, automotive, aerospace, electric and electronic applications
Mid-1990s	Silicon-curable polyisobutylene	Dimethoxysilyl- endblocked polyisobutylene	Elastomeric	Electronics, construction
Mid-2000s	Silicon-curable acrylics	Dimethoxysilyl-endblocked acrylic copolymer	Elastomeric	Construction
U.S. Patent Nov. 12,1985 Sheet3ofl2 4,552,790
5j Production goes global: first «- silicone plant in China.
Polysulfide
Silicone
Silicone replaces mullion façade expression: stop-less glazing allows the mullion to be invisible behind the silicone. Patent by Francis Geoffrey.
Urethane
I Fast-curing, two-part structural silicone sealant for faster, easier shop glazing of unitized building curtain walls.
Silicone sealants now indispensable ingredient for high-rise buildings.
M
Asia is the largest consumer of sealants at 35 percent of the total ?
market.	n
Timeline: Elle Gerdeman
PAGE 88	FAÇADE
AIRTIGHT MENTALITIES AND THE SUBURBAN BUBBLE
AIRLOCK a LIVING QUARTERS
The postwar period suffused the American consciousness with Space Race imagery. The aerospace engineering industry has always been particularly concerned with the tight seal and the air-lock. The weight constraints of launching materials into orbit pushed engineers to find ever-lighter materials that still maintained impermeable, airtight qualities. Challenges unique to the orbital space environment, such as rapid thermal expansion due to abrupt changes in solar exposure and corrosion caused by high-energy particles and atomic-oxygen bombardment, required unique material solutions.83
The widespread implementation of HVAC systems after the war reflected a new proclivity toward synthetic environments that would enable "easy living." When Levitt and Sons began rolling out suburban buildings on an assembly line in 1947, many included built-in central air-conditioning. The Levittown developments were not only built to be commuter towns, but also self-contained, "airtight" communities, with their own schools, shops, and community centers. The imagery of the Space Race, with its capsules, air locks, moon bases, and space suits, allowed controlled-environ-ment technology to grow in the public consciousness. Additionally, the Cold War threat of imminent nuclear annihilation generated a paranoid aspect to American society, whose citizens, built backyard fallout shelters and engaged in all sorts of preventive construction.
merit's Project Horizon studies the feasibility of a scientific military base on the moon.
1930s The first steel and impermeable, air-tight gasketed refrigerators.
1960s Buckminster Fuller's Dome over Manhattan, a proposition for a controlled environment on the scale of Midtown New York.
1958 Advertisement for Ger-Pak Barrier Film, a typical vapor-resistant polyethylene membrane applied to homes in the 1950s.
1947 Levittown after construction. Self-simi units with four plan options and central air-conditioning.
FAÇADE
PAGE 89
fLj|DS AND SHEETS
ÿÿhile façade assemblages clad with sealant- and gasket-Igd joints would take hold of high-rise construction, congous membrane systems would dominate the small and Ijd-scale construction industry. Rather than creating a orT1plete seal between exterior and interior environments, [Ti0Cjern air-barriers are generally used to create controlled ^readability. Typical air barrier assemblies include self-adhered sheet materials, fluid-applied materials such as »prays and foams, and mechanically fastened board stocks and films, which are commonly referred to as "building wraps-
p|ujd air barriers may be applied via trowel, roller, brush, or |jray. Many spray foams, widely used for insulation retrofits, simultaneously serve as air and vapor barriers. Tyvek and other "house wraps" are the most common form of ^¡(■jential and mid-rise air barrier systems. Many of the systems are semi-vapor permeable, allowing the façade to "breathe" and dry slowly.84 The application of air barrier systems has recently exploded in popularity. Many material manufacturers - such as Grace, Pro Clima, and SIGA -have products for every air-tightness need.
2010 Tyvek is one of the most common building wraps. In this image from Scapegoat Journal Issue 002: Materialism, it is said that "No other material embodies the complexity and ambivalence of contemporary building to the degree that Tyvek does."®
| | northern-cold climate - vapor drive interior to exterior ^ moderate climate - vapor drive equal both directions hot/humid climate - vapor drive exterior to interior
Climate Depending on climate zone, vapor-barrier assemblages are designed to dry in different directions.
2009 US soldiers apply spray foam to a military medical tent in Iraq to keep conditioned air from leaking out.
REGIONAL VARIATIONS
Building code requirements for air and vapor barriers are based on generalized climate types. An improper installation strategy can lead to mold and other moisture problems within the assemblage. The understanding of barrier placement was driven by new assembly technologies and problems resulting from incorrect placement within the façade, which led to litigation. This has yielded the common sense logic that "the air barrier goes on the warm side" depending on the climate.85
I-Vinyl or aluminum siding (perforations along bottom edge allow drainage and I drying to the exterior)
Building paper drainage plane piermeabie!
Hpalt-impregnated fiberboard or9ypsum sheathing (permeable)
Cavity Insulation in wood frame wall
»Polyethylene
vapor diffusion retarder
|Gypsum board with any paint Ip ¡»fall covering
ll^ethylene sealed to top P^teand bottom plate (air flow harder system)
Drying to exterior
Severe-Cold Climate wall assembly: Krerrneable air and vapor diffusion barrier to the Werior.
Vinyl or aluminum siding (perforations along bottom edge allow drainage and drying to the exterior)--------------
Building paper drainage plane (permeable)
Asphalt-impregnated fiberboard or gypsum sheathing (permeable) —
Unfaced cavity insulation in
wood frame wall (permeable) —	——
Gypsum board with semi-permeable latex paint and adhesive, gasket or sealant on top plate and bottom plate interior (air flow retarder system) --------—
Classic Flow-Through wall assembly: permeable interior wall finish and permeable exterior sheathing.
Vinyl or aluminum siding
Thin profile structural sheathing (‘Thermoply”). All joints between sheathing taped. Gasket, sealant or adhesive on top plate and bottom plate at exterior (air flow retarder system). Sheathing also acts as drainage plane.
Cavity insulation without vapor diffusion retarder (unfaced) backing in wood frame wall (permeable)
Foil-facing on sheathing (vapor diffusion retarder)
Gypsum board with semi permeable (latex) paint
Drying to .— interior —T/
Classic Hot-Humid Climate wall assembly: « Impermeable air and vapor diffusion barrier
to the exterior.
PAGE 90	FAÇADE
FAILURE OF THE SINGLE LINE OF DEFENSE
The dangers of exterior air quality contributed to the rise of airtight façades, but in the 1980s and 90s a new danger entered public awareness: the interior environment. Reports emerged on the relationship between indoor air and health effects, heralding a return to the necessity of "fresh air."
The postwar building experience demonstrated the high-failure rate of the perfect barrier, face seal, and other single line-of-defense strategies, with the exception of those in extremely arid climates, where moisture poses few problems. An insufficient regard to how sealants age, and the lack of control during installation, almost guarantees that the perfect barrier system will experience some degree of imperfection and discontinuity over time.
The single-barrier system is also involved with early curtain wall failures. Perfect seals must be completely impermeable to air, water, and vapor; yet perfect seals rarely receive necessary maintenance or replacement after their short lifespan. Architects continue to build single-surface seals because they are affordable in budgetary terms, not necessarily because they work in the long run.
I ilia* .lilla
iiM*
nr?
i	r« ■
danger
mí- . ^hiiirn
'■í I lili.ad
ItaimW-
ílirvJiT
Til ir
buildings
2000 Business Week asks: "Is Your Office Killing You?"9'
RETURN TO BREATHABILITY
Although intended to keep out harmful exterior climates, airtight façades contributed to the rise of harmful interior environments, including Sick Building Syndrome (SBS) and mold propagation. The tight-but-imperfect seal had the disastrous effect of trapping moisture inside the wall assemblage with no means of escape. Water and vapor infiltration of the single-surface seal led to façade failure and health problems for building inhabitants. Although volatile organic compounds (VOCs), bacteria, mold, and pollen are all contributors to SBS, the airtight envelope and inadequate ventilation exacerbated the many contributing factors. In the first half of the 20th century, building ventilation standards called for approximately 15 cubic feet per minute of outside air for each building occupant. Humorously, this was primarily instituted to dilute and remove body odors. However, as a result of the 1970s oil crisis, energy conservation measures reduced the regulation to 5 cubic feet per minute for each occupant.87
SBS and poor indoor air quality came to international attention in the 1980s and quickly became a cause for widespread fear, plus wide-ranging legal maneuvers.
The World Health Organization in 1984 estimated that up to 30 percent of new and remodeled buildings worldwide could be the subjects of SBS complaints.88 The relevance of SBS to the tight-seal mentality brought about an interest in a return to the breathability of buildings through semipermeable skins, operable windows, and ventilation, as well as a substitution of the fear of outdoor pollution with indoor contaminants. Indoor air, in much the same way
n
as outdoor air, was now permeated with "unknowns.
The perfect barrier was no longer considered a protective measure to separate a "harmful" exterior from the "healthy," conditioned interior.
FAÇADE
PAGE 91
tHE URBAN seal
fcgQil crisis of 1973 was pivotal, but the growing fixation ¡th airtight buildings was not only a means to conserve fussed for heating and cooling. The perfectly sealed building envelope became indispensable as the atmospheric j social conditions of American (and, to a lesser extent, |ur0pean) cities became increasingly toxic. All sensory ex-■«ure to the city, apart from the visual, was shut off. The Metropolis became an object to observe from lofty towers or enclosed boxes, its environment kept, at the least, at one remove.
f(ie sealed footbridges of Newark, New Jersey, illustrate the expansion of the sealed envelope. Office workers arrive by train at Newark's Penn Station or drive directly into park-|L structures under office buildings. They then travel by sky bridge to their offices and dine at subsidized cafeterias inside of gargantuan buildings. Such practices enlarge the sealed envelope to encompass nearly all aspects of urban life.
The impermeable assemblage, widely used in the construction of office park complexes, here transfers to a public transport hub, Newark Penn Station, New Jersey (original building from 1935), with new air-conditioned bridge allowing people to travel in a continuous sealed climate without using the street.
2000s PassivHaus section showing complete control of air exchange: fresh air enters the Mding through a filter from only one point.
20°0s Mode! of Pas-wall construe-^showing its thick-«»if atlC' complexity, as asan embedded,
CONTEMPORARY AIRTIGHTNESS AND THE PASSIVHAUS
PassivHaus is a recent German-developed standard for energy efficiency in buildings that aims to reduce their ecological footprint.89 It applies to ultra-low-energy buildings that require little intervention for interior heating or cooling, primarily through their impermeability to temperature, vapor, and air.
In an interesting parallel to early air-conditioned skyscrapers, certified PassivHaus designs often feature sealed windows, attempting to acquire complete control over all air exchange processes in order to boost the house to maximum efficiency. One would not enjoy a cool breeze passing through a PassivHaus in the summer since air intake occurs at only one point, and air supply and exhaust are mechanized. Once again, people are not to be trusted to maintain the temperature and energy efficiency of their own living spaces.
Despite nearly 30,000 certified PassivHaus buildings in Europe, the movement has been slow to catch on elsewhere. In the United States, only 90 houses were certified in the last decade, although many houses have been built according to the less stringent "Pretty Good House" formula, a trend in building that, while it does not meet the requirements of PassivHaus, strives to achieve a better-than-code performance.90 This resistance may be attributed to lower fuel costs in the United States and other countries in contrast to Europe.
PAGE 92
FAÇADE
Watertight and airtight assemblages are closely related, but distinct; though an airtight assemblage is always watertight, the opposite is not necessarily true. Traditionally, façades were constructed as breathing or, at the least, semi-permeable assemblages, while roofs were designed to be watertight, serving to shed water and move it away from the building. With the 20th century disestablishment of the façade from its structural duties, and as the use of mechanical ventilation in buildings became widespread, the breathability of the façade became less stringent. Roof technology and façade technology began to look more and more similar. Additionally, the growth of the lightweight metal cladding industry facilitated this progressive migration of roof technologies to the façade. The watertight metal envelope has two lineages that continue to this day: one, a low-end cladding solution used to deliver economic and time-effective building systems; and the other, a high-end solution used to grant flexibility in the geometry of the envelope.
1
FAÇADE
PAGE 93
r0MPLEX ROOFS: THE ORIGIN OF WATERTIGHT
Assemblages
l^e watertight metal envelope was first employed as a alleable cladding solution for highly complex geometries ¿specialized buildings. For centuries, thin copper or lead heets or plates would be used for waterproofing.
Churches, governmental buildings, and other highly visible and well-funded architectures would be among the first to be clad in metal. The most recognizable use of early watertight assemblages occurred in the cladding of domes in palaces and cathedrals.
The dome, part roof, part façade, needed a waterproof cladding that was highly durable, geometrically flexible.
The metal standing seam was the most common solution to shed water, while negotiating from roof to façade, and adapting to geometrically complex architecture. Ironically, the first use of aluminum sheets in architecture was for the cladding of a dome; that of San Gioacchino Church in Rome, in 1898.92
For centuries, copper has been the most common metal used for overlapped or standing-seam roof assemblages due to its resistance to corrosion, waterproof surface, relative cheapness and availability, and handsome green patina. Even the dome of the Pantheon in Rome was clad In copper plates and copper tiles before the material was pilfered for use in other projects.93
1701 The standing-seam roof is so prominent that it Sixes the name to the Copper-Roof Palace in Warsaw.
537 For centuries, metal cladding, as in the copper plates of Istanbul's Hagia Sophia mosque, has been used to create a watertight envelope for high-profile architecture with complex geometries.
1737 Part roof, part façade, the complex geometries of church domes are often clad in copper, as in Karlskirche in Vienna.
Because the process of making a watertight metal envelope involves overlapping and locking joints, this assemblage characteristically takes on a distinct pattern of parallel, upraised joints (also known as standing seam joints) with the subtle appearance of tiled units. Additionally, because this assemblage is most effective as a monolithic surface, any aberrations require unique details to maintain its waterproof performance.
Details Watertight assemblages have a range of typical details depending on the assembly method. Patterns of standing seams and overlapped metal tiles work together to produce a monolithic waterproof surface. Any apertures or other aberrations to the surface require unique details to maintain the seal.
PAGE 94	FAÇADE
SIMPLE, CHEAP, AND MASS PRODUCED:
COLONIAL TIN HOUSES
The watertight façade saw a massive proliferation in colonial architecture. For example, during the colonization of Australia, where resources were difficult to process locally, buildings had to be manufactured elsewhere, transported to the site, and quickly assembled and disassembled.
Finding a broad audience during the Dublin Great Industrial Exhibition of 1853, several British manufacturers began competing for Australian prefabricated and portable housing contracts.94 Manufacturers including Samuel Hemming, H. John Manning, and J.H. Porter all produced models for the colonization of Australia and other endeavors.95 Though these houses were typically clad with corrugated iron, they would come to be known affectionately as "tin houses." These buildings were characterized by their lightness, portability, waterproof or, at the least, water-resistant façade and roof, and a particular disinterest in heavy insulation. Responding to poor transportation infrastructure, every piece of the Hemming's Portable House was designed to be carried a reasonable distance by a man or boy.
1933 The Armco-Ferro House, a porcelain enamelled, insulated, frameless steel house built for the 1933 Chicago World's Fair.
Later, in the midst of the Great Depression, there was another upsurge of metal-clad building technology. The Armco-Ferro House, a prototype of a futuristic house exhibited during the 1933 Chicago World's Fair, arose out of a mindset in which advanced prefabricated houses were believed able to shelter the masses displaced by the recession.96 Designed as a traditional American Four Square house, the frameless, insulated, steel Ferro House would not be particularly warm in the winter, nor particularly cool in the surm mer, but it would keep out the rain, an could be prefabricated and assemble quickly.
1837 The Manning Portable Colonial Cottage for Emigrants. A simple and easy-to-construct prefabricated timber frame would be clad in wood or corrugated metal siding.
1853 A portable town for Australia erected at Hemming's Patent Portable House Manufactory in Bristol, England, to be dismantled and shipped to the Bishop of Melbourne. The houses were made from galvanized corrugated iron. Zinc for the galvanizing process was first shipped from Australia, processed in Bristol and then sent back as the houses.
FAÇADE
PAGE 95
lArGe-scale production
«booming industrial economy sought metal to quickly clad sSive factories that had been commissioned to feed the Kg{ machine in the United States. Albert Kahn, the most Eminent industrial architect of the early 20th century, loU|d design hundreds of modern factories throughout ¡he United States, employing not only primitive curtain-wall technology, but also panelized or overlapped, watertight etal cladding systems for some of the largest buildings Eg world had seen up until that point. Other firms such as ¡be Austin Company thrived in the design and construction 0f metal-clad factory buildings.97
In addition to massive, quickly assembled factories, mass
workers' housing had to be assembled for their operation. Drawing on the tradition of the 19th century portable house, vast arrays of government subsidized housing, ei-«ier constructed as travel trailers or mass-produced units, appeared adjacent to wartime factories as a solution to housing shortages and rent gouging by locals.98
1941 Willow Run Bomber Plant workers' housing. Hastily erected two-family unit government housing. Willow Run employment reached a high of over 42,000 people in 1943."
1945 Albert Kahn,
Dodge Chicago Plant. Partially clad with overlapped corrugated metal, at the time of Its opening it was the largest building In the world, covering 82 acres and 30 city blocks.
1921 Plant B, a corrugated metal-clad structure within Albert Kahn's Ford River Rouge Complex, In Dearborn, Michigan.
1942 Workers' housing for the Detroit Arsenal Tank Plant In Warren, Michigan, consisting of government trailers mounted on blocks and connected by boardwalks.
PAGE 96	FAÇADE
WATERTIGHT SPECIES
As watertight façade assemblages became increasingly conventionalized through mass production, a set of systems and standards appeared, each with their own architectural expressions and effectiveness in certain climatic conditions. Some of these systems have ancient origins, requiring little skilled labor to build, while others have come about recently, requiring specialized machinery to make complicated joints.
If the watertight façade's genera could be defined as overlapped, capped, dovetailed, or locked, then each genus would contain its own set of species: single lock, double lock, snap lock, trapezoidal lock, and so on. Every species occupies an environmental niche, possessing certain economic, climatic, and aesthetic advantages. Some joints negotiate between façade and roof more effectively, some joints work better in environments with less thermal expansion and contraction, and some joints may be constructed with fully prefabricated units and little skilled labor or equipment.
Tte-Loc Plus stafdtapleam SnaP‘0n Batten
Snap-Clad Tite-Loc Tite-Loc HS
Snap-On	, nr	Red ¡-Roof
Standing Seam y	Standing Seam
Locked Species of lock-joint, standing-seam metal cladding, each with a different articulation, sometimes subtle, sometimes drastic.
Capped
Overlapped
Locked
Dovetailed
Crest Fixing for
overlapped joints.
Valley Fixing for
overlapped joints.
Overlapped Choice of joint aiso depends on climatic conditions and the direction of the weather. Here, the lap must extend 10 percent of its length into the adjacent bay.
FAÇADE
PAGE 97

tHE Gl bill and the metal house
Le servicemen's Readjustment Act (Gl Bill of Rights) was Massed into law in 1944, providing benefits for Second Lorld War veterans, including low-cost mortgages, low-in-(erest loans, college tuition and living expense coverage, nd temporary unemployment compensation.100 As a result (this bill, the United States saw a boom of suburban jprne ownership in the postwar period. Corrugated metal technologies immediately interested contractors seeking to deliver large amounts of homes while benefiting from the surplus left by war industries. In 1947, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation granted a loan of $12.5 million to the Lustron Corporation to manufacture industrially produced, prefabricated homes on a massive scale in response to a housing shortage for GIs returning from the war. The baked-on porcelain enamel finish over steel made the Lustron home an extremely durable, low-maintenance, and inexpensive postwar housing option.101
American Legion's G. I. Bill Approved
1948 With funding from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Lustron Corporation began mass-producing prefabricated homes made entirely of steel.
1945 Returning veterans, furnished with funding from the Servicemen's Readjustment Act, could afford to buy new homes with low-cost mortgages and low-interest loans.
LAST 3 DAYS
to see
THE LUSTRON HOME
tte house Amenai luis been waiting for
1949 The Lustron Corporation's advertising campaign staged the Lustron house as a novelty, attracting visitors from far and wide to see the wonders of the modern metal house.
1945 Dymaxion Flouse redesigned. Clad with aluminum, the futuristic house was meant to be mass-produced, easily assembled, durable, and "strong enough to withstand a Kansas tornado."
(841 Buckminster Fuller, Dymaxion Deployment Unit prototype, Washington, D.C.
Two types of watertight cladding for two functions: the standing-seam roof overlaps kom roof to upper wall, where the overlapped, corrugated-metal cladding takes over.
Around 3,000 Lustron homes were built before the company declared bankruptcy in 1950. The collapse of this company was partially due to politically charged, restrictive zoning laws that prevented homes with Lustron characteristics (such as metal chimneys) from being built in certain areas.102
While other mass-housing strategies arose at this time, such as those employed at Levittown, the futuristic quality of the all-metal Lustron House hoped to seduce modern taste and appeal to those who dreamt of a technologically advanced, utopian future. These metallic techno-fantasy houses also found expression in homes such as Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion House, redesigned in 1945, and in popular culture in cartoons such as The Detsons.	~** ■"
PAGE 98	FAÇADE
SWORDS TO PLOWSHARES: RECYCLING WAR TECHNOLOGY
In the midst of the Second World War, the United States Navy called for the development of a versatile, lightweight structure that could be shipped to any location and assembled without skilled labor.103 With an already well-established reputation as highly portable, water-tight, and light weight, overlapped metal cladding was an obvious choice.
The Navy selected the George A. Fuller Construction Company to manufacture the Quonset Hut. The half-cylinder design's generic interior space could be adapted to many functions, from barracks and offices to latrines and isolation wards. The roof was constructed with sheets of galvanized, corrugated steel, while the ends were made of plywood or brick, allowing for easier adaptation in the field for windows, doors, or the joining of multiple units. The Quonset Hut was a perfect embodiment of the slippage of roof technologies to the façade plane. Over 150,000 units were manufactured during the war, with the surplus sold to the public at its conclusion.104 Adapted to commercial and residential use, the Quonset Hut took on a humorous pop iconography.
Postwar Commercial and residential markets found use for the military surplus Quonset Hut. Decorative finishes were added to the huts, rebranding military efficiency with fantasy and humor.
1947 Popular culture latched onto the sudden surge in military surplus Quonset Huts that hit the residential market, poking fun at the odd mix of practicality and impracticality inherent in the
1945 Highly adaptive, inexpensive, and quickly constructed, the Quonset Hut took on many functions during the Second World War. Serving equally well as barracks, an officers quarters, or a latrine, an entire military outpost could be constructed with the generic Quonset Hut.
FAÇADE
PAGE 99
WATERTIGHT BRANDS
fc recycling of the wartime military industrial complex into Instruction industries saw the emergence of many large Urporations manufacturing metal cladding. For example, j(a|zip appeared in the 1960s as a division of Kaiser Aluminum, an American company that had directly converted wartime factories into aluminum manufactories. KME, a german-ltalian metal manufacturer, also saw international geowth in the decades following the war.105
Increasingly capable of cladding complex geometries, wa-tgftight cladding systems enabled thin metal panels to produce complex curvatures in any shape, size, or disposition. Although the first watertight façades formed a characteristic vertical and horizontal pattern of seams, an architect might now work with a metal cladding manufacturer to develop façades with different panel-to-panel seam types, seam orientations, types of metal, finishes, and colors. The watertight façade could be identified as the most effective and economic cladding system, or as a facilitator of highly sophisticated architectural geometries.
KME Tecu Brass Seam Cladding.
2006 A landscape of Kalzip used on an urban scale at the Spencer Street Station in Melbourne, by Jackson and Grimshaw.
1998 Kalzip: a surface curved from roof to façade on Foster & Partners' Scottish Exhibition & Conference Centre, Glasgow.
Alh kfety-like quality of Ikea stores evokes Rr!1 Kahn's massive, metal-clad wartime indus-: 'actory complexes.
THE BIG BOX, CONTINUED
Perhaps following in the tradition of wartime factories, quickly assembled, inexpensive, and effective watertight metal cladding is still used on the façades of large-scale buildings whose program does not require many apertures. Big box retailers such as Ikea have made a brand out of the factory-like aesthetic of the overlapped metal façade.
&
PAGE 100
FAÇADE
A RETURN TO THE HIGH-END
Despite its wide proliferation in quick, prefabricated, and provisional structures, the watertight façade would also remain tied to its origins as a cladding solution for high-end and unique architectures. This history embodies the contradiction of watertight façades: through its use of metals (materials that were once rare, then common, then thrown away in overabundance and disuse), this assemblage has been used for the most complex and precious architectures, as well as for some of the most generic, ubiquitous, and trashy buildings ever assembled.
Frank Gehry has recently brought about a resurgence of the highbrow watertight façade. With advanced software, complex geometries may be clad with surfaces composed of unique metal tiles. Newly available materials, such as titanium, have made the watertight façade thinner, more durable, and more easily installed and manufactured. Additionally, the aperture, once requiring special and unique components to maintain a watertight seal, has returned in force to this assemblage. All of this is becoming increasingly viable via the development of high-end metal manufacturers, such as Permasteelisa Group, Zahner, or Waagner-Biro, all sharing the same sophisticated computer-modeling tools (for example, Catia or Rhinoceros).
the tradition of high-end standing seam metal cladding never disappeared from the history of the watertight façade.
1997 Gehry's Guggenheim in Bilbao exploits the potential of the metal cladding: effortlessly negotiating the complex geometries of the building, the 1/2-mm-thick titanium sheets are exquisitely sealed into a watertight façade.
1972 Highbrow and lowbrow: Gehry's Ron Davis House and Studio in Malibu uses inexpensive corrugated metal to architectural effects.
2013 Partially permeable screen, partially watertight surface, Gehry's Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health in Las Vegas brings apertures back to the watertight façade, an assemblage which typically functions best as a continuous wall.
PAGE 101

legacy
OF THE TIN HOUSE
spirit of the original colonial metal house still exists in sgveral embodiments, all of which are (in the interest of gconomy and mobility) characteristically quick, transient, K0rly insulated and even perceived as low quality. Yet wa-Kght metal cladding has seen a rise not only in unique, Bgh-end construction but also in mass production and in more improvised situations involving reuse.
perhaps a remnant of the government subsidized housing that supported the operation of massive wartime factories, trailer park has found a significant place in contempo-rg[y American society. Negotiating a transient and extra-so-cjetal ideology with the desire for both community and 0pen space, the trailer park oddly resembles a miniature suburb. Now expertly detailed and mass produced, the mobile home or trailer is part vehicle, part product, and part real estate.106
corrugated metal cladding _____________1" insulation
Permanent or semi-permanent areas for trailers or mobile homes afford lower costs for land and the benefit of mobility. Lightweight and waterproof, but without much else, these communities follow In the tradition of the Hemmlng's Patent Portable House.
A more improvisational contemporary construction technique that followed along the same traditions as the tin house, is that of the favela or shanty town, sadly one of the most frequent forms of contemporary urban development. Utilizing surplus sheets of corrugated aluminum and steel, materials which are inherently waterproof, corrosion-resistant, and readily available, shanty houses may be built with unskilled labor and on a massive scale, with some containing hundreds of thousands of residents. Though they do not insulate well from the environment or noise, these buildings keep out water and maintain a habitable interior. Without standardized construction techniques, nor zoning regulations (as most are technically illegal), these communities and buildings take on a unique complexity, appearing and disappearing depending on which way the politico-economic winds are blowing.
Khayelitsha Township, Cape Town (top left) Soweto Township, Johannesburg (bottom left) Ho Chi Minh City slums (bottom right)
PAGE 102
Multi-layered façades were invented to improve the environmental performance of the envelope by making it hollow or porous. Capable of expressing a wide range of functionalities, from cavity walls to rainscreens to solar screens, these layered technologies have only recently achieved popularity in the discipline, which for so long remained committed to the idea of the façade as a solid face with perforations. The façade as an assemblage of layers - a vertical "geology" - has become the dominant model of contemporary envelope design. Functional reasons such as ventilation, pressure equalization, and solar shading were the original reasons for this assemblage.107 Having evolved into the most paradigmatic contemporary assemblage, function has been left behind in favor of expression.
screens:
the
of thtffillask
PAGE 103
PLAIN
bad weather
Due
to their largely passive behavior, rainscreens have a
ernacular genetic. The earliest surviving examples are found to be on 18th-century Scandinavian barns and were k0rn of pure pragmatism. These systems featured an air Camber between an inner framed or masonry construction j an outer layer of lightweight siding, equalizing the air ressure across a building's façade and preventing wind and pressure-driven moisture infiltration.108 Interestingly, garly examples of rainscreens were only built on the windfacing façade. At a time when few buildings had insulation, this additional layer also produced the mediating buffer of an air space between inside and outside.
par more important, however, was the introduction of the cavity wall in late 19th-century masonry construction, first in Europe and then in the United States.109 During this time period, the same technique was used in heavyweight brick cavity walls in England and in balloon-frame construction in North America, though in the latter case, felts and corks were often added as waterproofing and insulating layers, a necessary addition to the anemic, lightweight walls. The separation of the outer wythe by an airspace, traditionally one-inch wide, channeled the large amount of moisture that penetrated a brick or stone skin back to the exterior, usually through weep holes at the bottom of the wall assembly.
So successful was this technique that building codes after the Second World War began mandating such an air space for masonry construction. While cavity walls are not true rainscreens because they are concerned with drainage more than airflow, the cavity wall nonetheless marks a crucial change in the conception of building envelopes: rather than being completely stopped, moisture and air are to be semi-internalized and managed.
outer seal sees water but not pressure; no pressure difference across this seal, therefore no rain entry
pressure in chamber same as pressure on outside face of assembly
air enters and
BfcSUrizes chamher
key seal Is interior; it takes maximum wind load but it does not see water
^a*e century Mulllon detail showing micro-ventilated mPonents with air and water-drainage holes.
18th century In farm buildings, particularly in cold northern climates such as Norway, open-joint wood siding over traditional mass walls or timber frames neutralized wind-driven rain and frost.
19th century Rainscreen-clad structures in Scandinavia. Exposure to the wind-driven rain of maritime climates can lead to water penetration.
RAINSCREENS AND THE THEORY OF PRESSURE EQUALIZATION AND ITS MINIATURIZATION
The rainscreen was formalized in a series of technical papers at a time when single-surface weather barriers were failing spectacularly. In 1962, 0ivind Birkeland of the Norwegian Building Research Institute first coined the term "rain barrier" and championed its potential to peel apart the failed single-surface barrier and introduce redundancy to the façade.110 The following year, G. Kirby Garden wrote "Rain Penetration and Its Control" for the Canadian Building Digest, where he codified Birkeland's proposal into the principles of pressure equalization.111 By 1971, the Architectural Aluminum Manufacturers Association published a guide for curtain walls where pressure equalization is extended to other façade components, such as curtain wall mullions and windows, thereby effectively miniaturizing the rainscreen principle.112 Where modernism failed through its faith in membranes and sealants, postmodernism prevailed with double, even duplicitous, layers and micro-ventilated chambers.
PAGE 104	FAÇADE
SCREENS AND ORNAMENTAL MODERNISM
Postwar architects declared, somewhat inaccurately, that pre-war movements had expelled ornament from buildings, an assertion that retroactively cast European modernism and the International Style as dogmatic trends with a rigid code of design conduct. The use of decorative and expressionist elements in the 1950s and 60s, such as the commonly used detached façade screen, found legitimacy as a rebellion against the perceived prohibitions of modernism.
A precedent for today's rainscreens, brise soleil and perforated ventilation walls stretched and multiplied to become comprehensive envelope elements, producing patterned effects and diaphanous surfaces for architectural expression.
I960 Edward Durell Stone's US Embassy in New Delhi, with freestanding screen wall composed of custom concrete masonry units.
1958 Paul Rudolph's Dewett Arts Center, Wellesley, Massachusetts. Screens such as this found wide use in university architecture in the 1950s and 60s.
The best-known example of this is Paul Rudolph's 1958 Dewett Arts Center in Wellesley, Massachusetts, in which a surface of perforated metal panels, rendered with a tautly stretched, fabric-like quality, covers a partially glazed façade. Edward Durrell Stone also employed freestanding screen walls as one of his signature design gestures. In his buildings, these assemblies ranged from custom-patterned, concrete masonry units (CMUs) to delicate wood and metal tracery. Masonry versions of these detached screens found frequent use in university architecture, so much so that a myth arose around them that administrators desired screens as a defense against projectiles launched by protesting students.
Deviating from the alleged strict modernist dogma, these elements are not technically rainscreens, but were conceived as and used for decorative and functional purposes. They identified a tendency toward ornamentation that would be later explored as an evolution of rainscreen technologies, eventua y becoming one of the most success u façade assemblages.
FAÇADE
PAGE 105
screen made of prefabricated panels to blend in visually with its historic context.
J989 James Stirling's Schwartz Center of Performing Arts at Cornell University uses R*nin veneer of stone cladding with open l0|nts to produce a ventilated façade.
1977 Renzo Piano's Rue de Meaux Housing Project in Paris also uses screens of masonry veneers.
1989 Disembodied terracotta screens of Renzo Piano's IRCAM in Paris, France, built in a factory and waiting to be clipped into place on the façade.
POSTMODERN TECHNOLOGIES
If steel- and iron-construction technologies materially and conceptually liberated the façade, postmodernism took advantage of its second liberation with the use of the rain-screen. In contrast to modernist, thin-stone adhered revetments, such as those in Mies's iconic Barcelona Pavilion (or in Giuseppe Terragni's Casa del Fascio, Como), a new set of "post-Miesian" buildings, including Stirling's 1977 Neue Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart, and 1989 Schwartz Center of Performing Arts at Cornell University, used thin stone in a rainscreen, air-cavity assemblage. The first stone-clad, ventilated façades would have open joints, revealing the cladding material to be only a thin veneer. Renzo Piano's Parisian 1989 IRCAM and 1991 Rue de Meaux Housing projects use a system of brick rainscreen panels to develop a contextual dialogue with nearby, load-bearing masonry buildings.
Despite their stylistic divergence, the façades of Stirling and Piano are conceptually similar, exploiting the open joints of rainscreens and ventilated façades to make an architectural statement about the isolation of singular materials, in turn offering a critique of the abstract and continuous stucco of modernist façades. Additionally, they undermine anxieties about the proper and so-called authentic use of materials, declaring that the simulated versus the real is a bankrupt value system leftover from 19th-century moralism. Instead, the rainscreen evolved values based less on the material itself than on the semantic performance of its material image, which is neither simulated nor real, but simply explicated. Rain-screens could be seen as a shift from "what the material wants to be," in Kahnian terms, to "what the building physics of the envelope demand," marking a turn from tectonic concerns toward energy consciousness and image-driven performances.

PAGE 106
BROKEN TILES
Because the rainscreen replaces dimensional masonry construction with thin veneers of material that are often held by clips, the materials tend to lose a degree of structural integrity that comes from thickness, lamination, and continuity. In stone veneers especially, the fragile tiles that are often used in this assemblage can crack or break, revealing the deceptive nature of the construction technique and its thin, superficial materials."3 Having always been a practical assemblage, many rainscreen systems allow materials to be unclipped and replaced if damaged, making for a more durable and adaptable façade over time.
1989	A broken tile at lames Stirling's Neue Staatsgalerie in Stuttgart. Once materials float free of their substrate, they lose the structural integrity that comes from lamination and continuity.
1989 The stone cladding at Stirling's Schwartz Center of Performing Arts at Cornell is seen here cracked around the edges of the mounting clips The thin veneers of material used in rainscreen assemblages are fragile, especially around fittings and attachments.

The rainscreen assemblage has several lineages. Most often, the rainscreen has been called upon for economic construction and duplicity, where a certain material is used to produce an appearance of another construction type that is no longer affordable or viable, such as stone masonry. However, while this assemblage is often deliberately deceptive in its attempts to hide the thin and artificial nature of modern construction, there is a contemporary trend whereby the reveals between materials are exaggerated to deliberately expose the thin cladding veneers and the geology or genealogy of the façade as an intentionally layered assemblage.
Typ|CAL SCREEN ASSEMBLAGES
ftg basic diagram of the rainscreen may ue translated easily into many different gsthetic expressions and performative gCifications, both by using different materials or by altering the logic of their gssembly- Some rainscreen assemblies gre typical and generic and some are highly specialized and unique, the latter squiring special mounting hardware and ¿¡gital fabrication techniques to express complex forms.
Lumber Board
Ricola Storage Building, Herzog and de Meuron, Laufen, Switzerland.
Metal, Tweaked on Site
Experience Music Project, Frank Gehry, Seattle.
Clapboard, Rainscreen
Typical.
Lumber Strip
Writing With Light House, Steven Holl, Long Island.
Metal, Perforated Panel
Sarphatlstraat Office, Steven Holl, Amsterdam.
PAGE 107
Brick, Back Ventilated Cavity
Typical.
Terracotta
IRCAM, Renzo Piano, Paris.
Métal, Précisé Digital Fabrication
De Young Muséum, Herzog and de Meuron, San Francisco.
PAGE 108
FAÇADE
2001 Tod Williams + Billie Tsien's American Folk Art Museum in New York under construction (demolished 2014).
REVEALING REVEALS
The reign, or tyranny, of the rainscreen began in the 1900 and continues to grow today as a system that provides S fective performance and unprecedented expressive ca • ties. Most rainscreens are based on a simple dialogue atCl" distance between a panelized cladding system and light & framing covered with a continuous moisture-proof mem '" brane, separated from one another by air. However, there ' another, primarily aesthetic trait to the rainscreen in which S the open joint transforms into a revelation of the system it self. From afar rainscreens appear holistic, while up close' the open joints show the inner workings of the disaggrea ed assemblage, allowing for a sectional and tectonic understanding that undermines the traditional concept of ar chitectural solidity.
However, there is no "morality" in this revelation. On the contrary, the rainscreen's open joints defamiliarize façade materials. Not only are finishes exhibited for precisely what they are (a material image), but also they reveal the contrast between the precision of the screen and the imprecision, or low resolution, of the actual environmental barrier The rawness, ugliness, and inexactitude of workaday construction that lingers just behind the rainscreen is now, as of the early 21st century, unashamedly exposed and denuded for anyone to see: for example, the chipped concrete on the San Francisco Federal Building (ca. 2007); the brazen exposure of layers in the Cooper Union Building in New York (ca. 2009); and the waterproofing membrane's random, lumpy patchwork on Caltech's Cahill Center for Astronomy and Physics in Pasadena, California (ca. 2008). Most of the materials in façades and envelopes are rough and installed with a characteristic lack of precision that defies the traditional textures of stéréotomie rigor and the decor of construction. Rainscreens have opened up the abject and irregular nature of modern materials and membrane construction for all to see, understand, and critique.
2009 Morphosls's Cahill Center in Pasadena, with ruptured surface revealing the rain-screen's assembly.
PAGE 109
2004 SANAA'S New Museum in New York uses its rainscreen primarily for visual effect, softening its edges.
2004 Morphosis' Cooper Union building in New York is a fairly conventional building hiding beneath an elaborate screen.
2011 Frank Gehry's 8 Spruce Street in New York
uses prefabricated, stainless steel face panels to
produce a rippling effect.
2013 Rudy Ricciotti's MUCEM in Marseille exploits panels of lightweight fibrous concrete to produce a tracery that wraps onto the roof.
1987 Herzog and de Meuron's Ricola Storage Mding, Laufen, Switzerland, uses a rainscreen 0f cement fiber panels, a vernacular image at the scale of a warehouse.
1990 Renzo Piano's Bercy 2 Shopping Center in Paris folds its walls onto its roof and uses the rainscreen's air cavity as an insulating buffer.
2000 Steven Holl uses rainscreens to play visual games: apparent versus actual volume, as in the prphatistraat building, Amsterdam.
Herzog & de Meuron's de Young Museum ln San Francisco employs a precisely variegated ''’Pper screen.
1997 Herzog & de Meuron's Dominus Winery in Napa, California, is constructed of rubble to moderate the extreme temperatures of the Napa Valley.
PAGE 110
FACADE
insulation: the rise of the cellular
The insulated façade is perhaps the assemblage most closely tied to economic ebb and flow. Since the beginning of the 20th century, every economic downturn has seen a subsequent thickening of the envelope and an increase in thermal resistance, whereas times of economic prosperity have sponsored emaciated façades that wastefully use energy. Insulation and economy are so closely tied that the energy crises of the 1970s engendered a national shortage of insulation material in the United States as home owners scrambled to increase the thermal resistance of their homes. Crucially, there is no technology capable of producing visual transparency and insulation at once, and, therefore, insulation is inevitably linked to opacity and all of its associated semiotics: the free-flowing, borderless, transparent space of modernism is at odds with energy-saving measures and the postmodern cellularization of society.
PAGE 111
STONE cotton candy
Fiberglass: mineral-wool Insulation.
THE TECHNOLOGICAL LEGACY OF THE GREAT DEPRESSION
The first known systematic use of building insulation was not intended to protect occupants from the environment but to protect them from the building itself. This was the case in the United Kingdom during the Industrial Revolution, when steam engines and furnaces were wrapped in insulation to protect workers from the heat radiated in industrial processes.114 The original material of choice was volcanic wool, a material found in volcanic sites that
was both fire-resistant and thermally
insulating. Its artificial equivalent, slag
wool, was first produced by chance in
1840 in a blast furnace in Wales. In ad- Asbestos: the raw min-
vanced methods for producing slag wool, molten rock is spun into a fibrous material on high-speed wheels - akin to the act of making cotton candy.115
eral is mined and processed into a number of commercial products that take advantage of its insulating properties, fire resistance, sound absorption, etc. Highly regulated as a potent carcinogen since the 1980s.
It was not until the 1880s that mineral wool insulation was first installed in American homes. Rigid and semi-rigid board materials, under brands such as Celotex or Insulite, started their spread in American housing between 1910 and 1930.116 Furthermore, there was no widespread use of insulating material for residential buildings until 1937, when an Architectural Forum article described the basics of insulation economy in terms of "annual saving in heat related to insulation first cost."117 Even though the French physicist Eugène Péclet had developed the concept of U-value (a scientifically determined factor describing the flow of heat through a wall) in the 1850s, it did not affect the building industry until much later.118 Finally, as a result of the industry's response to high energy prices during the Great Depression, alternative insulation materials began to appear. Some were organic products, such as cork or wood fiber, some were mineral products, such as asbestos, and others were completely synthetic, such as the foamed plastics developed by BASF in 1951. However, product availability would not mean extensive use just yet: the first thermal insulation standard in residential buildings did not appear in the United States until 1946, prepared by the ASTM Committee C16 (founded in 1938). Even worse, the first limitation on heat flow through envelopes in the UK was introduced by the 1965 Building Regulations, marking U-value's initial incorporation into the British construction industry. The Lustran House, primarily built between 1947 and 1950, was one of the first examples of an industrialized, lightweight, residential-scale building system with integrated insulation. Simple, cheap, and lightweight insulation became necessary in order to keep pace with the demand for housing in the United States following the Second World War, when the government transformed financial institutions to make home loans more readily available to decommissioned military personnel.
EJ-vvool worker blows insulation into an attic.
PAGE 112	FAÇADE
ASBESTOS, THE WHITE KNIGHT'S FALL FROM GRACE
Once hailed as a miracle material, then disdained as a killer, the history of asbestos demonstrates that material value systems are unstable and even volatile. What is commercially known as Asbestos is actually a set of six silicate minerals that were widely used in buildings and industrial products. However, as we now know, exposure to the material can cause severe illness and cancer.119
Builders and manufacturers became enthusiastic users of asbestos because of the product's resilience and strength. Fashioned into mats or mixed with other materials, its versatility and usefulness expanded.
By 1918, it had been observed by several studies in the United States that asbestos workers were dying unnaturally young and the first diagnosis of asbestosis was made in 1924. In the 1930s, major medical journals began to publish articles that linked asbestos to cancer. In spite of this information, asbestos-related diseases were largely silenced due to the lobbying efforts of large suppliers. The emergence of silicosis (a lung disease caused by silica dust inhalation) brought $30 million in lawsuits from workers against their employers, serving as a warning to asbestos companies.120
TREMOLITE	ACTINOLITE ANTHOPHYLLlTE
CHRYSOTILE
AMOSITE
^ ROC I DOUTE
What is known as asbestos is actually six silicate minerals, all with long, thin fibrous crystals.
Do Not Touch: as asbestos is only harmful when particulate and airborne, it is often best to just leave it alone.
Cladding: asbestos-cement board used in a façade panel.
1936 Advertisement for an asbestos-insulated range. The benefits of the material would reach many industrial products.
Suppliers ignored the danger for the sake of profits, much like the tobacco industry some years later. The conduct of these asbestos companies is especially despicable because the victims were largely their own workers, people who were unaware of the serious health risks they were exposed to on a daily basis. Even Henry Dohns, the 1858 founder of what would later become Dohns-Manville, a giant asbestos producer, died of asbestosis around the turn of the century.121
Postwar reconstruction efforts and booming economies saw a strong increase in global demand for asbestos, and by 1977 some 25 countries were producing almost 4.8 million metric tons per year. However, by the late 1970s, as the public began to understand the connection between asbestos exposure and debilitating lung diseases, liability claims against asbestos manufacturers caused many of them to market asbestos substitutes.
Translte: cross section of one-inch, corrugated Transite insulation, a highly popular asbestos product.
By 2003, new environmental regulations and consumer demand helped push for full or partial bans on the use of asbestos in 17 countries.122 In 2005, asbestos was banned throughout the European Union but, as a result of industry influences, it is not banned in the United States to this date. The risk still exists in many older buildings, in imported automotive products, and in places where natural deposits of the mineral are commonplace. The once magical miners is now widely acknowledged only for its toxic effect, its threat to health, and as a symbol of capitalist rapacity.
FAÇADE
PAGE 113
EARLY PANELIZED SYSTEMS
jLe first systematic use of insulation materials in façades grnerged in the industrial facilities that grew in secondary ¡.¡ties during the recovery from the Great Depression. As reSult of the financial industry's collapse in the United gtates, the economy turned back to manufacturing for stability- Having migrated away from the metropolis, most f these industries concentrated in what is now known as rtre Rust Belt, taking advantage of readily available raw materials and fluvial transport. Albert Kahn installed hectares of insulated light-metal façades, either in panel or sheet form, in the Rust Belt and other industrial locations in the United States. For example, the Lincoln Electric Plant ¡n Cleveland, Ohio, had a lightweight wall system composed of two continuous sheets of corrugated metal with a layer of mineral wool in between. The building was designed and built by the Austin Company, a modern company that performed design, management, and construction services with materials supplied by manufacturers such as Alcoa and Corning Glass.123 These ruthlessly utilitarian buildings developed the technology of light, insulated walls with low U-values. "Less is more," in purely economic terms, was invented in the Rust Belt.
1938 Steel bubble: lean Prouve's Malson du Peuple in Clichy
1947 Lustron Houses used prefabricated	employs steel cladding
composite steel panels for ease of assembly. with asphalt-sealed Here, every piece of the ready-to-build house joints and asbestos
Meanwhile in Europe, Dean Prouvé, a metalworker and self-taught architect, was busy developing lightweight insulated panelized systems for the French intellectual elite: the 1931 Maison du Peuple in Clichy, the 1935 Aéroclub Roland Garros near Paris, and the 1947 Fédération Française du Bâtiment in Paris are all paradigmatic examples of these technologies, developed in a very different environment, but one that was still reeling from both the Great Depression and the Second World War. After the war, Prouvé committed himself to finding ways to transfer prefabricated, insulated metal-panel construction methods to residential and, even, refugee housing.124

PAGE 114
FAÇADE
SYSTEMS
Most of the thin curtain wall systems developed to date, and all of the ones shown on this page, which have the more-or-less official sponsorship of various companies, use metal for the outside facing, either stainless steel, aluminum, copper or carbon steel. Only about half were designed originally to meet citv code conditions; the balance have either been adapted to meet the (ire-test requirement, or are not designed for this purpose. Taken as a group, the systems shown are remarkable for the variety and ingenuity in which the various problems inherent in thin curtain wall design are solved. Further rapid evolution can he expected from continued development research
ALLEGHENY LUDLUM
Facing and back-up: flanged, less steel panels, 2 in. deep, w;,h ?"V tory-poured calcium hydrosilicate sulation 2 in. thick. Inside finish. ring, lath and plaster or toil-bad^j plaster board and plaster to ntaki tain stiffness of return edges of panei flanges and to meet fire test f * inside.
Allegheny Lndlum^lcol(:orp..Pntsburghpo
REPUBLIC
Facing, back-up and inside finish: stainless steel face backed with rib-reinforced panels of carbon steel with two-piece flanges to isolate front and back surfaces, and containing 2 in. of fire insulation. Metal panels form inside finish, may be painted direct.
Republic Steel Corp., Cleveland, Ohi
ROBERTSON
Facing, insulation and inside finish: fluted steel or aluminum panels, 24 in. wide, backed with flanged steel plate enclosing 1 Vi in. rigid glass-fiber insulation. Inner and outer panels not in contact. Panels form inside finish, painted direct.
H. H. Robertson Co., Pittsburgh, Pa.
insulation]
aluminum I
ARMCO
Facing: flanged (vertical or horizontal) self-framing stainless steel panels. Principal feature is simple joint and connector system. Back-up: any suitable fire insulation, 2 to 3 in. thick. Inside finish: optional.
»stainless steel panels
•2" fire insulation
imset insulation
Armco Steel Corp., Middletown, Ohio.
U. S. PLYWOOD
Facing, insulation and inside finish: factory-fabricated panels with porcelain-enameled steel facings bonded to honey-comb insulating core. Inner and outer facings not in contact. Panels set in frame formed by insulated, extruded-aluminum column covers. Panel designed by Saarinen, Saarinen & Associates for General Motors Center, Detroit and engineered by U.S. Plywood Corp.,-Now York.
poreetom enomei Jaced panels
sealed double ■glazing
extruded aluminum 'facings a molds
,honeycomb insulation
, sealed double glazing
.plywood
’pcrcetom, enomeied foce.on both sdes
FAÇADE
PAGE 115
3"gypsun
spandrel
plosler
gypsum
space between framing tubes
corrugofed copper sheet
continuous cleats-« -nnnecl focio to framingJ
flush tubular framing - copper alloy •vertical members- 7-6“ oc •honiontal members- 2-O'o.C.
Mr© of ospho t saturated asbestos felt inserted in jum
'mineral wool nsulotort
FENESTRA
Facing, insulation and inside finish: double, interlocking flanged panels of steel or aluminum (or combination of both), with panels separated by asphalt saturated felt to avoid through-wall contact, factory-inserted insulation; panels 3 in. thick. Panels can be used horizontally or vertically,
channel reinforcement!
s 4-hour fire test.
CARNEGIE-ILLINOIS
Facing: stainless steel pans reinforced with horizontal carbon steel channels. Back-up and inside finish: optional. Sample illustrated shows steel panel back-up forming inside finish, cavity for optional insulation and/or fire protection to meet fire tests.
Cornegie-l llinois Steel Corp., Pittsburgh, Pa.
oonea 10 vertical angie snneners. Back-up: precast diatomaceous concrete, 4 in. thick. Inside finish: aluminum foil, 1/1,000 in. thick, cemented to back-up with bituminous cement, provides vapor barrier. Covered by continuous convector enclosure. Designed by Thomas K. Hendryx, architect, for Bradford, Pa. hospital and engineered by Aluminum Company of America, Pittsburgh, Penno.
stainless steel sheet facing	—---------
Z. 2" concrete ...	.
/____________16 X6 *io go wire mesh
- 3-0"
2“ flush tubular framing (copper alloy)	i
copper facing
CRUCIBLE
Facing and back-up: flanged stainless steel face integral with factory or site-fabricated sandwich consisting of cellular glass insulation between 2 layers of concrete with connecting reinforcing. Inside finish: inside surface may be painted direct.
Crucible Steel Co. of America, New York.N.Y.
iz" cellular glass insulation
'/«• *ie go expanded metal channel
continuous cleats
The American Brass Co.. Watofbury, Conn.
AMERICAN BRASS
Facing: ribbed copper panels, trimmed with extruded bronze, attached to tubular copper alloy frame. Back-up: gypsum block, 3 in. thick. Inside finish: plaster.
MAHON
Facing, insulation and inside finish: spaced, flanged panels of carbon or stainless steel or aluminum, containing glass fiber insulation (no fire-resisting back-up). Pans may be arranged as shown, with one set of flanges projecting, or with both sets of flanges turned in. Inner pan has factory applied finish.
The R. C. Mahon Co., Detroit, Mich.
1950 An Architectural Forum issue on curtain
walls. At the time, "curtain wall" also referred to metal assemblages such as these.125
PAGE 116	FAÇADE
THE RUSTBELT'S EPICENTER
In the years following the Great Depression, Pittsburgh and Cleveland emerged as the centers of industries that would bridge military production and building construction and navigate between the Great Depression recovery and World War II: Allegheny Ludlum, Republic Steel, Armco, Corning Glass, Alcoa, and H.H. Robertson were all located there and had to negotiate the needs for energy savings and cheap building solutions with the demands of the American war machine. While nobody on Wall Street was making money or building, Pittsburgh and the Rust Belt cities became the center of building production, fed economically by their own industries. Among these companies, the Aluminum Company of America, or Alcoa, which served mainly the aeronautics industry, had to adapt after World War II and decided to specialize in the fabrication of extruded profiles for building construction.126 Alcoa would soon become the industry leader for the supply of curtain wall profiles. Robertson, one of the companies that specialized in building affordable insulated factories after the Depression, developed its famous Robertson Panel in the late '50s using rubber gaskets transferred from the car industry.
Of all these companies, only Corning Glass, which produced glass and glass wool, and Alcoa and Robertson, which specialized in unitized wall systems, effectively survived the end of the Great Depression's cheapness and high energy prices. By converting to the industry of unitized construction systems for curtain walls, Alcoa and others found a new market for the sophisticated building growth that developed out of the new postwar market. While the application of military technologies to civil society implied a lowering of industrial capacity, it raised the technology threshold in the construction industry enormously. It was the transference of the technology threshold toward discretization that determined the industry's evolution. Harrison & Abramovitz' 1953 Alcoa Building in Pittsburgh became the first clear symbol of this assemblage just as it was becoming unfashionable.127 The Alcoa Building was the swan song of light, unitized and insulated systems. Glass would dominate the surface thereafter.
1953 In stark contrast to the transparent Lever House completed the previous year, the insulated aluminum panels of Harrison & Abramovitz's Aicoa Building in Pittsburgh are only half glazed.
MODERN INSULATION BLINDNESS
Modernism had no interest in insulation. The Great Depression's drive toward energy saving in buildings, which lasted through the end of the 1940s, was terminated by the improving economy in the American postwar period. The best example of this is none other than the arch-nemesis of the insulated wall, Lever House, the first canonical example of the curtain wall. Built in Manhattan (where almost no buildings had been built since the Great Depression) the building marked a shift closer to Wall Street and a move away from the Rust Belt industrial centers. Lever Brothers' architect-trained leader, Charles Luckman, identified the brave new world of corporate capitalism and bottled it up on Park Avenue. The prototype of a transparent corporate America had single glazing units, no operable windows and almost no thermal insulation, relying on mechanical devices to produce heating and cooling on demand. Insulation was anathema to the new optimism for transparency. One coui replace the oppressiveness of traditional buildings, and achieve transparency, through the use of unlimited, free-flowing, "too cheap to meter" energy.128 Insulation was seen as a hindrance to the social ambitions of the erasure of the inside/outside limit that constituted the modernist paradigm.
1953 Installation of a prefabricated insulated aluminum panel from Harrison & Abramovitz's Alcoa Building in Pittsburgh.
I
FAÇADE
PAGE 117
■
p0STMODERN insulation and cellular society
I ¿round 1970, two global events triggered the return of in-1 u|ation both on a technical and an aesthetic level. The first M gS the socio-political crisis of 1968, which questioned the ■Lgemony of the techno-corporate culture of postwar | ^perica. The myths of a global technology effectively and universally applied in the name of democracy and social ■ -uStice broke into pieces as the social contract forged in | |he Great Depression was torn apart by the political unrest ■caused by growing inequality and the Vietnam War. Post-JS war society effectively underwent re-stratification and the Hjperican Empire collapsed into competing regions. To rub salt in the wound, in 1973 the world went through the first global oil crisis, causing the price of energy to multiply tenfold. The modem utopia of transparency was no longer affordable and architects turned their eyes to experiments developed before or right after the Second World War in search of insulating solutions for a more cellular or atomized society.
The European welfare state offered a perfect opportunity to explore these technologies. The Greater London Council was one of the pioneers, and in 1968 built the Elgin Estate Tower as part of its policy of "slum clearance," which called for the construction of cheap and fast social-housing towers.129 This trend was closely followed by the Japanese Metabolists: Kisho Kurokawa's 1972 Nagakin Capsule Tower in Tokyo is not only a demonstration of composite technologies, but a very visible sign of a cellular society of "coinsulated" individuals.
1978 Foster's Sainsbury Center, Norwich, England, features a construction system similar to Grimshaw's 1976 Herman Miller Factory in Bath: a panel system bolted to a network of EPDM synthetic rubber gaskets. The gaskets ln between panels double as a gutter system.
Prefabricated insulated panels of Richard Rogers' parents' house. Ur9anic-coated aluminum panels joined with a neoprene "zip" system.
1976 Grimshaw's Herman Miller Factory: a structural framework is covered in a network of EPDM gaskets against which standardized metal panels are bolted. An airtight seal is formed from panel to gasket to panel.
1968 Greater London Council's Elgin Estate Tower's panelized construction.
Norman Foster, Richard Rogers, and Nicholas Grimshaw adopted light construction following their early exposure to industrial technologies in the United States. They collaborated with Robertson, one of the pioneers of light construction in the US, and developed a new language of panels and joints which was no longer transparent, defying the abstraction of modern architecture by insisting on an assembled quality. This high-tech aesthetic used panelization as an antidote to abstraction and claimed the expression of the construction technique as a legitimate architectural ambition.130 Team 4's unbuilt Zip-Up House, an entry for the "House for Today" competition, addressed issues of the residential use of panelization and cellularization as early as 1968. The following year, Richard Rogers designed a house for his parents in Wimbledon in which the side walls were of organic-coated aluminum panels assembled with a neoprene "zip" system rather than constructed in place.131 More mature examples of panelized façades include Foster's 1978 Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts in Norwich, England, and Grimshaw's 1983 extension to the Herman Miller Factory in Chippenham, England.

PAGE 118	FACADE
EIFS: FROM POST-WAR TO POSTMODERN
In contrast to the aesthetics of assembly and panellzatlon of the postmodern high-tech, another Insulation technology was revived with a vengeance and deployed all over Central Europe and America in everything from domestic residences to shopping malls: External Insulation Finish System (EIFS).132 This façade system, appreciated for its jointless appearance, capacity to produce complex, abstract volumes, facile incorporation of color, and easily produced moldings, was a crucial vehicle of the implementation of postmodern architecture.133
1990 Arata Isozaki's Team Disney Building near Orlando, with a palette of colors and patterns facilitated by the use of versatile EIFS assemblages.
1996 Peter Elsen-man's Aronoff Center, Cincinnati, clad In EIFS, during a reconstruction project.
One of the more emblematic implementations of EIFS can be seen in Michael Graves' 1982 Portland Municipal Services Building. Pietro Belluschi, a local citizen and architect of Portland's Equitable Building (one of the paradigmatic examples of the curtain wall in the late 1940s), having merged his firm with SOM ca.1951 to become Dean at MIT's School of Architecture, subsequently became nonetheless one of the forces behind the curtain wall takeover. As a result, and years later, he vigorously opposed the construction of Graves' Portland project.134 The punched-window, externally insulated wall was confirme as the nemesis of the modernist, "gas-guzzling" curtain wall.

1982 In Michael Graves' Portland n,,
'n9' E'FS helps d'
the façade grap^6
1978 Frank Gehry's Loyola University Law School, Los Angeles, with EIFS cladding every surface.
PAGE 119
FAÇADE
AN EIFS PRIMER
1931	Bayer invents polystyrene.
1941 Dow Chemical Invents a process to extrude polystyrene Into closed-cell foam. One of Its first uses is for US Coast Guard life rafts during World Warll.
1944 Styrofoam is officially patented by Dow Chemical at the close of the War. It replaces cork in low-temperature applications and is an insulation in a number of institutional and commercial buildings.
1955 The German company STO AG invents a synthetic resin wall coating, a precursor to synthetic stucco.
1963 STO AG introduces EIFS in Europe.
1968	The popularity of EIFS explodes in the
US following the signing of the Fair Flousing Act, which transformed mortgage and lending practices, and the federal call to build millions of new homes.
1969	Morsilli launches Dryvit, the first EIFS manufacturer in the US.
1973 OPEC announces an oil embargo, setting off the oil crisis. The need for cheap, fast buildings with decent thermal performance pushes the adoption of EIFS further.
1985 The Massachusetts Executive Office of Communities and Development (MEOCD) publishes one of the first reports of systemic EIFS failure.
1990	EIFS-clad, wood-framed homes In Wilmington, North Carolina, make the headlines when they begin to rot from the inside-out. Civil lawsuits ensue.
1993 STO Corporation files a patent for an updated EIFS system that is back-ventilated and drained.
EIFS Drawing showing the layers of the US External Insulation Finish System.
1993 Luxor Flotel,
Las Vegas, with a 110-foot-tall EIFS recreation of the Great Sphinx of Giza.
1968 Patent filed by German Inventor Edwin Horbach for "Resilient Cellular Wall Covering and Applying It." Horbach licensed this invention to Frank Morsilli, who then founded Dryvit.135
WDVS A historic building in Germany reclad on the right side with Warmedammverbundsystem, a German system similar to EIFS.
NOTCHED AgHÇSI VE
^h'£oSATrCCO
1996 1996 Monte Carlo Resort and Casino, Las Vegas. Any classical detail may be recreated easily with EIFS.
TYPICAL E.I.F.S CONSTRUCTION USING CHANNELED ADHESIVE INSTALLAI ION
FRAMING
DENg GLAS SHEATHING
PAGE 120	QADE
U-VALUE'S SECRET EMPIRE & ITS PARAMETRIC ARMY
Following the aesthetic delirium of postmodernism, thermal insulation is now going through an apotheosis and is likely to become the dominant preoccupation of architectural thinking about envelopes in the near future. It is doing so not through the mimicry of an image, but through the deployment of a barrage of parametric coefficients that are taking over the world, U-value being the most important of them. While other sustainable technologies, such as solar panels, wind turbines, and green roofs, are very visible and, therefore, suitable for architectural expression, insulation is by nature a concealed technology that is difficult to visualize and which must be implemented primarily through regulation. Having developed significantly since the late 1940s, the current insulation standard, ASHRAE 90.2, issued by the US Department of Energy, has become a powerful, empiremaking weapon. U-value, Peclet's 1850s' invention, is well on its way to world dominance through its presence in LEED certifications, through its impact in other legal frameworks (such as Part L in the United Kingdom, Minergy in Switzerland, and EN in Europe), and through voluntary classifications such as BREEAM or Energy Star. In American regulations, the mandatory requirements for the thermal transmittance value of walls in residential buildings has tripled since the first ASTM regulation in 1946 to current AS-RAE 90.2.
Insulation Thickness (cm)
CONSTRUCTION TYPI
	w/M?k	BTU(h°Fft?)
SINGLE PANE	4.8	0.85
DOUBLE PANE, AIR FILLED	2.8	0.49
DOUBLE PANE, LOW-E	2.1	0.37
DOUBLE PANE, LOW-E, ARGON FILLED	1.9	0.33
TRIPLE PANE	2.1	0.37
TRIPLE PANE, LOW-E, ARGON FILLED	1.4	0.25
QUADRUPLE PANE, VERY LOW-E, KRYPTON FILLED	0.74	0.13
QUINTUPLE PANE VERY LOW-E, XENON FILLED	0.51	0.09
Thickness: the last 10 cm of insulation provides the same benefit as the first 0.5 cm.
U-values: for construction types, from the common single-pane window to the rare quintuple-pane, very low-E, xenon-filled window.
SOME EXAMPLES	SAVINGS BY Kalwall vs. Single Glass “U”= 1.10(6.2)*	Savings by Kalwall vs. Double Glass “U"= 0.50 (2.75)*
0.29 (1.60) Kalwall	73%	47%
0.23 (1.25) Kalwall	79%	58%
0.14 (0.8) Kalwall	87%	74%
0.10(0.6) Kalwall	91%	82%
2000s Kalwall, a contemporary translucent insulation, allows light to pass through a façade while maintaining a high U-value. Perhaps products such as this will serve to end the battle between insulation value and natural lighting provision.
U-VALUE, G-VALUE, NET-TO-GROSS RATIO AND DAYLIGHT FACTOR: THE WAR OF COEFFICIENTS
If the modern curtain-wall aesthetic of thinness Is now clearly receding in response to these regulations, there is a brewing conflict between U-value and net-to-gross ratio (a measure of usable space compared to total building area). Insulation is becoming so "fat" that it is beginning to eat away at the profit margins of reduced usable space. Moreover, the increasing occlusion of daylight (due to the fenestration ratio's exponential decrease) promises to evolve into a true war of coefficients within these regulatory frameworks, as the provision of daylight is now considered the most important factor for energy saving in office buildings.
In order to resolve these conflicts, the building industry is currently developing a variety of insulating, yet thin and transparent products; for example, double, triple, and argon- or krypton-filled glazing. Meanwhile, the appearance of vacuum cavities, vacuum-insulated panels, and nanoge translucent insulation technologies may indicate an even newer, high-tech solution is on its way to answer to this endless problematic associated with energy efficiency, architectural econometrics, and environmental aesthetics.
FAÇADE
PAGE 121
Sövercladding: the Battenberg Comprehensive School, Germany, a modernist ^®ture recently overclad with insulated panels to improve environmental performance, thickening the walls significantly.
2009 Spray foam Insulation applied to soft-sided US Army tents in the Bagram Regional Contracting Center, Afghanistan.
Typical wall assembly showing the complexity of PassivHaus construction with two distinct layers of insulation.
BP* Thermal photograph of a PassivHaus on non-PassivHaus on the left. A total seal of ST1 only air but also heat is achieved.
THE PHAT LOOK; RETROFITTING & THE PASSIVHAUS
The push toward the retrofitting of buildings to cope with increasing regulatory demands is being progressively implemented by way of governmental subsidies and has spurred the development of entirely new industries. As opposed to other technologies, which had a great potential to generate visual effects, retrofitting is a technology in disguise. One has to look for its presence with a detective-like attitude. It is generally given away by a tendency toward detail fatness: the growing thickness of UPVC window frames, larger reveals which indicate the thickening of the insulation layer, double and triple reflections on glass panes, the progressive opaqueness of façades, the reduction of window transparency and sizes, the slightly dampened sound created by layers of closed-cell urethane or mineral wool, the weight of new doors, etc...
The ultimate experience of an insulated wall today is through the infra-red camera, which allows us to see the relative temperatures and thermal transmission coefficients of buildings. If the development of such a culture is proportional to the window ratio of its buildings, then we heading toward a stage of cultural regression. Or perhaps not. For with our peripatetic parametric army, we have initiated a never-before-seen endeavor to save the planet with insulation.
PAGE 122

While the myth of the totally transparent envelope runs deep in modernist ideology, and although it vests enormous fascination and influence in the public imagination, it accounts for only a very limited amount of the overall production of glass envelopes. All-glass technologies are sophisticated, expensive, and, while popular, always exclusive. All-glass technologies aim to erase the visual presence of the envelope; sometimes to visually extend the interior outward, toward nature via the "borrowed landscape," but most often to expose interiors and their treasures to the avid gaze of consumers and/or voyeurs. The all-glass façade has only a few, though utterly sophisticated and well-engineered components. Progressively larger panes of glass have required new strengthening techniques, as well as new methods for transport and installation. Additionally, the erasure of the mullion has required not only delicately crafted new hardware, such as spider joints, but also advanced structural silicones that are durable and long-lasting.
>&***.
totapijsion:

FAÇADE
PAGE 123
VICTORIAN GREENHOUSES
(Architectures of total transparency appear in cycles, often ¡^mediately following the invention of new glass-manufacturing techniques or glazing systems. The first all-glass structures were built in England in the early 19th century at the height of the Industrial Revolution. A trend of "environmental colonialism" drove the desire to cultivate non-native plants on the grounds of wealthy estates, which, because 0f the altered climatic conditions from source to new territory/ required the transmission of not only seeds and plants, but also of their local environment.136 Victorian greenhouses were, perhaps, the first architectures to exploit the heat-capturing properties of the all-glass enclosed space, in effect producing localized tropical environments within the temperate English climate. Early all-glass enclosures were made possible by the abolition of the Glass Excise Tax in 1845, new thin iron mullions, and improvements ¡n plate glass, facilitating a structural system which hothouse designer John Claudius Loudon called a "stressed-skin."137 In the same way that the emergent technologies of the Industrial Revolution were new, so too was the mentality behind building transparent structures. Although buildings such as the Palm House at Bicton Gardens in Devonshire, England, completed in 1830, were motivated by the need for controlled environments, they quickly became a way to showcase exotic plant collections and, thus, the reach of imperial Britain.138
1936 When it opened in 1936, Simpsons of Piccadilly, designed by Doseph Emberton, claimed to be the largest menswear store in London. The storefront windows, still in place, were concave so that when the glass was clean, shoppers on the street would see virtually no reflection.
1820 ]ohn Claudis Loudon's Palm House at Bicton Gardens in Exeter, England, is composed of 18,000 small panes of glass and thin iron bars. Its long life is due to the redundancy created by the many glass panels, and to their small size; should some break, structural integrity is maintained.141
The Citroën Marbeuf garage in Paris, esigned by Albert Laprade, arranged cars on «conies in a 19 meter-high space resembling heater - in which cars were the audience and |Potential customers would perform on stage.
EXTRA PROFITS
THAT COME FROM
UP-TO-DATE STOREFRONTS
1938 How to Plan and Construct Modern Store Fronts, a book by Extrudalite and Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass Company.142
GLASS AND COMMERCE
As advances in glass-making technology brought cheaper and larger panes of glass to the masses, the allglass façade enabled urban commerce through its capacity to display goods with high fidelity while keeping them secure. Innovations in glass manufacturing have repeatedly triggered mini-revolutions in the display industries.
Shortly after plate glass was invented in late 17th-century France, storefronts and urban streets acquired a new transparency that has remained commonplace ever since. Retailers were able to market goods using glass to display their products to the masses of consumers populating the new megalopolises. Paris, Berlin, London, and New York were the first locations of these deployments and had a powerful effect on the public imagination.139
Laminated safety glass, patented by Édouard Bénédictus in 1909 under the name "Triplex," was first created to reduce the risk of injury in automobile accidents, but was quickly marketed to store owners for protection against theft: even after shattering, safety glass remains a single surface.140 As storefront technology was rapidly applied to exhibition halls and, eventually, reflective corporate towers, allglass architecture not only displayed products but also became a showcase for its own structural ambitions.
PAGE 124
FAÇADE
1899 Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company markets the marvels of large plate glass.
19th century Splitting glass cylinders with a white-hot iron during the manufacturing process.
20th century An Olmar Autoclave for heatina glass during the lamination process.
FLAT GLASS DIMENSIONS THROUGH HISTORY
70 AD 50 cm x 30 cm Translucent cast glass plates In Pompeii.
1685 33 cm x 25 cm Reglazing of the Banqueting House,
1830 84 cm x 54 cm
Maximum sizes available in Belgium.
1845 1.2 m x .72 m
1913 3.8 mx 1.9 m The Fourcault process.
1925 4 m x 2.3 m
Improvements in the Fourcault process.
19274 mx 2.5 m
Pilklngton improves the plate glass process.
1951 15.24 mx 2.4 m
Exhibition glass shown at the Festival of Britain
1970s 6 m x 3.21 m
Size of float glass fixed to protect
European glass from Imports.
2009 9 m x 3.21 m New jumbo size announced.
1800 Polished Plate made In England now uses steam engines for grinding and polishing.
1688 Polished Plate produced in France.
1678 Crown Glass, now made In London, dominates until the 1800s.
1620 Brown Plate, first made in London, used for mirror and coach plates.
1330 Crown Glass produced In Rouen, France.
1226 Broad Sheet produced in Sussex.

1923 Polished Plate first appears in UK and allows for larger panes.
1913 Flat Drawn Sheet technique developed in Belgium.
1903 Machine Drawn Cylinder technique invented In US.
1898 Wired Cast glass created by Pilkington for safety and security.
1888 Machine Rolled glass invented, allowing for the introduction of patterned glass.
1959 Float Pilkington,
Glass, invented by Sir Alastair launches in UK.
1847 Rolled Plate introduced by Tames Hartley, used for extensive roofs in railway stations.
1843 Early Float Glass invented by Henry Bessemer, expensive and not commercially successful.
1834 Improved Cylinder Sheet based on a German process used to glaze the Crystal Palace, common until First World War.
ADVANCES IN GLASS PRODUCTION
FAÇADE
PAGE 125

fAÇADE eats window
Ip 1845, the Glass Excise Tax, which had artificially inflated the cost of glass jor nearly a century, was repealed by the British government.143 As glass became much more affordable and readily available, architecture had to reassess the status of the window.144 Within three years, the cast plate-glass manufacturing process was perfected, anC) in 1851 Joseph Paxton was able to build the Crystal Palace, centerpiece of the Great Exhibition and the largest glass building (564m by 139m) of the 19th century.145 This building created an entirely new model of cultural display, housing thousands of objects that boasted the successes of the Industrial Revolution and its imperial reach. However, the real display was the building itself. With the completion of this building, the conception of the "window" as such was no longer necessary, having been replaced in the public imagination by a surface of glass that could surround a building from façade to roof.
Writing in the January 1851 issue of Household Words, the great Victorian novelist and moralist Charles Dickens argued that the Crystal Palace distracted London from its own problems and hid the laborers involved in making it, though he allowed that it was "a wonderful structure, reared in glass, by the energy and skill of a great natural genius."146
1851 The design was "to be constructed almost entirely of glass and iron, the most fragile and the strongest of working materials; to combine the lightness of a conservatory with the stability of our most permanent structures.''148
1851 Workers quickly assembling the the Crystal Palace.
1914 Bruno Taut's Glass Pavilion, built for the sutscher Werkbund Exhibition, both jewel ■“display case.
In the early 20th century, new programs of cultural display drove the evolution of glass architecture. Bruno Taut's Glass Pavilion, built for the 1914 Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition, Cologne, was both a jewel and a display case. The Glass Pavilion was an early and flamboyant example of all-glass construction and extremely sophisticated, creative, and inventive in its various uses of glass: the structure was raised on a drum of glass bricks, contained staircases made of glass, and utilized colored, opaque and clear glasses, including glass mosaics. The pavilion cultivated an illusory experience, using the dynamic abilities of new and old types of glass to produce a range of effects: solid, void, limitless, and filtered.147
PAGE 126
1928 Wrapped enw in glass, Mies' com^V
tion entry for a£*P«-
m Stuttgart builds or,
ideas ,irSt identi n
1921 Friednchstrasse Skyscraper, using
artificial light to make
CALIFORNIA'S PANTHEISM
The availability of large-scale glass and silicone generated a particular form of modern regionalism in California, where earlier forms of "pantheism" (coupled with hedonism) had easily taken root. While the Greene Brothers, Frank Lloyd Wright, and Rudolf Schindler explored the continuity between interior and exterior through porches and screens, the new availability of large glass panes in the Post-War expansion enabled an entirely new and radical type of domestic architecture. Richard Neutra and Pierre Koenig produced masterpieces of Californian architecture dependent on large pieces of glass to produce a radical continuity between inside and outside.
FROM GLASARCHITEKTUR JO THE CASE STUDY HOUSES
Despite a slew of well-publicized projects and proposals, the all-glass envelope returned to being an architectural fantasy by the beginning of the 20th century. Hans Scharoun's Three by Three Dimensional Glass House,149 Mies van der Rohe's Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper,150 and Carl Krayl's Crystalline Star House and Glass Sphere,151 all designed in 1920, envisioned a new type of apparently unrealizable glass architecture. The development of laminated glass in the early 20th century, improvements in plate glass manufacturing, and the widespread use of vacuum suction cups enabled the creation and installation of ever-larger glass panes. Manufacturing processes not only improved the quality and strength of glass, but also made it cheaper. Home improvement catalogs proclaimed glass walls "For All America!" and picture windows became not only affordable, but also a necessary component of the middle-class suburban home.152 The Post-War housing boom in Europe and the United States, coupled with new paradigms for domestic exhibitionism, created a new market for residential glass architecture.
1921 Mies van der Rohe's entry for the Friedrichstrasse Skyscraper competition, an all-glass membrane revealing a steel skeleton within.
1920 Hans Scharoun's Three by Three Dimensional Glass House, published in Stadt-baukunst-Fruhlicht.
1959-60 Case Study House Photos, Julius Shul-man. Dramatic lighting strategies imported from the theater would influence night-time architectural lighting strategies. Additionally, the home and all of its possessions would be placed on display with a jewel-box quality.
PAGE 127
STRENGTHENING glass
Ue four most common processes for ¡^proving the structural properties of iaSs are annealing, tempering, heatstrengthening, and lamination. Annealing relieves stresses that develop in glass as it passes through a slow, controlled cooling process. Annealed glass is the most common glass for double-glazed windows and similar products. It is also the base material j0r more advanced glass processing sUch as coating, toughening, and laminating.153
Tempered glass, also known as toughened glass, is treated to resist breakage and to break in a more predictable pattern when shattered. The tempering process creates controlled stresses within the glass: a sheet of annealed glass is heated above its "annealing point" and then its surfaces are rapidly cooled so that the inner layer of the glass remains hotter. The different cooling rates form compressive stresses along the surface and tensile stresses in the interior of the glass. Ultimately, this balance of stresses increases the pane's resistance to breakage.
When toughened glass does break, the counteracting stresses cause it to shatter into small, regular fragments called "dice," which are less likely to cause injury.154 Tempering also creates resistance to the effects of extreme high and low temperatures, allowing for installation on façades that are subject to warm interiors and freezing outside air.
:woe-tempered glass is designed for shatter distance, but when it does break, it produces a Pattern of dice that prevent injury
Pittsburgh Plate Glass advertisement showing blurry common window glass on the left compared to clear plate glass on the right.
BEHIND .TRIPLEX
1923 "Wired Glass Resists Entry" from British Glass magazine, by the Pilkington Brothers Ltd. Here, two types of resistant glass are displayed, wired-rolled and wired-cast glass.'55
1928 Triplex shatterproof glass was the standard windshield glass on the Ford Model A, beginning in 1928.
1951 Vacuum suction is now in general use for lifting large plates of glass.
Here, one of the world's largest plate glass windows, spanning 15 meters, is being moved from the Power and Production Pavilion at the Festival of Britain.®
PAGE 128
FLOATING GLASS
The most significant evolution in the production of glass panels during the 20th century was the invention of float glass. Developed by Alastair Pilking-ton, the technique was patented and brought to market in 1959. Molten glass is poured continuously from a furnace onto a bath of molten tin. The glass floats on the tin, spreads out, and forms a level surface before being drawn off the bath horizontally in a continuous ribbon and then into an annealing oven or "lehr." After controlled cooling, the glass emerges as a fire-polished product with virtually uniform thickness and no optical or structural imperfections.156 Pilkington's invention granted new possibilities for the then-conventional limits of all-glass environments.
controlled
atmosphere
lehr
Description of the float process, from a lecture by Alastair Pilkington at the Proceedings of the Royal Society of London.
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
2005
2010
1966 The highly automated control center that facilitates the movement and cutting of float glass at the Cumberland, Maryland, Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company's float line.
1970s Total Vision System, employing glass mullions, at a race track in Arkansas.
1972 Total Vision System prototype at a car dealership in South Carolina. The heavy roof makes the all-glass system even more impressive.
1960s to 2007, there are 62 lines for the production of float glass in Europe. In 2010, 70 million tons of float glass are produced a year.160
TOTAL VISION SYSTEM
The advent of float glass re-invigorated architects' attempts to create seamless, all-glass structures. By the 1960s, as companies around the world began to license the revolutionary float process from Pilkington, elastomeric sealants, having advancing significantly since appropriation into building construction after World War II, were newly engineered with added durability to perform as "structural sealants." Pittsburgh Plate Glass, the first company to license the float process from Pilkington, introduced the Total Vision System in 1965.157 The Pittsburgh Plate Glass Total Vision System marketed a structural glazing system composed of glass panels bonded with structural sealant to glass mullions. With the use of a medium-modulus silicone sealant, the Total Vision System replaced the traditional wood, steel, or aluminum mullion with glass fins.
:AÇADE
PAGE 129
hEAT-TREATING and laminating glass
^ggt-strengthened glass Is similar to tempered glass in that •(s treatment induces compression in its surface, but not to ^e extent that it produces "dice" when broken. Although heat-strengthened glass breaks in a similar pattern to basic anfiealed glass, it has roughly twice the strength. However, this type glass is not considered safety-glazed and, therefore, needs to be laminated when used in situations requiring safety glass.168
1970s A scientist demonstrates the effects of ballistic glass in the Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company's book, Romance of Glass.
Laminated glass is made of two or more layers of glass bonded together with an interlayer of polymeric material. The sheets of annealed, tempered, or heat-strengthened glass are compressed and heated to create a single panel with significantly increased strength and ductility. Most laminated glass has an interlayer of polyvinyl bu-tyral (PVB) that does not change the optical properties of the glass when evenly applied. Cast-in-place laminated glass is made by pouring resin into a gap between sheets of glass held parallel and can use very large sheets of glass.159 The original function of laminated glass was safety. When laminated glass shatters, the fragments are held together by the interlayer and the panel can even maintain its structural integrity. However, increasingly, the interlayer is used as a means to apply other technologies to glass such as coloring, sound damping, fire resistance, and ultraviolet filtering. One of the most significant benefits of laminated glass is its increased structural properties. The advances of float glass manufacturing and improved bonding methods for glass lamination have led to the rapid rise of structural glass applications.
Laminated glass: two or more layers of glass are bonded with a polymeric material, often a Polyvinyl Butyral (PVB) film.
2010 A 15 m x 4.5 m Seele GMBH Dumbo Autoclave used for laminating glass.
PAGE 130	FAÇADE
MIRRORING GLASS
The 1970s and 1980s saw a proliferation of monolithic reflective-glass façades facilitated through the advent of new materials and new assemblage logics. In curtain walls characteristic of the 1970s, as glazing became thicker and relied more on advances in adhesives, the mullion, which had been prominently expressed in curtain wall design just a decade earlier, was able to mostly recede behind the outermost membrane of the structure. The mega-scale, the eccentric massing, and the impenetrably reflective mirrored surfaces of I.M. Pei & Partners' 1976 John Hancock Tower in Boston, Massachusetts, and John Portman's 1976 Bonaventure Hotel in Los Angeles, California, speak to these new aesthetic and structural possibilities. The Hancock Tower evinces a movement toward high-tech curtain walls of perfectly flush surfaces. Not coincidentally, many of the massive corporate landmarks built in the 1970s and 1980s express an explicit hostility toward their urban contexts.161
1976 I.M. Pei and Partners' John Hancock Tower in Boston does away with spandrels. Over 10,000 one-way reflective glass panels span continuously from floor to floor supported by a grid of extruded aluminum mullions.168 ’
1975 View of the Willis Faber & Dumas offices in Ipswich, England, opaque by day and transparently glowing by night.
SEAMLESS GLASS
Foster + Partners' 1975 offices for Willis Faber & Dumas in Ipswich, England, pushed the limits of what a seamless allglass façade could become.162 The undulating glass curtain wall, attached at the corners by steel clamps, is hung from above and braced against wind loads with glass fins to create a continuously transparent façade.163 Gaps between panels are sealed by a thin bead of structural silicone. The office building's reflective and opaque assemblies formed part of an emerging trend in all-glass corporate architecture. The transparency is reversed at night when the workers are at home and the empty building's façade dissipates.
SEEING THROUGH OPACITY
SANAA not only achieved the seamless continuity of a transparent glass façade in the 2006 Toledo Museum of Art in Toledo, Ohio, but the architects also expanded the complexity of what it meant to see through a building. Ka-zuyo Sejima stated: "All the glass is transparent but there are so many curved layers that the building has an opaque feeling to it. You cannot grasp if the reflection is from one layer of glass or another, or whether you are just seeing the other side of the museum. The building produces a completely different feeling of transparency. You can see through it, but it is opaque."164
2006 In SANAA'S Toledo Museum of Art in O i°< multiple layers of g ass confuse interior, exterior, and in-between.
PAGE 131
STRUCTURAL glass and spider joints
although structural glass design has Its origins in 19th-century	hothouses, structural glazing (the di-
rect adhesion of glass sheets to each other and held in a ^porting assembly) did not emerge until after World War y ^hen advances in adhesive and sealant technologies fi-pally made it possible.
¡While glass has a relatively high compressive strength, it has very little tensile strength. Because of this, up until the past few decades, single panels of flat glass were not strong enough to support typical envelope loading as structural members. Glass does, however, have a relatively high modulus of elasticity and can withstand substantial stress with increasing deformation until it reaches the point of failure.165 Because of the possibilities of these characteristics, advanced assemblage systems would see the façade become almost entirely glazed.
1999 The I.M. Pei designed pyramid at the Louvre, an early spider joint project involving Peter Rice. This image shows the bespoke cradle made to install the glass panels.
Structural sealants vulcanize and adhere glass panels to supporting frameworks made of steel, aluminum, or even glass. Façades with structural-glazing assemblages are typically two-sided or four-sided. Two-sided assemblages are characterized by glass sheets bonded to substrates on their vertical edges while four-sided structural glazing is bonded to substrates on all four sides with structural sealants.166
1986 Peter Rice designed some of the first buildings with the now familiar spider joints or point supported glass, part of an attempt to "remind the viewer of the presence of the plane of glass, while at the same time maximiz-in9 its ephemeral and transparent qualities." His curtain wall at the Cité des Sciences at P ViHette, Paris, introduced point-supported 9lass with cable trusses on,a large scale.169
The curtain wall at Adrien Fainsilber and Peter Rice's 1986 Cité des Sciences et de l'Industrie at Parc de La Vil-lette in Paris revolutionized structural glass through the innovative use of a point-supported system. Point-supported glass would become nearly synonymous with structural glass façades for the next two decades. The main innovations at La Villette are drilled glass panels with holes for point fixing, spherical bearings that keep all loads in the same plane as the glass (eliminating local bending effects), and horizontal cable trusses that resist out-of-plane wind forces.167 Point-supported glass assemblages must use toughened glass to withstand the stress concentrations that result from bolting directly to the glass sheets.
PAGE 132	FAÇADE
LOAD BEARING GLASS
Glass fins were the first and most widely used structural glass members. They were first designed in the 1950s, mainly to resist lateral wind loads in all-glass façades. The Sainsbury Center for Visual Arts in Norwich, England, by Foster + Partners, completed in 1978, used 60 cm-wide by 25 mm-thick fins of toughened glass for the 30 m x7.5 m glass wall.170
Beam members made of only glass have been increasingly used over the past 20 years in the development of completely transparent assemblages. Glass beams are attached to façade glazing systems as reinforcing ribs for glass glazing. Beams can be spliced together if the length is too great to be produced monolithically.
One of the first major installations of glass columns was in the Local Authority Office at Saint-Germain-en-Laye, near Paris, designed by Brunet and Saunier in 1995: 22 cm x 22 cm glass columns composed of three layers of toughened glass support a glass roof.171
1995 Glass columns composed of three layers of toughened glass support the glass roof in the Saint-Germain-en-Laye Local Authority Office.
1963 The Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library at Yale University exhibits 180,000 volumes in its central glass clad stack.
1998 Glass fins and beams in the Arab Urban Development Institute Reading Room by Nabil Fanous Architects in Riyadh predates the famous glass cube by Apple.
EARLY GLASS BOXES
As the possibility of the all-glass enclosure saw significant advances, the Platonic cube was often invoked, perhaps as a rational construction solution for its delicate materials. Glass boxes, often themselves nested inside of other buildings, became a ubiquitous visual reference for performative separations, be they acoustic, thermal, or programmatic^ These nested environments, though fully contained and dis tinct, are always fully accessible visually.
13 to An early application of glass fins to resist lateral wind loads, at the Sainsbury Art Center in Norwich, England.
structural sealant
laminated glass
interior glass fins resist lateral wind loads
FAÇADE
PAGE 133
aPPLE APOTHEOSIS
gjnCe Apple opened its first Apple gtore ¡n 2001, the technology giant has uSed all-glass architecture as its visual Landing for its retail outlets, holding niany patents for monolithic glass assemblies. A perpetual modernist ¿ream, the all-glass cube which adorns Fifth Avenue Apple Store in New York City has been one of the most photographed buildings in the world since it opened in 2006. Apple's buildings, largely designed by Bohlin Cywin-ski Jackson (with structural engineering by Eckersley O'Callaghan), demonstrate the company's commitment to a||-glass branding and has produced the most significant glass engineering ¡n the 21st century. In the few years after the Fifth Avenue store opened (that Is, May 2006), the design possibilities for glass structures evolved so rapidly that the cube was deemed almost immediately obsolete. The 2011 version, Apple Store 2.0, reduced the number of glass panels from 106 to only 15, the number of beams from 10 to 4, and the total number of glass units from 164 to 28.172
In 2010, engineer Dames O'Callaghan cited the manufacturing equipment of float glass producers, rather than the properties of the glass itself, as first limitations to the further evolution of Apple's glass use (limitations such as the size of float beds, factory cranes, and autoclaves).173 To produce the glass for the second cube, Apple's glass manufacturer fabricated a special autoclave for laminating 15m-long sheets of glass. The push for a unique aesthetic coupled with performative glass engineering is manifest in the details as well. As an alternative to spider joints and bolted connections, the newest details feature laminated metal connections sandwiched between Qlass layers, removing the need to Puncture the surface of the glass.
2006 / 2011 The dream of George Fred Keck and Bruno Rucker, the all-glass cube, was finally achieved by architects Bohlin Cywlnskl Jackson and engineers Eckersley O'Callaghan for the Fifth Avenue Apple store In New York.
2011 Connections between panels are embeddf in between layers of laminated glass at the Fifth Avenue Apple store.
Unlike the displays in storefronts that drove early glass production, the glass façades at Apple are not about showcasing products, as the product is no longer an object but the brand itself. Only a glowing Apple logo hangs in the company's store windows. The allglass environment, driven again by the demands of retail, now largely showcases
PAGE 134
FAÇADE
Double-façade assemblages are designed around glass's capacity to serve as a trap for infrared radiation. A double set of glass panes with an air space in-between produces a benign micro-atmosphere that insulates while simultaneously enabling maximum daylight intake and transparency. First used in cold climates, where there was a need for maximum insulation and maximum daylight, the double façade was a global technology that has progressively become locally specific. From the Mur Neutralisant to the Trombe Wall, the double-façade envelope became one of the beacons of passive-building technologies. However, the revelation of its relatively large costs in materials, maintenance, and space has now weakened its strength as a species.
double façades:
climate
incorporated
PAGE 135
ARTlFICIAL microclimates
■j^g possibility of using façade elements to generate climatically active environments dates back to the Romans: according to an account by Pliny the Elder, Emperor Tiberius waS said to have enjoyed a particular type of cucumber all ear round thanks to the use of a mobile form of greenhouse-174 Until more advanced technology would allow large expanses of clear glass to be produced, greenhouses 0ften used mechanical means to regulate climate, either with mobile planters, operable opaque envelopes, or stove and furnace heating systems similar to those of the Roman hypocaust. With 17th-century glass-making technology came the birth of the modern greenhouse and conservatory, an assemblage whose ability to regulate climate upended on material properties and the logic of their assembly rather than mechanical operations.
The arrival of large-scale glassmaking technologies coincides with the Age of Enlightenment, and there is an association to be made between the transparent qualities of glass and liberation from the obscurity and superstition of the Ancien Régime. While this assertion loads glass with ideological content, the double façade's relevance as a façade assemblage emerges not merely from its use of clear glass, but from its capacity to incorporate air, climate, and even nature into the façade. If the association with scientific clarity dates back to the 17th century, it would not be until the early 19th century that climate was incorporated directly into this façade assemblage.
1691 John Evelyn's design for a greenhouse. Traditionally, greenhouses required mechanical operations to sustain their artificial interior climates. Either mobile planters, stove and furnace heating systems, or removable shading devices would serve to extend the growing season.
1626 A permanent framework built around Duke Famese's orange trees. During the winter months, the roof would be untiled and retiled daily, an extremely labor-intensive process.
1619 Salomon de Caus' design for a temporary winter orangery, a structure to be built around an orange grove, trapping air to create an artificial environment.
PAGE 136
FAÇADE
SHIPBUILDING TECHNOLOGIES AND COLD WEATHER
The double fagade's genesis may be traced to two phenomena: first, the greenhouse effect and its capacity to generate microclimates contained by glass; and second, the ability of an air space to act as thermal insulation. In the 18th century, the increasing availability of glass and its use as a construction material in boats facilitated a transfer of technology in maritime cities such as Coruna and Ferrol in northwest Spain. Plate glass, manufactured in the Royal Glass Factory in the La Granja de San lldefonso, an enlightened factory promoted by Spanish royals, was sent to Ferrol for glazing the sterns of large Spanish galleons as early as 1759. Mimicking shipbuilding construction, the Galician gallery originated as a solution for the enclosure of exterior balconies, using wood-framed glass wrapped around stone masonry buildings. The ability of this assemblage of glass, air, and masonry to act as a climatic device quickly became apparent and triggered a systematic application, first in the neighborhood of Magdalena in Ferrol, and then in Coruna and Pontedeume, neighboring cities with similar climates and similar attachments to naval technologies.
Kastenfenster windows in Prague. Two layers of glass create a climatic buffer zone to the interior. Windows may be adjusted for different weather conditions.
Airflow within a Kastenfenster: hot air in the interlayer flows to the top and out, drawing cool air in the bottom.
Interior of a Kastenfenster, showing its two operable layers.
KASTENFENSTER
In Central Europe, the conflicting demands of increased daylight (requiring larger windows) and well-tempered environments (requiring more insulation) drove the evolution of the Kastenfenster or double window. An air chamber between two panes of glass performed both as a thermal insulator for large window openings and as a heat collector.'75 In prosperous cities such as Vienna, Prague, and Berlin, the Kastenfenster became a standar assemblage applied on an urban scale.
V7cmci ies> ii i v_^ui ui ica. piuspci uus mai mmo	n i 11v_»i n iwesi opain SQW
a transfer of glazing technology from naval construction to building construction. A wood-and-glass frame, similar to the stern of a large shin i built to enclose the balcony of a masonry façade. With increasing availabilitv of glass, the Galician Gallery would soon become popular in these port cities.
Ferrol Masonry building with its balconies over-' clad with wood and glass create sun rooms.
ECOLOGICAL IMPERIALISM:
^HE BIOLOGICAL EXPANSION Qf EUROPE
|nthe beginning of the 19th century, English garden ? architects started creating buildings with glass and cast ¡r0n that were dedicated exclusively to housing a population of climate-sensitive plants. Throughout Europe »'aristocrats discovered the possibility of creating exotic I winter gardens in rural settings, where they could generate I artificial climates, extending substantially the length of the growing season and the range of plants cultivated. Glass I #aS now being used on an increasingly large scale as an »artificial climatization device. Albert Crosby has called this ■process "ecological imperialism," a phenomenon that pgrmitted prosperous European nations, such as England and the Netherlands, to extend their pool of ornamental and economically significant species well beyond normal bio-geographical limitations through the generation of artificial climates.176 Part economic botany and part amenity horticulture, these exclusive and expensive imperial experiments survive to this day in now-public botanic gardens all over Europe.
1820 Interior of the Great Conservatory at Syon Park, near London, by Charles Fowler, Inspiration for Paxton's Crystal Palace.
PAGE 137
1824 Greenhouse No. 28 at the St. Petersburg Botanical Garden: while the glass may be thin, its enclosure serves to generate a thick, artificial environment on the interior capable of hosting exotic plants.
1848 The Palm House at the Royal Botanic Gardens in Kew, London: the repeal of the Glass Tax in 1845 and advances in plate glass technology allowed for less expensive and ever larger expanses of glass.
1828 Interior of the Great Conservatory at Syon Park by Charles Fowler, inspiration for Paxton's Crystal Palace.
PAGE 138
floor to ceiling single pane inner glass membrane__________
continuous single pane outer glass membrane__________
sealed air chamber mullion_________
1903 The little-known Steiff Toy Factory in Giengen, Germany, the first true double-glazed façade, featuring a sealed air cavity with embedded windows.
Double façade at floor plate showing the façade's air cavity extending the entire height of the façade past the edge of the floor plate.
Workers at the Steiff Toy Factory could enjoy plenty of light and air while the double façade would maintain some insular value to reduce heat gain and loss.
INDUSTRIAL EXPERIMENTATION
As with many other assemblages, the first test of the double façade would appear in an industrial context. Little known, particularly in its time, though widely understood as the earliest example of the double façade, is the 1903 Steiff Toy Factory in Giengen, Germany.177 Antecedent to what many consider the earliest examples of mature modernism in the 20th century, this extant stripped-down factory features a steel skeleton, a flat, single-slope roof, an exterior circulation ramp, arguably one of the first deployments of a curtain wall, and certainly the first example of a double façade - all many years before these technologies became widely used.178 The inaugural double façade used a sealed air chamber between two glass walls, balancing the light penetration of glass with the provision of a cushion of air trapped between glass panes for insulation.
The Steiff Factory's grid of columns under construction.
The Steiff Factory upon completion: the ramp from the ground to the second floor was designed for handicapped accessibility.
The Steiff Factory's operable windows are embedded in the sealed double wall, allowing fresh air to penetrate the envelope.
PAGE 139
1926 The Zuyev Worker's Club in Moscow by Mikhail Golosov featuring round, double-glazed stairwell.
rQlD AND IDEOLOGY: REVOLUTIONARY SOVIET J0UBLE GLAZING
Ipthe 20th century, Stalin imported the aesthetics I Albert Kahn's Detroit factories as an image of modern oroduction for the fast-developing Soviet Union. Glass and Vjeel was the image of modern technological construction that the new architectural avant-garde needed. However, because the achievement of this image of progress was at odds with the local climate, Russian modernist architects became early adopters of double-glazed technologies.
factory designs, was hired to design the Chelyabinsk Tractor Plant In Russia, formally similar to the Dodge Truck Factory in Detroit.
1928 The Burevestnik Factory Workers Club in Moscow by Melnikov also features a double-glazed rotunda.
J929 Using the money Js earned from his ¡®20s commissions, Melnikov built his own nouse in Moscow, Complete with double •widows.
ffcThe Narkomfin building in Moscow, by Ginzburg, features large double-glazed windows that stretch across nearly the ^P®fagade. The lobby also has a double-glazed Bewail. Le Corbusier would cite this building lnsPiration for his later housing schemes.
PAGE 140
LE MUR NEUTRALISANT
In 1916, Kastenfenster technology Inspired Le Corbusier to use a monumental double window In his Villa Schwob. By embedding a water heater designed to heat the air between the two panes of glass, the window was an early version of his Mur Neutralisant concept. The potential of combining alr-conditloning systems with double-glazing technologies would become an obsession for Le Corbusier during a brief period of time In the 1920s.
After his double-glazing experiments in the Villa Schwob, Le Corbusier began to develop and promote the Mur Neutralisant, a system he believed would be able to create a consistent internal temperature regardless of the exterior environment. This "neutralizing wall" was essentially a sealed air cavity within either an opaque or transparent façade. The air in this cavity would be tempered by controlled stack effect ventilation, or Respiration Exacte, a type of internal air-conditioning applied only to an external air cushion, an idea Le Corbusier developed with engineer Gustave Lyon.179
1916 Le Corbusier, Villa Schwob, La Chaux-de-Fonds, Switzerland: a hot water radiator heats the air within the cavity of the large double-glazed window.
1920s Diagram of Le Corbusier's Mur Neutralisant: tempered air flows between the membranes of the façade.
RESPIRATION SYSTEM
1920s Diagram of Le Corbusier's Respiration Exacte: in a sealed system, a central air conditioning unit pumps air throughout a building.
1920s Le Corbusier's Mur Neutralisant proposal at Centrosoyuz, eventually cut from the budget and replaced with double-glazed windows, common in Russia at the time.
"Our invention will stop the air at 18 degrees from undergoing any external Influence ... These walls ... consist of a double membrane with a space of a few centimeters between them ... A space that surrounds the building underneath, up the walls, and over the roof terrace ... A thermal plant is Installed for heating and cooling, two fans, one blowing, one sucking ... As a result, we control things so the surface of the Interior membrane holds 18 degrees."180
e Corbusier, on the Mur Neutrallsant (1931).
"Your proposal will demand approximately four times more steam and more than twice the fan energy to heat and ventilate the building than would be necessary with the current methods employed ... to heat and ventilate a building exposed to the same atmospheric conditions."181 — The American Blower Corporation, on Corbusier's Centrosoyuz (1920s).
FAÇADE
PAGE 141
peSpite warnings of energy •„efficiency from the American Blower Corporat'on' *-e Corbusier, as earlier in 1928, proposed a double-glazed Mur Neutralisant for the 1933 Centrosoyuz Elding in Russia.182 With only Le Corbusier's assurance and little identifie data to justify such a system, de Mur Neutralisant was removed from the definitive proposal and ■placed with double-glazed windows, ynfazed. Le Corbusier attempted to deploy this system at the Salvation ^rmy Cité de Refuge in Paris one year |ater. The Mur Neutralisant was again Kjt from the proposal and replaced with a single-glazed, south-facing glass wall. As expected, the glass wall kept the building warm during its first winter, but overheating caused a complete disaster during the summer.183 Luckily for Le Corbusier, this façade was completely destroyed during World War II and in 1950 he was called upon for its reconstruction. Having abandoned his double façade obsession, the front of the Cité de Refuge was rebuilt with a brise soleil, which remains intact to this day.
After these failed attempts at a technologically dominant (though energy inefficient) global architecture, the double façade would fall into obscurity for nearly 40 years. The double façade, concerned primarily with its own environment and the transcendence of local climate, had more or less failed. As a result, it would take the threat of global environmental catastrophe, the grim reality of higher energy costs, plus years of public conditioning to resurrect an assemblage as radical as the double façade.
1929 Le Corbusier's Centrosoyuz in Moscow. His Mur Neutralisant concept was cut from the façade but the double-glazed windows typical in Russian Constructivist architecture remained.
E® The Cité de Refuge in Paris by Le Corbusier as R|9inally built: south-facing, inoperable single glazing -™saster for the interior environment.
1950 The Cité de Refuge after postwar reconstruction: the façade now uses a brise soleil to passively regulate temperatures.
PAGE 142
THE 70s OIL CRISIS AND SOLAR ENGINES
In the 1970s, the energy crisis was looming and an increased consciousness about energy scarcity and the fragility of the global environment inspired a number of low-tech, energysaving, double-façade assemblages. In 1967, Félix Trombe, a French engineer, built the first solar furnace and developed the Trombe wall, a type of passive-solar wall that could act as a ventilation engine in the summer and a heating device in the winter.184 In this assemblage, a wall with two layers (a glass external layer, and a high thermal-mass internal layer) is constructed on a south-facing façade.
Trombe Wall: interior showing thermal mass, cavity, and outer glass.
1970s During the day the sun heats the thermal mass and generates air flow throughout the house. At night, the thermal mass continues to slowly let off heat, keeping the temperature of the house moderate, even with no direct sunlight.
1881 Air Heater, Edward Morse: the idea of the Trombe Wall patented in 1881.
Short-wave ultraviolet light passes through the glass almost unhindered and is absorbed by the high mass wall. This thermal mass then re-radiates in the far infrared spectrum and the resulting heat, unable to pass back through the glass easily, warms the air inside the cavity. The addition of vents at the top and bottom of the wall to circulate cool air creates a system that operates year round and in different climates. The Trombe wall signaled an evolution of double-glazing technologies from mechanical to passive, coinciding with the 70s oil crisis.
The quest for transparency that characterized the first embodiments of the double wall were replaced by extrathick walls capable of providing thermal inertia to the system. Rather than a "neutralizing wall," double skins became a device for climatic adaptation.
PAGE 143

p0UBLE ENVELOPE HOUSE
f jpthe 1970s and 80s, Lee Porter Butler and Tom Smith began advertising and Hflstructing Double Envelope Houses. Ithese homes were essentially a build-*L within a building, with a one-foot Ihavity between the walls and a larger, s0Uth-facing solarium. Butler famously , arTie up with this concept after taking two tabs of LSD and asking the universe to reveal to him the secret of tjermal principles.186 Subject to much skepticism with regard to their environmental benefits, these houses became the focus of a debate about environmental technologies. Public criticism of this building type caused the Double Envelope House, and perhaps the double façade itself, to be understood as a novelty, and a bold though misguided fad: more an expression of greenwash-¡ng than a truly effective environmental device.
Double Envelope House: south-facing Interior solarium.
1980s Light would enter a main south-facing solarium and heat air within the cavity. As the heated air rose, a natural convection-flow loop would generate, drawing cool air up through either the subfloor or cooling tubes In the earth.
1980s Double Envelope louse airflow diagram: the cycle of hot and ol air would keep the nner building buffered against environmental extremes.
PAGE 144	FAÇADE
HIPPIE TECHNOLOGY GOES CORPORATE
In the wake of the oil crisis of the 1970s and the energy conservation measures that followed - including the Energy Tax Act under the 1978 National Energy Act, and later the Crude Oil Windfall Profits Tax Act of 1980 - one of the most notable and exemplary double-skin systems appeared abruptly and fully matured, seemingly without precedent. Upon its opening in 1981, the Occidental Chemical Building featured not only a double-glazed façade, but also automatically controlled mechanical louvers for light management and motorized dampers for ventilation, making it both the first double façade in the United States, and perhaps the first "smart building."186 At this point, not only had air become an important building material, but its dynamic management was inherent in the logic of the assemblage.
First smart building? The section had now become mechanized. Solar sensors on the sides of the building would affect motorized dampers to block or permit heat gain. As the cavity between envelopes was thickened for maintenance access, a new space between the inside of the outside, and the outside of the inside, would i
1981 Occidental Chemical Building, Niagara New York, Cannon Design. The double façade Is taken over by the corporation.
At the time of the Occidental Chemical Building's erection, the rhetoric about double façades had shifted significantly from that of the 1920s, with the idea of using energy to provide internal comfort regardless of climate displaced by the idea of maximizing energy efficiency. Le Corbusier's insistence that assemblages such as the Mur Neutralisant would be able to create an architecture independent of climate was slowly superseded by a new attitude that attempted to use careful, climate-specific engineering to reduce a building's heating and cooling loads. In a sense, after much trial and error, it was milieu itself that was re-localized versus neutralized.
With all the principles of air-conditioning largely established before the 1970s, a controlled internal temperature was taken for granted in modern buildings. The technologies explored in the Occidental Chemical Building inaugurated an approach to environmental control systems that revolved around a building's energy performance within its context and relative to other buildings. However, the noble ambitions behind this projec eventually resulted in serious failure.
FAÇADE
PAGE 145
l9gOS HIGH MAINTENANCE GERMAN POLITICS
L the next decade, an increasingly large, environmentally conscious public in Germany would come to terms with the iouble façade as a commercially viable technology. The gpvironmental image associated with the double façade Yvould influence corporate architecture to adopt this type as "green," a label which had become popular and Politically influential. As double façades became highly performative, their advantages became associated with double glazing, dampers, solar shades, and other architectural devices that had become integral to the functionality of the façade. Reborn as an assemblage attuned to site-specific conditions, the double-façade species would see its consolidation in Germany.
¡n the political context of the Soviet double walls of the 1930s, Germany in the 1990s saw an ideologically driven
resurgence of double-wall technology. The combined effect of environmental consciousness and employee rights (unions had negotiated the worker's legal right to open the office windows) produced a new golden age for double-façade buildings. Yet increasingly expensive, high-maintenance buildings were constructed more as an image of political compromise than for actual technical performance. The capital and maintenance costs of these buildings, and the resultant loss of net floor area, were only justifiable through their capacity to envision the political ambitions for environmental sustainability.
1997 The City Gate building in Düsseldorf diagrammatically functions as a building within a building in that interior façades may open up into a collective exterior envelope, allowing for natural ventilation of interior spaces while maintaining an environmental seal to the exterior. The exterior envelope would be a semiotic unifier of a series of stacked microclimates, each with their own independent interactions with the surrounding cavity. This would allow safe natural ventilation even in a skyscraper, not only allowing severely reduced heating and cooling costs, but also alleviating work-related stress associated with harshly air conditioned artificial environments.
1999 The Trade Fair Headquarters in Hanover would integrate all environmental building systems into a single hybridized system including 14,000 solar and temperature sensors. Essentially duplicating the building with a virtual network of data input and output, dynamically changing mechanical systems would become automatically controlled by intelligent programs. The 2000s would see an advancement of these hybridized assemblages with integrated computer systems, and photovoltaic arrays, attempting to develop a net-zero carbon footprint building, effectively removing the architecture from the environment in terms of ecological impact.
1995 The Gôtz Headquarters in Wurzburg, Germany, directly advanced the technologies 5jthe Occidental Chemical Building. Where Occidental featured four solar sensors to control Jlssun shading mechanisms, Gôtz features 250; Occidental's white louvers were replaced by toned louvers, one to absorb summer light, ®id the other to reflect winter light; and axial HJs in the corners of Gôtz circulate air within ■P cavity, spreading heat to encapsulate the •Biding with an evenly tempered buffer. An array ^^Sotovoltaic cells on the roof further offset Wergy costs transforming the façade into an ™vcrtisement for an environmentally conscious 0rPoration.
PAGE 146
FACADE
RECENT EVOLUTION:
RAREFACTION AND OCCUPATION
The double façade is now facing extinction. Not only does it consume a substantial amount of space that is difficult to recover in terms of cost efficiency (or in the onrushing imperatives of cost engineering), but, as the Occidental Chemical Building and German experiments conducted in the 1990s have demonstrated, it requires intensive and costly maintenance.
The idea of using air circulation as part of a façade assemblage seems to be quickly receding as a viable technology. On the one hand, there are now systems that, rather than using airflow as a climate-control device, are using vacuum or argon-filled cavities as insulating technologies. Companies such as Gartner have made new technologies commercially available that provide very low transmittance values while occupying very little space. As these rarefied, high-tech technologies become increasingly inexpensive, effective, and maintenance-free, it will be difficult for the double-façade species to avoid complete extinction.
2006 Occidental Chemical failure: several years after its inception, the mechanical louver system of the Occidental Chemical Building in Niagara broke. The expense, both to repair and to maintain the systems in place within the cavity, proved too high and the louvers were left in a nearly fully

horizontal position for many years.
The building was left mostly abandoned until 2006 when a renovation effort began. The mechanical louvers have been removed and replaced by a more conventional solution: Venetian blinds on the inside of the glass.
Rarefaction: double- and even triple-glazed windows have become nearly ubiquitous while double façade has begun to fall into obscurity. While double glazed windows can be construe under highly controlled conditions and mass produced to provide well documented and ° ized energy savings, the double façade is a '9 unique and costly assemblage that now ma little sense economically.
FAÇADE
PAGE 147
1^ entirely different trend can be ob-served in the expansion and occupais of these liminal spaces, no longer Exclusively devoted to technology, but Increasingly occupied by secondary Kégrams. This is perhaps a return to the original galleries in Galicia, or to tt,e conservatories and winter gardens explored by northern European aristocrats. The solariums of Lee Porter Bute's Double Envelope Homes of the 70s and the environmental movement can also be considered antecedents to these current trends in building technology-
After many attempts and uneven suc-cess over the last few decades bridging the late 20th century and the early 21st century, it has transpired that the effective performance of the double-façade assemblage depends on the possibility of enlarging it to the point that it can perform as a programmed space with a different environmental performance, turning the area between the interior and the exterior into an oc-cupiable buffer space. The progressive reoccupation of these liminal climates, not only by humans, but also by plants and greenery, is a noteworthy contemporary trend.
Lacaton and Vassal's work explores this possibility by repurposing low-cost, low-performance greenhouse technology to afford a substantial increase of building space that, though it is only partially conditioned, may be used for such buffer programs. The systematic introduction of a type of space that is neither internal nor external, where certain parts of the building program can be re-located, is an inventive assemblage that couples the double wall with economies and functions that develop new building typologies.
Lacaton and Vassal's 1999 House in Bordeaux, 2007 Mulhouse Housing, 2009 Nantes School of Architecture, and the 2011 Transformation of a Housing Block in Paris 17° are all innovative derivations of the double-wall assemblage, yet having now exploded into local climates and differentiated programs. Their 2007 Fair and Exhibition Hall, also in Paris, even integrates potted climbing plants into a double-façade assemblage. During the summer, as the plants blossom, their leaves help shade the interior, effectively creating a living shading device integrated into the façade^^
2009 School of Architecture, Nantes, Lacaton and Vassal: Inside, outside, or in-between? The distinction has been blurred as the envelope expands to the point of habitation, creating newly occupiable microclimates.
2007 Fair and Exhibition Hall, Paris, Lacaton and Vassal: a double façade with a living organism acting as the sun shade.
PAGE 148
FAÇADE
tensile façades: from comfort to spectacle A

The technologies that made the tensile façade possible were derived directly from military research, yet this assemblage has found its most frequent application in leisure. This is perhaps due to its provisional nature as a light-weight and low-durability enclosure: equally well-suited for Rapid Deployment Military Shelters and - , Air-Supported Pool Enclosures. Once a symbol of a nomadic and extra-societal culture, the tensile façade has become increasingly engaged with spectacle, facilitating fantastic formal and performative possibilities for the façade or economically cladding megastructures for sporting events.
FAÇADE
PAGE 149
gTABILIZED by tension
¡goth pneumatic and tensile façades rely on the fact that, though membranes characteristically have no resistance to cornpression, if they are put under sufficient tensile force, th©y can become geometrically stable. There are two basic typologies of tensile structures: endotensiles and gxotensiles. Endotensile structures are primarily stabilized ky inflating fabric containers to produce tension in their surface- Exotensile structures are those where tension is applied to the fabric from the outside.187
fhe broad dissemination of these technologies occurred at several points in the 20th century: first as the discovery of Lynthetic materials lead to a boom of tensile structures with military applications, then as a culture desirous of new societal models found identification with the transient nature of tents and inflatables.188 Later, the necessity of cladding mega-structures efficiently and inexpensively sought ultra-thin materials. Finally, spectacularly new formal possibilities for tensile façades were unlocked by advances in computation.
■ Selection from Thomas Herzog's 84 types Bglr)gle- and double-membrane structures with Qitional linear support.
1851 Semper's Primitive Hut had four fundamental elements: hearth, roof, enclosure, and mound.
The enclosure finds its origin in weaving and fabric and relates to comfort and decor.
1887 Tensile-membrane technology developed initiall for sails. Here, the sailboat Volunteer wins the America's Cup with light, varnished cotton sails.
SEMPER, TENTS, SAILS, AND OTHER ANCESTORS
According to Gottfried Semper's The Four Elements of Architecture, the enclosure found its origin in fabrics, textiles, and weaving.189 Additionally, fabric is the element that produces comfort and décor. According to this theory, decoration is a remnant of fabrics that were used to clad the inside of buildings, insulating habitation from direct contact with masonry, the customary material for the building envelope.
The tradition of stabilized external fabrics serving as enclosures finds its derivation in tent and sail technology, generally constituted by fabrics treated with a varnish that makes them water-resistant and durable in the outdoors. These technologies have had a long engagement with mobile and nomadic inhabitation, a tradition that continues to this day. Beyond simply being light, the benefit of tensile enclosures to nomadic activities is that, when not placed under tension, the material has little resistance to compression and may be folded and carried away.
PAGE 150
PLASTIC FANTASTIC
The development of fabric technologies for architectural purposes occurred with the invention of plastics and synthetic fibers at the turn of the 20th century, plus their commercialization after the Second World War.
Yet plastics first appeared in the mid-1800s. Parkesine, the first plastic, was patented by Alexander Parkes in 1856. Shortly thereafter, Celluloid, also known as imitation ivory, was patented in 1870 and rose in popularity as the Parkesine Company collapsed.190 In the 1930s, a number of plastics that are now ubiquitous were invented. Polyethylene, the plastic used in Saran Wrap and common plastic bags, was discovered in 1933 and has become the world's most ubiquitous plastic. The first synthetic fiber, polyamide, was invented in 1935. This plastic, now known colloquially as nylon, was introduced to the public at the 1939 World's Fair in New York and became a commercial success for its use in fashionable hosiery for women.191
1856 Parkesine, the first plastic. The Parkesine Company would fail less than two decades after its inception, as cost cutting led to poor product quality.
The polyethylene polymer. Commonly used in plastic bags and bottles, nearly 80 million tons of this material are produced every year, globally.193
1870 Celluloid was a malleable early plastic also known as imitation ivory. This material was used to make everything from dice to knife handles
1936 A pillbox made from the first pound of the new plastic Polyethylene, now the most common plastic in the world.
1939 Nylon fabric: inventor Wallace Carothers stretches a sample of polyamide, a miraculous new synthetlcTabric.
$8,000,000 for a Stocking That Won’t
17 I V T Y - 0 D D
whole _____
toxtilo progress was started when scientists learned a method of transforming nature’s cellulosointo rayon.
Now comes nylon with even greater possibilities. It is a new product of coal, air and water, developed by duPont chemists and now on display at tho World’s Fair. Its chief claim to fame, apart from an initial production cost of $8,000,000, rests on tho fact that nylon can bo knitted into silk stockings that won’t run.
Nylon is said to he tho first man-made organic textile fiber ever produced from materials of the mineral kingdom. Chemically and physically nylon has many amazing properties.
It can be spun finer than fibers of silk and rayon. It will take dyes used for silk, wool, acetate, and certain of the direct dyes used on cotton and rayon. It can be made into aewing thread and knit goods, narrow fabrics, woven dress goods, velvets, knitted and woven underwear,brush bristles, tennis racquet strings, fishing lines, transparent wrapping film, plastic compositions, and textile finishing agents. But it is hs a new material for stockings that nylon stars in tlio feminine world. Nylon stockings are extremely sheer. They arc resistant to abrasion. In short, good-bye runs.
Run
Miss Helen Patterson Examining Hosiery Made of the New Chemical "No Run" Material at the "Wonder World of Chcmislry’’ Ex-hihit at ihc New York World’* Fair.
1939 Article from the 1939 New York World's Fair
describing the fantastic properties of Nylon used
In woman's stockings.
Howland-Hughes
“Wntorbury’a Friendly Department Stores”
ttelle-SliarHieer
popularity.
FAÇADE
PAGE 151
MILITARY INTELLIGENCE: THE UNITED STATES syNTHETIC RUBBER PROGRAM
^ the onset of the Second World War, with the natural rl)bber supply from Southeast Asia having been cut off, a shortage led to a boom in synthetic rubber research via the united States Synthetic Rubber Program. The result was government Rubber-Styrene (GR-S), a general purpose lynthetic rubber, as well as scores of other new products with various applications. In 1942, the formula was leaked ,0the Germans by Standard Oil, an act which, because ^¡s material process was so invaluable to the war effort, waS likened to treason.192
■fhe first examples of organic polymer technology for building construction were seen in the military. After the war, military research and development into new synthetic materials and their many applications would find its way into the commercial market. This research would lead not only to new types of membranes, but also synthetic adhesives, gaskets, and other materials, resulting in many new assemblages beyond the pneumatic and tensile. Following the war, membrane technology would find a new market in leisure-related functions.
Landing Craft Rubber Large (LCRL): a standardized inflatable boat produced for the United States military during the Second World War.
■P* Senator Truman calls the mid-war disclosur H* Synthetic Rubber formula to the Nazis by "idard Oil treasonous.
Inflatable Dummy Tank, a helpful tool during the war despite its tendency to burst.
Radome's were used after the war to protect sensitive radar installations during poor weather. The protective dome could be quickly deployed when needed or stored while the radar was in use.
lUlO
PAGE 152	FAÇADE
BIRDAIR AND THE CIVILIZATION OF TENSILE BUILDING
Having served as the head of the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory during the development of the radome (an Inflatable rapid-deployment shelter for large radar equipment), Walter Bird used his expertise In pneumatic construction to found BirdAir In 1957.194 In an attempt to apply the military technologies developed during the Second World War to civil society, companies such as BirdAir and CIDAir, plus many others, brought about a revolution in, and a broad dissemination of, pneumatic and tensile assemblages. The effect on culture was almost immediately apparent, as Walter Bird's backyard pool appeared on the cover of Life's November 1957 issue, entitled "Tomorrow's Life Today."195 Postwar, inflatable technologies would shift toward an association with leisure, sports, and entertainment typologies and would never again stray far from these functions.
Among many experimental architects of the time, figures such as Reyner Banham, Haus-Rucker-Co., and Ant Farm continued to explore the possibilities of the transient and nomadic lifestyle afforded by the pneumatic façade. While maintaining the geometrical rigor of the utilitarian-military applications of the previous generation, pneumatic leisure projects throughout the 1960s and 1970s would require advances in materials and coatings, adding durability, transparency, or color to the tensile assemblage.
1957 Life Magazine, Walter Bird's air-supported pool enclosure In winter. Later to become a BirdAir product, when this photo was taken this structure was installed around Mr. Bird's personal backyard pool.
1971 The Instant City, Ibiza, by lose Maria Prada Poole and Carles Ferrater, designed as a temporary housing solution for students at a conference. The structure was meant to disappear into the landscape once its purpose was fulfilled.
1965 The Environment-Bubble from Reyner Banham's "A Home is Not a House," a personal environment for the nomadic individual.197
FAÇADE	PAGE 153
1968 Architectural Design has an issue dedicated to the frenzy of inflated structures.
A major distinction that would arise between military and leisure applications of the tensile façade was that, while the military use of tensile materials was strictly temporary, civilian use required greater durability for fabrics and different types of structures that afforded greater permanence. Added UV protection, added strength, and increased clarity, among other things, were the main elements in the evolution of tensile structures and the materials with which they are comprised.196
1961 Advertisement for the Dow Chemical Company's Saran Wrap product. At this time, there was a general cultural obsession with plastics. While 1960s counterculture was using plastic to support a nomadic way of life, the suburban family was wrapping everything with plastic as a way to promote a healthy and sterile way of life.
J972 Oase #7, a personal oasis, was installed by fwus-Rucker-Co for Documenta 5 on the façade °‘the Fridericianum Museum in Kassel, Germany.
1969 Predating the 1973 publication of their Inflatocookbook, Ant Farm's 50" x 50" (125 cm x 125 cm) Pillow was originally designed for a Japanese rock festival. When the promoters bailed, Ant Farm kept the pillow for social experimentation.
1970 The Japan Tele-Communications Pavilion at the Osaka expo was clad in PVC coated vin stretched over an Internal structure.
1970 The Automobile Pavilion at Osaka was clad with CSPE coated vinyl with an exterior structural web.
PAGE 154
AN INFLATED EXPO:
OSAKA 1970
The first applications of synthetic fabrics in building construction military or civilian - were primarily composed of nylon, polyester, or fiberglass, which was then coated with PVC, vinyl, or acrylic materials. This line of experimentation found its apotheosis at Expo '70 in Osaka. Both exotensile and endotensile systems would form large-scale roofs, air-supported and air-inflated pneumatics, and stretched-membrane façades.
Despite synthetic fabric's potential grandeur and variety, as demonstrated at the Osaka expo, the next generation of tensile materials would no longer be fabrics but films. Fabrics are composed of fibers, making them tough and tear-resistant, translucent but not transparent, porous unless modified with other materials, and irregular across their surface. Fabrics are joined by stitching and are primarily used in large-scale opaque constructions that require high durability. Conversely, films are composed of a thin sheet of continuous material, either singular or in multiple plies, making them less tear-resistant than fabric though more transparent, comparatively impermeable, and consistent and smooth across their surface. Films are joined by bonding or fusing and are primarily utilized in high-performance and/or highly transparent or dynamic applications.
1970 The Fuji Pavilion at the Expo '70 in Osaka was the largest ever inflatable multi-membrane structure. The 16 tubes, each with a diameter of four meters, were made of PVA coated on the outside with Hypalon and on the inside with PVC.
The polyvinyl chloride (PVC) polymer, the third most widely produced plastic, having many applications from inflatables to pipes.
1970 The roof of the American Pavilion at the Expo '70 used a translucent, white, vinyl-coated glass fiber, originally designed for astronaut's space suits, for its 183 m x 83.5 m-wide span.

FAÇADE
PAGE 155
íR0M FABRICS TO FILMS: pTFE AND ETFE
polytetrafluoroethy|ene (PTFE), more Hfirnonly known as Teflon, is a film Bgje of carbon and fluorine. This Raterial is non-reactive, hydrophobic, and has a very low coefficient of ájction. Because of these nonstick, ■Erosion-resistant, and waterproof r0perties, Teflon is a material that is ¡¡jeal not only for building construction ■talso for other commercial applications such as cookware. Teflon was patented in 1945, and shortly there-after, DuPont began producing fjiassive quantities of the material, mostly for commercial use.198
Ethylenetetrafluoroethylene (ETFE) is a film with even more impressive properties. This fluorine-based plastic is extremely lightweight and strong, while maintaining a high resistance to a wide temperature range and corrosion. This product surpassed polyethylene technology by maintaining a stronger
resistance to ultraviolet light, a benefit that was not required in the military use of plastics but was ideal for civilian applications.'99
H
I
H
I
F
I
F
I
-tc-c-c-c
till H H F F
2000 The Eden Project greenhouse, one of the first large-scale ETFE pillow assemblages, and the largest indoor rainforest in the world.
J n
The ethylene tetra-fluoroethylene (ETFE) polymer.
2008 The
ar|d Arup ^PPorts
Water Cube In Beijing, by PTW Architecture under construction. A light framework the ETFE pillows.

ETFE pillow outer membrane
Structure of the polyte-trafluoroethylene (PTFE) polymer, a commonly used non-stick coating also known as Teflon.
2005 The translucency of ETFE allows for the incorporation of lighting within the structural pillow units, as in Flerzog and de Meuron's Allianz Arena in Munich.
ETFE has become an important material in the construction of large translucent envelopes: The Eden Project, Allianz Arena, Basel Stadium, and the Water Cube in Beijing are all good examples of ETFE façades, roofs, and sometimes both. The structural parameters which restrict this material end up producing a characteristic architectural expression. Because ETFE inflatables need to be permanently pumped with air, there is a size limit beyond which construction is not economically feasible to stabilize a membrane for a long period of time. This produces a unitized and often-repetitive pattern of cushions, hybridizing structure with double- or even triple-skinned membranes.
PAGE 156
THE SPECTACLE
FAÇADE
In this progression, the patterning of cushions moved from a more consistent geometry to a geometry that was increasingly irregular. This tendency has been encouraged by advances in digital modeling software that allows irregular surfaces to be calculated and drawn more easily. If the Water Cube in Beijing is already a non-periodic system of ETFE bubbles, the evolution of these technologies would continue to follow the exploration of the formal freedom this assemblage can afford with its increasing attachment to leisure programs.
Fabric as an element of façades that facilitates the expression of pliant and differentiated geometries is now being explored on multiple levels through mostly small-scale, experimental projects such as Arata Isozaki and Anish Kapoor's 2011 Ark Nova in Lucerne, Kengo Kuma's 2013 Tea House in Augsburg, Zaha Hadid's 2013 Serpentine Sackler Gallery in London, and OMA's 2009 Prada Transformer in Seoul.
2011 Anish Kapoor's Leviathan within the Grand Palais in Paris.
2009 OMA's Prada Transformer, in Seoul, performs literally, changing shape and function as it rotates. Durable and lightweight cladding materials were necessary for this spectacle.
2007 Kengo Kuma's inflatable Tea House generates a softly glowing ambient environment.
1995 Christo and Deanne-Claude's Wrapped Reichstag, Berlin, is not a tensile structure, but uses the qualities of fabric to change the character of the building it shrouds.
PAGE 157

2000 The first use of a variable skin ETFE assemblage was the Cyclebowl by Atelier Brückner for the Hanover Expo.
| Christo and Jeanne-Claude's wrapped buildings and ^poor's tensile extravaganzas represent an extreme of Çpiat plastic fabrics could do to provide spectacular Installations, SO-IL's 2012 white tent for the Frieze Art Fair E, |\|ew York and the various buildings at the 2012 Olympics EL London explore, on the contrary, an entirely different line 0f research. These buildings utilize the economy of fabrics i0 produce low-cost buildings, which are quickly assembled gnd for temporary use only.
■[•[re tensile façade will always be caught in a schizophrenic position, existing at once as an expression of provision, economy, and utility, and, at the same time, flamboyance, performance, and dynamic adaptability. A symptom of our age, perhaps, it is also entirely possible that such too will one day be perceived as unsustainable, but for different reasons, and reasons we cannot quite see at this stage of tlie game due to the historically and economically determined nature of building science.
2000 The two inverted leaf patterns of the Cyclebowl allow for variable opacity.
2012 Olympic Shooting Venue, for the 2012 Olympics in London. Large, temporary, and inexpensive, three qualities which make fabric
structures highly desirable for Olympic venues.	2012 Basketball Arena
London Olympics.
In the Cyclebowl by Atelier ijrOckner for the Hanover Expo 2000, a triple layer ETFE assemblage with a printed frit pattern allows the façade to ierform dynamically. Besides animating a building's skin, this assemblage can also adapt to environmental conditions, blocking or admitting light.
PAGE 158
media façades: from information to atmosohere
In A Thousand Years of Nonlinear History, Manuel De Landa classifies material assemblages as Geological, Biological, or Linguistic depending on the level of codification in their substrata.200 If architecture has traditionally been primarily mineral, and only partially biological in its composition, it has also had an investment in the linguistic, although in the form of a language that is coded in material terms. Columns, beams, windows, and doors have become the signs in the language of architecture. Media façades include those façade assemblages that use literal materializations of codes that belong to non-architectural forms of communication, such as written or pictorial media. Media façades have maintained two modes of performance: a linguistic mode, which uses the façade to convey information through verbal language; and a sensational mode, which uses the façade to communicate through atmosphere and affect. While façades that incorporate advertising have been common since the early 20th century, media façades have increasingly turned toward pure atmospherics.
PAGE 159
^eDia and architecture
Architecture has always incorporated media. Media Blades exist, for example, in the friezes of Greek temples or the façades and stained-glass windows of Gothic lathedrals; or, they are present in both primitive and jophisticated form wherever we can see the physical Lgistration of linguistic and pictorial signs, where non-architectural narratives are collected in non-architectural Edifications. Architecture has long been a medium onto which other forms of communication are applied. interestingly, the images and inscriptions of both the stained-glass windows of Gothic cathedrals and friezes tf,at have appeared in ancient architectural constructions ^across cultures have long lost their original meaning for us, becoming pure architectural sensations.
5th century BC The Parthenon Frieze is the paradigmatic example of the use of pictorial media embedded in an architectural substrate.
2nd century The
Romans would continue to use relief sculpture on architectural objects to communicate stories, as in Trajan's Column.
B®The stained glass window, as in Chartres Cathedral, France, repre-, its a definitive switch from media which is seen-in-light to that which is jp*-lit. Signage in the early 20th century would see the same shift.
13th century The Alhambra Mosque in Granada incorporates both language and pictorial media into architectural surfaces.
The evolution from communication to sensation is one of the main characteristics of the history of media façades, both as architectural entities, and as vaporous technological wonders, but it is likely that even in their earliest manifestations their sensual performance would have played an important role in their design: stained-glass windows are not only about communicating a story, but also about inspiring a sense of awe. There is, indeed, a distinction here between ornamentation and communication, one that we might claim as a fundamental trait for media façades.
While façades have long incorporated non-architectural signs as vehicles to communicate with diverse constituencies, a form of intertextually in its broadest and most democratic sense, it is the abstraction and reductivism of modern architecture that fostered the unprecedented and perhaps perverse need to use and amplify sculpturally incorporated or digitally infused written and/or pictorial media in order to convey non-architectural information to the masses.
PAGE 160	-DE
MODERN SEMIOTICS: TEXT AND LIGHT
1893 The Electrical Building, Chicago World's Fair. Here, large audiences were introduced to electric lighting and signage on a vast scale for the first time.
Gothic stained glass had already explored the effectiveness of light as an architectural device that could simultaneously communicate non-architectural messages and evoke powerful sensations. However, the mark of the evolution of media façades as a modern architectural assemblage would not come until the emergence of the incandescent light bulb. Slightly at odds with pure forms of modernity, and driven by concerns for either the commercial or political spectacle, the introduction of electric lighting would forever change the façade.
After the success of the great World Fairs,201 facilitated by the movement from gas to electric lighting, information and architecture became inextricably linked through illumination—though not always harmoniously. The history of the media façade can be understood as the history of both illuminated signage, as in displays "tacked on" to buildings, and buildings illuminated from within, whereby the volume of the building becomes a kind of lighting fixture.
1929 Hugh Ferriss, The Metropolis of Tomorrow Illuminated from below: the dominant prewar treatment of skyscrapers in the United States.
It was Paul Scheerbart, inspired by the great World Fairs of the late 1800s, who first anticipated the nocturnal life of the modern world, where "the night, indeed, can be more glorious than the day, quite independently of the splendor of the starlit sky."202 Scheerbart imagined artfully composed urban constellations with civic buildings and boulevards outlined in uniform strings of electric lamps. What the visionary novelist-poet may not have anticipated, however, was the aggressive evolution of illuminated signage that followed.
As early as the 1920s, the spectacle of electronic billboards questioned the very foundations of the architectural discipline, conventionally understood as a practice concerned with the manipulation of volumetric form. Perhaps it is not surprising, then, that until the past decade or so, high architecture and media displays have had a conten tious, if not overtly hostile relations ip-
1908 Adolf Loos, Kärntner Bar, Vienna, Austria. Illuminated from within: the preferred prewar method of lighting in Europe.
FAÇADE
PAGE 161
■mo opposing, continent-specific trends characterize prefer commercial lighting. In the United States, the theatri-feally floodlit fantasies of artist-architect Hugh Ferriss repre-Kjnted the dominant treatment of skyscrapers in Chicago apd New York. The Ferriss approach favored illumination below, casting noir-ish gradients on massive stone iolumes. The best in European lighting, by contrast, was jjempüfißd by the combination of interior lighting and backlit glass-paneled signs. Both approaches were devel-ped in the interest of advertising. However, the European chool of thought lent itself more readily to avant-garde ex-Igfjrnentation, as in Adolf Loos' 1907 Kärntner Bar in Vien-t Erich Mendelsohn's 1928 Schocken Department Store in Berlin, Erik Gunnar Asplund's 1930 Entry Pavilion for the Stockholm International Exhibition, and Ludvik Kysela's ^930 Bata Department Store in Prague. Disciplinary debates in the United States centered around strategies of outlining versus spotlighting volumes, while Europeans led the way in the movement toward the dematerialization of volume altogether.
1930 The Entry Pavilion for the Stockholm Expo by Gunnar Asplund is almost entirely composed of signage.
1936 Albert Speer, Cathedral of Light, “®f1in, Germany, ■»spotlight, once “sed to illuminate |®rolc towers (as in ™9h Ferriss) would ,come synonymous ■ft militaristic ■"tonstratlons.
The 1930s saw significant cultural and technological developments that would forever change lighting on both continents. Floodlights, like those used to illuminate skyscrapers in the manner of Ferriss, became synonymous with militaristic demonstrations and anti-aircraft initiatives surrounding World War II. Albert Speer's searchlight temples at Nuremberg in 1934 and his 1936 Cathedral of Light in Berlin forever changed the meaning of festival lighting, so much so that when the same lights were used during postwar celebrations and festivals, color filters and scattering strategies were employed to ensure that the same formal spectacle reflected peacetime values. Architecturally speaking, the neoclassical column, the column of the searchlight, and symmetrical organizations of both were forever tainted with the specter of fascism.203
PAGE 162
MEDIA GOES MAINSTREAM:
POST-WAR DEVELOPMENTS
The 1930s also saw the invention of fluorescent lighting. Though unpopular at first, due to audibly and optically perceptible flickering, fluorescents promised an even distribution of light at a fraction of the power used in comparable incandescents. Aesthetically, fluorescents also signaled a shift away from the directional, v-shaped light of incandescents toward a new atmospheric glow that characterizes many office spaces today. But the development of electronics also made available sequencers and groups of relay mechanisms that allowed the animation of neon lights. Already tested by Albert Speer in his light-scenographies, the subsequent introduction of time in the choreography of media façades was to become one of the most popular possibilities of artificially lit façades.
1962 Piccadilly Circus, London. The original incandescent light bulbs have been replaced by neon lights and moving signs.
What started as avant-garde "pyrotechnics" to seduce and sway the modernist psyche, and almost always in strict association with artistic, commercial, and political events, spectacular lighting would
become a mainstream urban
1921 The façades of New York's Times Square have been covered with pictorial media for nearly a century. This plaza now attracts over 39 million visitors per year with an average of 330,000 visitors per day.205
1972 The first casino in the Las Vegas Strip was built in 1931. Shortly after its arrival, the Strip became a popular hub for leisure activities, festooned with fantastic electric lighting displays.
technology in the postwar period permeating everyday life. The capacity for artificial lighting technologies to affect and alter behavior, plus the increased affordability of these technologies in the postwar period, made it possible for the media façade to capture certain building types. The movie houses of Odeon Cinemas in the United Kingdom and the casinos of Las Vegas were but two of the architectural typologies whose nocturnal image would be forevermore wedded to lighting technologies. These technologies became so powerful in the production of urban spectacle that they would sponsor entire urban development schemes in enclaves or zones where the façade was typically overexposed. Times Square in New York, Piccadilly Circus in London, and Ginza in Tokyo were, due to their population density, able to trigger the practice of turning urban façades into gigantic billboards enhanced by new lighting technologies. These environments, which have continued to evolve as newer screen technologies appear, have become, in themselves, important tourist attractions, superior to most traditional monuments. High concentrations of electronic billboards in urban centers have since expanded to Las Vegas, Seoul, and Shanghai, which now boast similar spectacles o nighttime illuminated advertising-— ( ultimate embodiments of Scheerbarts gauzy dreams and Marshall McLuhan s slogan "the medium is the message."204

ç
FAÇADE
PAGE 163
The Nanjing Road Shopping District in ^Kghai attracts over one million visitors per making it one of the busiest shopping streets P8(^e world. At 5.5 km long, it is also the world's K!eSt shopping district.206
P®9 The Ginza District in Tokyo is one of the ®r9est and most luxurious shopping centers in |®World. Signs for large department stores, [Wclubs and hotels adorn every building,
B™ng up the district at night. There is almost no ,a?ade left as illuminated advertising takes over.
PAGE 164	FAÇADE
"INSOMNIAC" CORPORATE CAPITALISM: THE NEON-GLOW EFFECT
Following some dim-outs during the war, the United States, and specifically New York, emerged as Berlin's successor in innovation and experimentation with architectural lighting, if not strictly with media façades. The unforeseen psychological effects of dramatic lighting strategies imported from the theatre became most evident in nighttime photography and film, as in Dulius Schulman's images of the Case Study Houses in California. Mirroring Times Square's success at producing a sensation, the lighting of modernist buildings in 1950s New York was to become a powerful mode of corporate advertising.
1952 Gordon Bunshaft, Lever House, New York. Black-and-white strips in the night would become synonymous with postwar corporate power.
TJZV,?*;<>■
Building, New Yor^Th glowing, fluorescent interior of the mJ . building was to becom* a powerful mode of ® corporate advertising
1958 Mies van der Rohe, Seagram building, New York, with "insomniac" lighting regime.
Gordon Bunshaft's 1954 Manufacturer's Trust Building in Manhattan was one of the first great American articulations of the fluorescent interior, a model that would later be repeated and elaborated in the corporate masterworks of SOM and Mies van der Rohe. The introduction of large panes of glass into massive curtain-wall systems in buildings like Bunshaft's 1960 Pepsi-Cola Building introduced a new design problem in which the interiors of buildings asserted themselves on the building's façade like clusters of individual stage sets. It is no accident, then, that around this same time, theatrical designers began to receive commissions to illuminate many of modern architecture's greatest accomplishments in glass and steel. Figures such as Richard Kelly reconciled the drama of Hugh Ferrisss volumetric floodlighting with Berlin's backlit signage by translating the modernist interior into an artful fishbowl on the façade.207 The Seagram Building's spectacularly backlit black grid, a Kelly design, became the prototypical example of corporate America's infatuation with "insomniac" lighting schemes (untilt e energy crisis in the 1970s put a damper on such grand gestures).
FAÇADE
PAGE 165
POSTMODERN ISM'S FLOATING
s,gnifiers
ke media façade's postwar second life can also be understood outside of lf)igh design through the popular mediums of signage and science fiction. If modernism was characterized Ijjy abstract and volumetric illumination, Kostmodernist architecture, with its intense interest in semiotics and populism, was the perfect medium to exploit the capacity of billboards to embed signification while engaging in popular culture, fantastic and otherwise. Piccadilly Circus, Times Square, and Vegas became the reference points for an intentionally lowbrow, popular or "pop" architecture, where signifiers were truly free-floating and there was an architectural emphasis on the split between the signifier and the signified. Moving away from high-modernist \ corporate lighting, postmodernist architecture explored signage as a new and important component of façade assemblages.
1963 The Guild House in Philadelphia, one of Robert Venturi's first major works, uses a combination of nondescript commercial architecture and ironic historical references as semiotic devices.
GUILD HOUSE
1971 In Cedric Price's Fun Palace, architecture Becomes the infrastructure for time-based Biteractive media. The ; project was named during an "alcohol-inspired brain-storming session off Times Square in 1962." Perhaps the neon lights of the square inspired more than just the name.209
1971 Pompidou Centre in Paris, by Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers a high-tech masterpiece, and a media extravaganza incorporating projectors and light shows into the building and its plaza.
1967 Venturi, Scott Brown and Associates proposal for a National Football Hall of Fame. Here, the façade becomes entirely devoted to animated signification.
The 1963 Venturi & Rauch Guild House in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, was one of the first examples of signage used as a critique of the abstract and wholesome language of modernist architecture, an idea that Venturi would revisit again in 1967, in his proposal for the National College Football Hall of Fame in New Brunswick, New Jersey. Both projects make deliberate use of signage attached to architecture as a literal explicitation of the detachment between the signifier and the signified. This occurred in parallel with projects such as Cedric Price's Fun Palace or Ron Herron's Robotower, which proposed large TV screens on the façades of buildings. Such screens were also originally proposed for Renzo Piano and Richard Rogers' 1971 Pompidou Centre in Paris, but were eventually discarded because of the added costs and because the authorities feared that they might be used for public agitation.208 The appropriation of commercial media façades by "high" architecture was often doomed to failure, primarily because of high-end architecture's inability to generate a dedicated revenue stream to pay for the installation and maintenance. It is also possible that "sober" cultural institutions will often use the cost of such measures to avoid what they quietly consider ostentatious and vulgar, the very definition of tackyfflf
PAGE 166	FAÇADE
FROM SIGNAGE TO ATMOSPHERE
Ridley Scott's Blade Runner (1982) inaugurated the next step in the development of media façades: while still presenting the grid of televisions that would allow for the possibility of constructing an enormous screen with existing technology, it displayed a mysterious, and deliberately meaningless, female face presiding over the urban scenery, a late-dystopian variation on Big Brother perhaps. The relationship between the screen and the building that supports it being no longer evident, Ridley's use is similar in spirit to "cultish" postmodernist attempts to use screens as demonstrations of the detached signifier. As the signifier became hyper-meaningless and began operating as a pseudo-epiphenomenal and spectral apparatus, media had again become extrinsic to the object per se. In fact, media had literally swallowed the object: signage had become atmospheric and the urban projection was not far off. As symptom of the postmodernist age, what was to follow such spectacle was the near universalization of social media in combination with advertising and smart phones.
Though the energy crisis of the 1970s stunted the development of architectural lighting on a large scale, this decade also saw the first commercially successful application of LEDs and computerized control systems. The combination of these technologies has defined lighting from the 1980s until today: the postmodern inability to access building-scale screen technologies at viable prices was finally defeated by these developments.
Light Emitting Diodes, first patented in 1961, offered highly efficient, thermally mild, scalable light in a "solid state."210 The practical LED device was produced in 1962 and first used for indicator lights and flat-panel computer displays. Originally red, followed by amber and green, the LED became available in blue and white during the mid-1990s. Digital Multiplex (DMX) is the standard interface between control systems and dimmers, color scrollers, projectors, strobes, and other lighting equipment. The DMX standard was developed in 1986 by the United States Institute for Theatre Technology and allows up to 512 pieces of lighting equipment to be controlled by one system using a single cable.211
1982 In Ridley Scott's Blade Runner, intentionally meaningless pictorial me dia seems to float in the air of the urban milieu, with the media façade havin lost any relationship to the building behind.	'' -
EVOLUTION OF LED EFFICACY
LED Technologies have evolved rapidly since their invention in 1962. Following a boom in the mid 1990s their application has become nearly ubiquitous.
"An act of architecture represents the creation of a new environment that is both physical and phenomenal through the introduction of information into an existing environment. Architecture becomes a device for both the transmission and the retention of information. That is, instead of being an assertive physical form, architecture ought to be a device for producing phenomenal form; that is, an environment."2'2 — Toyo Ito, "A Garden of Microchips," 1993.

1986 The Tower of Winds in Yokohama, by Toyo Ito, is an early example of the media fagade's shift from signage to atmosphere.
The introduction of cheap LEDs and DMX controllers in the 1980s initiated a third phase of the media façade, creating a culture of pixelated advertising, increasing in resolution exponentially every year. Increasingly inexpensive screens were making possible the omnipresence of animated media in buildings, both internally and as part of the envelope. As with the deployment of fluorescents on a large scale, LED pix-elation has produced its own special set of effects. Toyo Ito's 1986 Tower of Winds, Yokohama, represents one of the earliest examples of what can be described as the "atmospheric" media façade. Ito's Tower appropriates the immediacy of animated signage and translates it over the entire building err velope. The animation of the envelope launched a paradigm shift in architecture marking the dissolution of volume into pure media.
FAÇADE
movement of the media façade [toward an "environmental"
[arChitecture was by no means a straightforward progression.
Illumination, from the outset,
suggested *be possibility of the
[atmospheric field-architecture that Ito . fjna||y realized in 1986. Meanwhile, jpany anomalous projects anticipated applications that were only to become c0mmercially viable decades later.
fhe media display on Kohn, Pedersen, fox's 2002 Lehman Brothers Building in Manhattan, now Barclay's Capital,
' visualizes media of an entirely different nature, echoing the mega screens I pictured in the opening scenes of Blade Runner. The Lehman Brothers Building became one of the most visible signs of the 2008 financial crisis due to its capacity to reprogram : corporate identity in a few hours and was also one of the first projects to exploit LED technology on a massive scale.
2004 The Galleria Department Store media façade in Seoul, by UN Studio, is not meant to communicate linguistically but to generate a dynamically ¡changing atmosphere.
PAGE 167
2002 The media façade of the Lehman Brother's Building, in New York, now Barclays Capital, by Kohn, Pedersen, Fox expresses both linguistic and atmospheric qualities.
2002 Barclays Capital media façade control room. One of the first projects to exploit LED technology on a massive scale required an impressive control system.
Projects such as Ito's Tower and, more recently, UN Studio's 2004 Galleria Department Store in Seoul, plus the 2011 New Galleria Citycenter in Cheonan, and the 2013 Hanjie Wanda Square in Wuhan, China, all represent a new exploration of principles based on taking advantage of the responsive properties of a combination of LEDs and DMX systems. The Galleria, for example, collects information about the weather of Seoul during the day and translates that data into a unique lighting scheme at night. Such designs posit a new definition of the façade as an architectural element capable of visualizing invisible fields of environmental information. The explicitly linguistic use of advertising screens for data visualization points to an interesting property of large LED screens; that is, their versatility and ample ability to homogenize vast tracts of information, of virtually any kind, and transform it into extravagant fields of abstract light-play—to entertain, inform, seduce, or even brainwash citizens.
PAGE 168	FAÇADE


The incorporation of vegetation into the façade has a long vernacular tradition - for example in the potted flowers seen in Andalusian, Swiss, and Flemish building - while its incorporation into architecture dates back to even before the Corinthian order. These lineages have developed from the theories of Vitruvius and Abbé Marc-Antoine Laugier to William Morris and Louis Sullivan. But it was not until the 20th century that true living matter became part of the architectural expression of buildings, and only very recently that technologies have enabled planting to occur literally on the façades of buildings. With the rise of the environmental consciousness in the 1970s, and the more recent Stern Report and Kyoto Protocol, green façades have risen in popularity and become a more or less generic assemblage. Green has been loaded with symbolic value for an ecological strand of architecture, while the true environmental benefits of maintaining a green façade remain under scrutiny and the cost efficiency on a large scale (via maintenance) is utterly suspect.
FAÇADE	PAGE 169
tHE HYBRID ORDER: BETWEEN the GEOLOGICAL AND THE glOLOGICAL
Architecture has consistently, and over Millennia, maintained a modality that Bpbodies vegetation symbolically, a sort of hybrid order between the geological and the biological. Many architects and theorists have Iclclressed this issue, including ¡v)truvius, who suggested that elements 0f the Greek orders, such as triglyphs, were a kind of petrified remnant of fcooden construction techniques, and Laugier, who famously or infamously traced the Greek temple back to a primitive hut made with logs and branches.213 However, it was not only such "enlightened" architectures that used vegetative motifs as part of their semiotic structure. There are many examples of the use of flora as an ornamental motif in popular architecture, from Andalusian courtyards to Swiss and Flemish houses, as above, to French and Italian topiaries.
1769 Wimpole's Folley, Cambridgeshire, by Miller & Brown, is a Gothic church intentionally built as a ruin. Romantic sensibilities at the time found the vegetation-covered ruin awe inspiring.
1794 Painting of Tin-tern Abbey by T.M.W Turner. Many artists, architects, and writers during the romantic period were inspired by the well-preserved ruins of Tintern Abbey.
While consistently a subject of inspiration, vegetation is also architecture's foremost nemesis. The animosity is most vividly depicted in a deep tradition of Romantic imagery wherein vegetation is connected with the entropic side of architecture: via the ruin. The aesthetic of the picturesque explored the semi-natural as an escape from the ruthlessness of the ultra-artificial, manmade orders, plus the ravages of the Industrial Revolution. In the High Romantic search for the Sublime, an exit was sought altogether from the manmade world. For example, in Sanderson Miller's Wimpole's Folly, a fake Gothic cathedral intentionally built as a ruin, or Karl Friedrich Schinkel's intervention in Charlottenburg Palace, with its affinity for pergolas and climbing plants, the art and architecture of the so-called picturesque was clearly keen on being engulfed by vegetation.
14th century BC At the Luxor Temple in Thebes, the columns are reminiscent of papyrus bundles, perhaps symbolic of the marsh from which the ancient Egyptians believed the creation of the world to have unfolded.
1755 The Primitive Hut from Laugier's Essay on Architecture wherein architectural conventions literally find their origin in nature.
6th century BC Origin of the Corinthian Order: cccording to legend, a Greek architect was walking through a graveyard in Corinth and happened upon a grave marked with a basket weighed down by a stone tile. An acanthus plant had sprouted underneath the tribute and the composition inspired the Corinthian Order.214
Plants and flowers have long been part of an ornamental drive deeply rooted in architectural cultures, but also part of an anti-architectural tradition, a suspicion against the artificiality of the discipline, and a search for the Sublime in its cyclical demise.
PAGE 170	FAÇADE
INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND NATURAL ORNAMENT
1899 The Bayard-
Condict Building in New York by Louis Sullivan (
returns to architectures
roots in vegetal orna-mentation.
The socialist, 19th-century firebrand William Morris certainly displayed aspects of this anti-modern architectural anima, though his role comes rather late in the shift from Neo-classicism to Romanticism. Morris's use of floral motifs and their nostalgia for a pure, original nature was consistent with his general rejection of the Industrial Revolution and the world it had created, and/or the ugly end it portended. While Morris was openly critical of the modern culture that came with urbanization, Louis Sullivan was not so explicit, despite the repeated use of floral ornamentation in his façade panels. In both Morris and Sullivan there is a deliberate attempt to couple industrial production and floral ornamentation, the artificial and the natural, in an attitude that resonates, arguably, with architecture's Corinthian ancestry. The use of floral motifs in a modular fashion, either with interior wallpapers or façade panels, and inspired either by the rejection of rampant industrialization or by the opportunities presented in serial production, constitutes one of the earliest systematic attempts to reincorporate vegetative motifs into modernist architecture.
een Dininq Room at the Vic®.
and Albert Museum
London. William M0'r
ns s textile designs attempted to bridge
the gap between 9 naturalistic ornament, tion and new industrial"
processes.	al
1887 In Wightwick Manor, Wolverhampton William Morris textiles adorn every surface.
1895 The Guaranty Building in Buffalo,
New York, by Adler and Sullivan: a mistrust of the new production methods of the industrial era fed a renewed respect and desire for craftsmanship and ornamentation.
PAGE 171
I
■ g CORBUSIER'S LITERAL GREENING
I V'/hile modern architecture's functionalist polemic may have Expelled ornamentation and natural I elements from buildings, Le Corbusier, among other modernists, quite jfgmously deployed planters and flora |j0th as shading elements in façades and as rooftop gardens. There was ! often a tinge of green to modernist I-architecture, even if only for strictly utilitarian purposes. The influence of the Garden City and the hygienist movements were to become an important reference in Le Corbusier's early work, where the incorporation 0f the natural into the architectural is a constantly recurring thematic.
Le Corbusier was possibly the first modernist who dared attempt the literal integration of vegetation into architecture. His highly theoretical and ■mostly unbuilt projects associated with Immeubles Villas (1922), with their transposition of Ema's Carthusian monastery via a series of gardens associated with living units, at least left the gates ajar for the incorporation of greenery into the modernist façade to come. The Maison Clarté, the Durand Apartments, and many other Le Corbusier projects would incorporate greenery into the façade in the form of vegetated-terrace elements, a component that formed an interface between inside and outside. Where Sullivan and Morris used nature as a
1934 Le Corbusier, Durand Apartments, Algiers. Here nature nearly makes the leap to the façade, contributing to the architectural expression of the building.
11th century La Grande Chartreuse, Saint-Pierre-de-Chartreuse. Monasteries such as this, capturing a plot of land for each monk, were the inspiration for Le Corbusier's later housing schemes.
1925 Le Corbusier's Immeubles Villa, Bordeaux: a checkerboard of enclosed living spaces and exterior areas for vegetation.
late-Romantic semiotic device, Le Corbusier used architecture as literal infrastructure for vegetation.
1932 The Maison Clarté in Geneva,
Switzerland, by Le Corbusier is an early
example of a building	1932 In Le Corbusier's Immeubles Villas project,
keen to be swallowed	more space is devoted to exterior, vegetated
by vegetation.	patios than to enclosed areas.
I
1961 Atelier 5's Siedlung Halen in Bern, Switzerland: early example of Brutalism's desire to be subsumed by vegetation.
1982 Vegetation pours over the walls of the Barbican Centre in London by Chamberlin, Powell & Bon. The stepped and vegetated scene evokes descriptions of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon.
■■■ Æ
PAGE 172	FAÇADE
VEGETATED BRUTALISM AND THE CRITIQUE OF THE TECHNOCORPORATE EMPIRE
Following Le Corbusier's experiments, a number of Brutalist architects developed the Idea of re-vegetating modernism, softening the blow of raw concrete In urban environments with life and color, attempting to return modernism to a lost Arcadia. Perhaps revolting against the cold, monotone repetition and sterility of functionalist modernism, Incorporating greenery Into the Brutalist façade not only literally brought life, but also allowed for the expression of Individuation in an otherwise repetitive and monolithic architecture.
16th century The
Hanging Gardens of
Babylon by Maerten van Heemskerck The imagery of heavy COn structlon consumed hv vegetation is revived Brutalist experiments ^ the 1970s and 80s
Such examples of Brutalism's caution In embracing a totally de-naturallzed environment, plus risking the sin of absolute hubris, Include: Herman Hertz-berger's open and exposed cinder blocks on the balconies of the Haar-lemmer Houttulnen Apartments, which were to be used as planters; the 1982 Barbican Center complex, surrounded as It Is by a lush central park with greenery pouring over catwalks and out of apartment balconies; vegetation flowing over the roofs and up the walls of Atelier 5's 1961 Siedlung Halen In Bern; the series of terraced platforms festooned with wild greenery and reminiscent of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon In Renaudle's 1975 Housing Buildings In Ivry-sur-Selne; and the climbing plants of Fernando Hlgueras 1973 Hotel Las Salinas or 1973 Military Housing Co-op In Madrid.
1975 Housing Buildings in Ivry-sur-Seine by Renaudie, consumed by vegetation over the years.
FAÇADE
PAGE 173
tHE 1970S ENVIRONMENTAL MOVEMENT
■e interest in advancing an ecologically sustainable society developed as a critique of the menacing techno-Eprporate culture of the postwar era and achieved popularity along two trajectories.
Qn one front, a series of postwar environmental disasters ¡seo public awareness of the environment and modern man's negative impact upon it. The publication of several 0pU|ar texts, including Rachel Carson's Silent Spring of 1962 and Paul Ehrlich's The Population Bomb of 1968, attention to private and corporate environmental |egligence and malfeasance, plus the now soon-to-be-realized likelihood for global ecological armageddon. With agrowing public awareness of the environmental damages laused by modern life and rampant consumerist culture, the 1970s saw environmental movements dating back to the conservationists and preservationists of the early 20th century finally begin to take hold and impact public policy.2'5
On another front, the public realization that energy is not an unlimited resource came in the wake of the 1973 oil crisis.
A number of public programs promoting energy conservation followed, including the 1978 National Energy Act, with its statutory provisions and subsections (such as the Energy Tax Act and the Gas Guzzler Tax) beginning to have a direct impact on everyday societal norms. With the belated admission that natural resources are not unlimited and should not be squandered, green credentials became popular and a sought-after distinction in public affairs, both governmental and commercial.
1982 Haarlemmer Houttuinen Apartments by Herman Hertzberger. Planters are incorporated into the raw concrete block handrails, softening the rough hand of modernism and allowing for individual expression.
SILENT
SPRING
Rachel
Carson
1962 Rachel Carson's Silent Spring, exposed the ecological impact of chemical pesticides, helped start the environmental movement.
The architectural expression of this movement would come amid these changes in public policy and coincide with an increased public demand for green products. Several trends in environmental façade construction were born at this time. One, a technological solution, would deploy advanced assemblages, including living walls and greenhouses, plus new materials such as low-emissivity coatings. Another, a natural solution, would utilize sustainable and recyclable materials, passive-solar technology, and ancient and vernacular building techniques. Lastly, a new emphasis, however deceitful, on the symbolic façade would employ green superficialities to imply a socially and environmentally friendly ethos for the building's tenants or owners.
1973 The Oil Crisis, as well as a series of environmental disasters in 1960s began to raise public awareness about the fragility of global ecological systems and our negative effect upon them.
PAGE 174
TRUE VERTICAL GREEN
Reminiscent of a return to a proto-modernist picturesque sensibility, the Brutalist greening strategies noted above still maintain an orthodox relationship to gravity. Potted plants, climbing vines, and roof gardens grow upon, and are understood relative to, a horizontal datum; an earthen base, so to speak, as mineral substrate. It would not be until the end of the 20th century that the primary means of grounding such measures would shift from a horizontal to a vertical plane and green would lose its close relationship to gravity.
The modernist green wall comes from nearly a century of research in hydroponics and botany, but has only seen wide dissemination in architecture within the last two decades, or, from roughly 1990 to 2010. The first patented green-wall assemblage was invented by Stanley Hart White, a professor of Landscape Architecture at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. The wall, which integrated a hydroponic nutrient delivery system, growth medium, plant matter, and structure into a single assemblage was developed between 1931 and 1938.216 These early concepts would not be fully developed until a political shift initiated in the 1960s, substantiated in the 1970s, and expressed with modest vigor in the 1980s. This shift sowed increasing public demand for green technology, both as a technical solution and as a sometimes pathetic appliqued symbol for de rigueur environmental conscientiousness.
1938 The contemporary vertical garden was invented many years ahead of its time. Stanley Hart White patent his Vertical Gardening System, as a "solution to the problem of modern garden design."220
2005 Nearly all contemporary green walls are based on Stanley Hart White's 1938 diagram, as in Patrick Blanc's Les Halles, Avignon.
PAGE 175


grEEN is the new black
in 1976, Stuart Wrede constructed a cube of earth planted with grass for Institute of Architecture and Urban gtudies' "Idea as Model exhibition." in uninterrupted flow of green (from gr0und to wall to roof), yet rooted in an otherwise Platonic geometry, this ¡pgtallation redeployed landscape, paving been liberated from the ground, aS ornament. Telling of the cultural 2eitgeist, the piece was described by Wrede as "a new type of landscape art whose function is symbolic only; that of the folly, gateway, fountain, or monument."217 Eschewing the glaringly obvious performative qualities of the living model, here green was merely a symbol for green. Meticulously cared for, watered and trimmed regularly, and even dismantled when it caused water damage to the floors of the IAUS, the model represented the intersection of a desire to use organic matter primarily for symbolic purposes with the reality of its material properties.218 As green has made the leap from the ground to the façade in the years following this model's dismantling, it has become more than an appliqué symbol, becoming a representation of a true shift in cultural ethos.
1973 Higueras was another early adopter of façade greening, as in the Military Housing Co-op building in Madrid.
1994 Emilio Ambasz, Fukuoka Prefectural International Hall, Japan. Though still maintaining an orthodox relationship of vegetation to ground, building-ness is nearly completely swamped with greenery, save some geometry.
1976 Stuart Wrede, Et in Arcadia Ego. A cube of grass created for the "Idea as Model" exhibition at the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies. Famously dismantled by an enraged Peter Eisen-man for causing damage to the floors.221
Beginning in the 1970s, Emilio Ambasz explored the models discovered by Brutalists, advancing them as early experiments in environmentalist architecture. The 1975 Cordoba House featured an almost entirely absent architecture. Two disembodied walls form the shell of an architecture otherwise covered with earth and greened over, with the façade having become simply a retaining wall. In a similar way, at the 1988 Lucile Halsell Conservatory in the San Antonio Botanical Garden, architecture is relegated to follies exposed in a massive artificial landscape. Ambasz' "Green Over Grey" polemic was both an aesthetic and an environmental manifesto of sorts, attempting to displace the emphasis on abstraction and utilitarianism in late-modernist architecture with a renewed picturesque focus on living or organic principles.218 The 1994 Fukuoka Prefectural International Hall became the ultimate expression of the urban park migrating on to the façade, as terraced roof gardens pour plant matter over and across the façade, effectively draping or veiling the building in green, while directly connecting to the park below.
1982 Dames Wines continued this line of thought with his High-rise of Homes, introducing more greenery to the scheme.
2004 In the Tower Flower, Édouard François cartoons the Idea of the verti cally stacked suburban home.
Global warming summit heats up
India vents at richer nations for 'shirking their responsibilities
By KEVIN GRAY / The Associated Press, November 14, 1998
BEUNOS AIRES, Argentina - India chided the industrial world on Friday for asking developing nations to do more to cut greenhouse gases, saying wealthier countries should take the lead under s 1997 global warming treaty.
In the last hours of a U.N. climate summit, India's environmental minister contended some countries would like to evade their legal obligations under this Kyoto protocol to scale back emissions of the heattrapping gases.
"When it comes to ... taking responsibilities, some countries would like to shirk" their obligations while raising "new ideas" about how the agreement should be implemented, said India's environment! minister, Shri Suresh Prabhu. "That's not acceptable to us."
He did not name any countries. But his statement appeared aimed at a US-backed campaign for developing nations to take on emissions targets like those laid out for industrialized nations under the Kyoto treaty. India and China are the biggest opponents of that proposal.
1997 The Kyoto Protocol set binding obligations on industrialized countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions, ushering in an age of international ecological responsibility.
2007 The green wall of the CaixaForum in Madrid, by Flerzog and de Meuron and Patrick Blanc, holds 15,000 plants of more than 250 species.224
Though still in its infancy, green has already seen a rapid rise of technical expertise, broad dissemination and proliferation, growth in popularity, and relegation to kitsch. François's Tower Flower of 2004 literally turns the façade into a shelf for comically scaled planters.222 The repetitive wall of planters, reminiscent of Andalusian flowerpots, brings to mind A.B. Walker's "Celestial Real Estate Company," a cartoon from 1909, but as a vertical multiplication of greenery rather than "celestial" real estate. Ironically, the individual expression of freedom afforded by the infinitely repeatable horizontal plane in Walkers cartoon or, in a similar way, Dames Wines's 1981 drawing "Highriseof Homes," is washed away by the monotony and banality of François planters. However self-consciously outré, it does recognize the potentia of the façade to extend the literal carbon footprint of a building infinitey-
PAGE 176	FAÇADE
EXTENDING THE GROUND AND THE KYOTO
PROTOCOL
Though developed in the 1980s, full-scale exterior green-wall assemblages would not make an appearance until the late 1990s. The final moment of broad dissemination for the green façade would take place after the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, at which point vegetated buildings would be thought of literally as carbon traps and oxygen producers.
A flurry of literal-green projects, from those of Patrick Blanc to Édouard François to Lacaton and Vassal have continued the exploration of green technologies - now politically correct and aesthetically crowd-pleasing - toward a literal form of the Cosmopolitical Arcadia that uses buildings as carbon traps and air purifiers. Life cycles, and even the now-prosaic notion of biodegradability, have shifted from the organic world of gardens to the mineral world of buildings.
2004 The Quai Branly museum in Paris, by tean Nouvel and Patrick Blanc, features a 200 meter x 12 meter green wall.
1909 A.B. Walker, Celestial Real Estate Company. The idea of an infinitely repeated ground arose at the birth of the first skyscrapers.
FAÇADE
PAGE 177
The recent boom of green walls may be categorized based on construction logic and the intention of the façade. Either integrated into the construction or applied as a facing to an existing structure, a green wall may be seen either as symbolic encoding for ecological sustainability and its pretensions, or, as a performative layer attempting to achieve ecological sustainability in itself. In many ways it is similar to public art and serves as an ode to now fashionable sensibilities. A rise in prefabricated and modular green-wall technologies, years of successful assemblages, and do-it-yourself greening strategies proliferated by the internet have increased the accessibility and viability of greening, expanding literal greenwashing at an exponential rate. The goal of the green revolution is to perpetuate literal greening both as a symbol of an environmentally conscious society and as a means to reduce our carbon footprint by any means available. As greenwashing continues to increase in public demand, architecture will continue to attempt to accommodate such desires.
p013 Parkroyal on jckering, Singapore, by W°HA Architects.
2012 The Supertree Grove at the Gardens by the Bay in Singapore by Grant Associates is one of the spectacles Of the "City of Vertical Green."
gREENWASHING
^though it is not clear whether these façades are truly effective, and there is lingering suspicion that their water ^efficiency outweighs their benefits, jf,e literal green façade has now become a branding strategy both on a local and urban scale. Arup's Citygroup Data Centre in Frankfurt is a remarkable example of this type of greenwashing. The building claims to be an energy-efficient data center, and bas a veneer of green thrown over its façade. The green façade is mostly appliqué, serving as a visual signifier or badge for the building's hidden performance standards. On the urban scale, Singapore City now boasts that It is the capital city for Vertical Green, though time will tell the degree to which this proclamation is positive and whether the trend is truly sustainable.223
2009 Section and elevation of the Citigroup Data Center in Frankfurt, by Arup. A highly advanced and energy efficient data-processing center hidden behind a sticker of a green wall which signifies its "greenness."
2013 Stefano Boeri, Vertical Forest, Milan: planting begins.
PAGE 178
Façades that incorporate moving parts have been both a playful diversion and a pursuit of the utmost seriousness with powerful societal implications since the dawn of the machine age. In its infancy, the fully automated façade was always eclipsed by gadgets and components such as automatic windows, garage door openers, and mechanical heating and cooling, as an onslaught of tiny motors descended upon the American home. Recently, with increasingly sophisticated control mechanisms, façades with moving elements have become more popular and creative in their applications. With the rise of programmable micro-controllers and processors, the future of the kinetic façade may be secure, yet its performativity remains truly obscure in relation to shifting global environmental conditions and political protocols.
kinetic façfm
the yi|||
nT f 'B ilT wr"B I
PAGE 179
gppUR SI MUOVE
caçades have always had moveable elements. Doors, windows, awnings, shutters, louvers, blinds, lifting bridges, n(j other kinetic elements have been necessary to modulate the otherwise impenetrable and static building envelope- The earliest examples of kinetic-façade elements required manpower for their operation, allowing people to control the spaces they occupied, such as the sliding shoji doors in traditional Japanese architecture. Over time, technology has intervened and simple human-powered façade elements have evolved into complex, mechanized systems with responsive, automated, remote, or - now -embedded artificially intelligent aspects.
Throughout most of architectural history, façades have played the conservative role of conveying a sense of stability and permanence. Despite a building's natural tendency to move and adjust, decay, degrade, and even change function over time, most architectures aim to inhibit these mutations. The preservation of a singular understanding of a building (with its part-to-whole relationships firmly established and invariable, fixed forever ¡n Euclidean or Newtonian time and space) is what the value of the traditional façade is meant to suggest. As a more dynamic conception of society emerged, architecture sought to express and celebrate the notion of change over time. Given that technological change is driven in part by crisis, it remains to be seen where our current situation will take us, although, and if past experience is of any value, it may be in ever-narrowing circles.
1889 The infinite, mechanistic landscape of the Palais des Machines lri Paris, a celebration of the new machine age and all the conveniences and advances that a mechanically charged society could produce.
1770 Wolfgang von Kemperen's mechanical chess playing machine, "The Turk." Later revealed to be an elaborate hoax containing a live chess player acting as puppeteer rather than a true automaton, this machine was born in an era inspired by the future of machines and their impact on society.227
PREMODERN MACHINES
In 1889, as part of the Exposition Universelle in Paris, architect Ferdinand Dutert, under the consultation of the structural engineer Victor Contamin, built the Palais des Machines as a symbol of a dynamic future.225 The building not only showcased the triumphant machines propelling the last days of the otherwise crude industrial revolution toward utopia proper, but was, in itself, the physical and literal embodiment of the hoped-for future. Using glass, steel, and three-pin hinged arches (a technology typical of bridge construction), Dutert and Contamin designed and engineered the largest column-free structure up to that point in history, a building that epitomized the shift toward a fully mechanized society.
This then-emergent mechanized society would lead to a fascination with mechanical curiosities. Simple robots or "automata" began to appear in circus performances, playing music, performing card tricks, or even playing chess. Though the most famous chess playing automaton, "The Turk," turned out to be a hoax, the dream of mechanization would always maintain a playful and entertainment-oriented parallel to more serious societal endeavors.226
1659 Sliding shoji screen doors at the Shugakuin Imperial Villa, Kyoto.
1913 Real curtain walls: Dulia Morgan's Tent Houses at the YWCA Conference Grounds in Asilomar, California.
PAGE 180
\DE
MECHANIZATION TAKES COMMAND
From Antonio Sant'Elia's futurist architecture in 1914, to Le Corbusier's Toward an Architecture in 1923, to Sigfried Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History in 1948, modern architects have always dreamt about mechanized buildings. Buildings were no longer thought of as purely geological, but, instead, as complex machines more akin to airplanes, ships, or automobiles, capable of adapting to situations over time autonomously. This fetishization of machines extends from the smallest kitchen appliance to the entire locomotion of a building -anything and everything could be automated. Architecture would attempt to keep pace with advances in mechanization but the kinetic façade would always remain behind product design and operable components.
MOTOR OPERATES WINDOW SHADE A reversible electric motor, operating on the house current, raises or lowers a window shade at «be pressure of a button. The button la held down until shade is at desired level
1930s Advertisement for a motorized window shade.
"took 0«« M* just hoc lead out and »woo.fi . . . down tank* Ik* gorog» deer , . _ oil by
Vai, election ico nd I ha AVCO Automatic Dear Operator do HI Me more mon-hondling garage doon in aaMy weather—whether you are coming In or going owl—you |utl P'»*c o batten,
The AVCO Autoa»lic Door Operator do*» more Ikon amoie your naighbon Ir irr.«
dependably, daily, ai your private doorman! Ineipenolve and automatic . . . Tow'll want he trouble-free MIrvice for yatit home. Available fee immediate delivery from your tecol dealer or dlUrlbutor. Be lure to dip and mail the coupon below far complete detail».
1947 Advertisement for the automatic garage
door opener, one of tne
devices that brought
mechanization of the façade to suburbia.
1919-1920 Vladimir Tatlin's Monument to the Third International contained geometric shapes moving through annual cycles like heavenly bodies.
FAÇADE
PAGE 181
wHAT WALL? EARLY
Mechanized openings
»n onslaught of small motors and miniaturized mechanical systems would descend upon the American home, nrovlding a range of mechanically enhanced architectural elements and consumer appliances. As machines took over more and more aspects of everyday life, architects finally began to erect mechanized façade assemblages.
jhe availability of motors and Increasingly complex mechanical systems allowed a new connection between architecture and nature, one In which a building's walls could dissolve before one's eyes, connecting the Interior directly to nature. This tradition could continue from Terragnl's experiments ¡n Como and Mies' mechanized wall at the Villa Tugendhat all the way to Neutra's landscape-subsumed houses In California.
1937 At Giuseppe Terragni's Sant'Elia Nursery School in Como, in order to provide shading and mitigate sunlight, a freestanding concrete frame held mechanized sunshades that could be cranked open, doubling the size of each classroom.
1930 A large glazed wall at Villa Tugendhat in Brno retracts into the floor: a visual relationship to nature transforms into a physical connection.
1936 Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times: the modern worker is literally caught in the machinations of the factory. Every aspect of life, Including feeding and grooming, is automated.
IP® The doors of Terragnl's Casa del Fascio could be opened simultaneously, in a rigid orchestration of control, by motors and a mechanism housed In the security booth.
While later kinetic façades would take on an autonomous role, adapting automatically to changing stimuli, the first ki-netic-façade assemblages were characterized by architectural accessories that could be moved directly by inten-tioned human interaction. Either with controls operating motorized actuators or with direct human contact, there was still a sense of control over the first kinetic-façade assemblages, something that would bellost or at least out- j sourced to a master programmer in later systems.
PAGE 182
DEUS EX MACHINA
Angelo Invernizzi's Villa Girasole, near Verona, seems to have achieved the dream of the fully automatic building as early as the 1930s. The entire building rotates on a mechanical track, with its inner glazed courtyard following the path of the sun. As it sweeps over a thin lawn of grass, ideal for sunbathing, the irony of the Girasole is its disregard for the nature that its name, meaning "sunflower," invokes. With the introduction of mechanical heating and cooling for buildings, the typical American home would become fully automated. The caricature of the fully automated life expressed in Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times would become a reality, with machines achieving control over interior environments.
1935 Angelo Invernizzi's Villa Girasole, or Sunflower, near Verona, is an early realization of the automated building. Set on a turntable, the wheeled villa rotates 360 degrees over the course of the day so that it is always facing the sun, a real machine for living.
1939 Advertisement for automatic gas heating for the home. Mechanical heating and cooling would become the ultimate expression of the mechanized home, even if the cost of gas in 1939 was not as low as the advertisement suggested.
1935 "The House that Runs Itself," Popular Mechanics. Human control was no longer necessary nor desired for the maintenance of the modern home.229
FAÇADE
PAGE 183
MANUAL control
jean Prouvé, with his extensive metalworking expertise, would be an ¡^portant figure in the development of manually controlled, mechanical-kinetic façade. Prescient of many later operable façades, Prouvé's mechanical louvers, sunshades, and grilles in, for sample, 5 Square Mozart, Paris, 1954, and Les Maisons Tropicales, Africa, prototypes 1949-1951, were well-crafted, detailed, and complex. The manual kinetic façade would give a degree of control to the inhabitant with the supporting architectural infrastructure serving as the registration 0f this agency, passively displaying patterns of open and closed louvers across the façade.
1949-1951 ]ean Prouvé designed three prototypes for the Maison Tropicale which were mass produced for use in West Africa. His background as a metal worker Is reflected in the industrial aesthetic of his buildings.
1954 Dosep Antoni Coderch and Manel Vails' Casa de la Marina in Barcelona features a dynamic façade operated by the tenants, a machine for urban living, with mechanistic louvers and grilles.
HILBERSEIMER'S BLINDS
Brought by Mies van der Rohe from the Bauhaus in 1938 to chair NT's Department of City and Regional Planning, Ludwig Hilberseimer took charge of the ritual of adjusting the Venetian blinds in Crown Hall. The ritual became an obsession and according to Peter Beltemacchi, a former Associate Dean and Professor at NT's Department of City and Regional Planning, "Hilberseimer used to walk around and adjust [the blinds] all day long," consciously attempting to control the quality of light in the building.227 Hilberseimer obsessively operated the blinds until he died 1967, at which point the louvers were uninstalled and discarded.
1956 Two masters:
™es van der Rohe ftiokes a cigar in satis-JSction, standing before |™t>erseimer's blinds “¡side his Crown Hall l Wege of Architecture *he Illinois Institute of ■“chnology in Chicago.
PAGE 184
PLAYFUL MACHINES
Once the building envelope became fully automated and the modernist dream of a mechanized architecture was attained, operability lost its novelty. The machine aesthetic of modernism was no longer considered an appropriate aesthetic for the contemporary world. Having advanced from the original utilitarian or performance-driven kinetic assemblages, contemporary kinetic façades are driven toward a rather hedonistic set of performances. Movable elements are exaggerated and ornamented to produce new narratives or expressions. In another trend, kinetic façades are composed of serialized found objects such as operable doors, windows, awnings, shutters, and other kinetic elements. The mechanized objects of the modern American home have recently reappeared, but grossly mutated and hyperbolized.
1995 Shigeru Ban's Curtain Wall House in Tokyo, a lo-fi operable façade.
2002 Shigeru Ban's Paper Art Museum in Shizuoka, opens completely with a series of translucent awnings.
1984 Santiago Cala-trava's garage doors at the Ernstlng Warehouse in Coesfeld, Germany, a modest commission with grand ambitions.
1977 Open Sesame: tames Wines and SITE'S Best Products Notch Showroom in Sacramento slides open like a drawer.
2006 Shigeru Ban's Metal Shutter Houses in New York upscales and scales up the generic metal shutter.
FAÇADE
PAGE 185
FAST, cheap, and out of control
The motto "Fast, Cheap, and Out of Control," coined by I Rodney Brooks of MIT's robotics department, epitomizes i the dream of a political reality that is effective and I respond rather than subject to the ruthless regimes of capitalist production and their illegitimate extraction of I profit from inhuman labor. Brooks favors a diffused model | 0f intelligence that eschews centralized planning and decision-making. He argues instead for an architecture in which layers of behaviors are directly linked to sensory 1 recepti°n- According to Brooks, "it is more natural to locally react to sensed aspects of the world, and let a I pre-wired priority scheme resolve any conflicts generated within the distributed system. It is entirely plausible for different parts of the system to believe wildly inconsistent things about the world."230
Michael Fox, the head of the MIT Kinetic Design Group, has proposed a taxonomy of kinetic controls that may be translated into three types of behavior in kinetic façades: the manual, the autonomous, and the responsive.231 In this progression, the responsive envelope responds to natural forces, having been programmed to produce a desired visual effect or move according to certain parameters. For example, Ned Kahn's Wind Veil (2000) is a kinetic façade that responds to natural wind patterns, and Chuck Hoberman's POLA Ginza Building Façade in Tokyo (2009, with Nikken Sekkei and Yasuda Atelier), responds to solar conditions.
2009 The increasing availability and understanding of programmable microcontrollers, such as the Arduino UNO, allows for the automatic response to input stimuli with output through programmed parameters.
B12 Aedas' Al Bahar Towers in Abu Dhabi are shrouded n 8 lattice of operable petals that expand and contract 0 control daylighting and solar radiation.
rn-r^-rinwHTi
1988 lean NouveTs Institut du Monde Arabe in Paris exalts the mechanics of the shutter.
2012 UAP and Ned Kahn's Brisbane Domestic Terminal Car Park is a completely passive system, ebbing and flowing to localized wind currents.
THE RESPONSIVE
The responsive kinetic façade is based on non-linear, interactive performances that are dynamically modified by sensors receiving data from changing environmental inputs. Increasingly available for experimentation, micro-controllers like Arduino may be programmed to respond to a variety of inputs with a variety of outputs, interacting with an increasingly complex and varied battery of sensors, motors, lights, and other hardware. The coupling of sensors and servos makes it possible for the façade to react to environmental stimuli, natural or anthropogenic.
notes
1.	See: Alejandro Zaera-Polo, "The Politics of the Envelope, Part 1," Log 13/14 (Fall 2008); and Alejandro Zaera-Polo, "The Politics of the Envelope, Part II," Log 16 (Spring/ Summer 2009).
2.	In relation to aluminum, see: for the US, Charlotte Muller, "The Aluminum Monopoly and the War," Political Science Quarterly 60, No. 1 (March 1945), 39-43; and, for the UK, E.C. Goldsworthy, "Light Alloys in Post-War Britain," Journal of the Royal Society of Arts 92, No. 4663 (April 1944), 230-41.
3.	See Noel Uri, "The U.S. Insulation Market," Energy Policy 6, No. 1 (March 1978), 78-80.
4.	For a general treatise on the construction of American power and its transformations across various socio-political platforms, see C. Wright Mills, "The Structure of Power in American Society," British Journal of Sociology 9, No. 1 (March 1958), 29-41.
5.	Mike Davies and Richard Rogers, “A Wall for All Seasons," RIBA Journal 88, No. 2 (February 1981), 55-57.
6.	ETA is the Basque separatist movement founded in 1959 and still active, albeit in a mostly de-militarized manner, as of 2014.
7.	"Design space" is a concept proposed by Daniel Dennett to define design within an evolutionary process. Daniel Dennett, Darwin's Dangerous Idea: Evolution and the Meanings of Life (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1995).
8.	See Hentie Louw, "The Rise of the Metal Window during the Early Industrial Period in Britain, ca. 1750-1830," Construction History 3 (1987), 31-54. It is impossible, for example, to imagine the architectural effects in Walter Gropius' 1913 Fagus Factory or Albert Kahn's early 20th-century Detroit factories without monolithic walls of glass and steel.
9.	See Robert Davison, "Possibilities in Postwar Techniques," Architectural Record (May 1945), 85-90. See: Nina Rappaport, "Factory," in R. Stephen Sennott, ed.. Encyclopedia of 20th-century Architecture, Vol. 1 (New York: Fitzroy Dearborn, 2004); and Sergio Poretti, "Le tecniche costruttive negli anni trenta tra modemismo e autarchia," in 150 anni di cos-truzione edile in Italia (Rome: Edilstampa,1992).
10.	See the "Introduction" in GilbertSimondon's 1958 doctoral dissertation, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques. Gilbert Simondon,
On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects: Part One, trans. Ninian Mellamphy, University of Western Ontario, June 1980, Duke University, https://english.duke.edu/ uploads/assets/Simondon_MEOT_part_1. pdf, 1-10.
11.	Gramazio & Kohler Architects, Gantenbein Vineyard Façade, Flasch, Switzerland, 2006. An example of the non-standardized brick façade.
12.	See Akos Moravanszky, "Concrete Constructs: The Limits of Rationalism in Swiss Architecture," Architectural Design 77, No. 5 (September 2007), 30-35.
13.	See Dennis Doordan, "Promoting Aluminum: Designers and the American Aluminum Industry," Design Issues 9, No. 2 (Autumn 1993), 44-50.
14.	See "According to Plan: The Story of Modern Sidewalls for the Homes of America," short film by Handy (Jam) Organization, 1952, https://archive.org/ details/Accordin1952.
15.	See Thomas Ray, ed.. Symposium on Thermal Insulating Materials (Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing Materials, 1952).
16.	See "Hypertelia and Self-conditioning in Technical Evolution," in Simondon, On the Mode of Existence of Technical Objects:
Part One, 51-60.
17.	See Michael Wigginton, "The Glass Wall and Other Stories. The Past and Future History of the Willis Faber Dumas Building," RSA Journal 143, (October 1995), 63-76.
18.	Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969), 16.
19.	"The University of Cincinnati September 2010 Fee Pledge Request - $35,050,000," Ohio Higher Ed (University System of Ohio, September, 2010), 2. http://regents.ohio. gov/cap-oper-requests/background/sep10/ ucincinnati-fee-request-debt%20issuance.pdf.
20.	See R. Michael Rostron, Light Cladding of Buildings (London: The Architectural Press, 1964), pp. 43-57.
21.	"Aluminium Smelting," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 24, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aluminium_ smelting.
22.	Scott Murray, Contemporary Curtain Wall Architecture (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009), 70.
23.	Muhammad Asif, Alan Davidson, and Tariq Muneer, "Embodied Energy Analysis of Aluminium-clad Windows," Building Services Engineering Research & Technology 22,
No. 3 (2001), 195-99.
24.	See: John McKean, Crystal Palace: Joseph Paxton and Charles Fox (London: Phaidon Press, 1994), 22-23; and "History of the Crystal Palace (Part 1)," Crystal Palace Foundation, n.d., http://www.crystalpalace foundation.org. uk/history/history-of- the-crystal-palace-part-1, accessed September
12,	2014.
25.	For example, see the rise and fall of Mies van der Rohe.
26.	John McKean, Crystal Palace: Joseph Paxton and Charles Fox (London: Phaidon Press, 1994), 22-23.
27.	David Yeomans, "The Origins of the Modern Curtain Wall," APT Bulletin 32 (2001), 13.
28.	See: Jürgen Götz, "Maintaining Fagus," trans. Elizabeth M. Schwaiger, in Annemarie Jaeggi, Fagus: Industrial Culture from Werk bund to Bauhaus (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000), 133-41; and Christopher Johnson, Steel Window Reconstruction at the Bauhaus Dessau (Cottbus: Applied Art History Department at BTU Cottbus, 2013).
29.	See Kenneth Powell, "Expressive Engineering," The Architect's Journal (July
13,	2000), 28-37.
30.	"Biography," Albert Kahn Papers 1896-2014, Ann Arbor: Bentley Historical Library, University of Michigan, 2014, http://quod.lib. umich.edu/cgi/f/findaid/findaid-idx?c= bhlead;idno=umich-bhl-0420, accessed September 9, 2014.
31.	Meredith Clausen, "Belluschi and the Equitable Building in History," The Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 50,
No. 2, (June 1991), 109-29.
32.	"Lever House, New York: Glass and Steel Walls," Architectural Record (June 1952), 130-35.
33.	Lewis Mumford, "Clean," The New Yorker (April 26, 1952), 27-28.
34.	M.J. Scheffler, and J.D. Connolly, "History of Building Joint Sealants," in Michael A. Lacasse, ed., Science and Technology of Building Seals, Sealants, Glazing and Waterproofing, Vol. 5, ASTM Special Technical Publication 1271 (West Conshohocken, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials, 1996), 85-94.
35.	"Pepsi-Cola Building Designation Report," New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission, June 20, 1995, http://www. nyc.gov/html/lpc/downloads/pdf/reports/
pepsibldg.pdf.
36.	See Phyllis Lambert and Barry BerqH0i| Building Seagram (New Haven CT Y ' University Press, 2013).
37.	See Eeva-Liisa Pelkonen and Donald Alh eds., Eero Saarinen: Shapingw the Fmrectlt' (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press
38.	National Register of Historic Places
"General Motors Technical Center Naf Historic Landmark Nomination"	lonal
(Washington, DC: US Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 2013) 37 .
39.	Pelkonen and Albrecht, eds., Eero Saar•~™'
Shaping the Future, pp. 230-35.	Inen:
40.	Nancy Miller, "Big Blue: A Look Back at th Modular Expansion and Aesthetic Preser vation of the IBM Manufacturing Facility' Rochester," Architecture Minnesota SerT tember/October 2005, http://enandem files
wordpresscom/2013/02/am_big_blue pdf
41.	Regarding this new sun-shading aesthetic and its benefits, see K. Gertis, "Problems of Summer Room Heating," NASA Technical Documents, Internet Archive, April 1973
http://www.archive.org/details/nasa
techdoc_19730012217.
42.	"John Hancock Tower," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified June 21, 2014,http-//
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Hancock_Tower
43.	See "The Biggest Mirror Ever," Architectural Forum 126, No. 3 (April 1967), 33-41.
44.	Murray, Contemporary Curtain Wall Architecture, 53.
45.	Matthias Schuler, "Energy and Comfort," in Michael Bell and Jeannie Kim, eds., Engineered Transparency: The Technical, Visual, and Spatial Effects of Glass (New York: Princeton Architectural Press 2009) 236-40.
46.	Werner Sobek, "Engineered Glass," in Bell and Kim, eds., Engineered Transparency 169-82.
47.	Nadine Post, "Painful Precision Allows Frank Gehry to Twist the Glass Envelope," in Buildings: Innovative Projects, January 8, 2007, http://enr.constructlon.com/features/ buildings/archives/070108.asp.
48.	"Roman Concrete," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified September 4, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roman_concrete.
49.	"Eddystone Lighthouse," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified September 6, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ EddystoneJJghthouse.
50.	Allison Kelly, "Coade, Eleanor (1733-1821), Manufacturer of Artificial Stone," Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, 2004, http://www.oxforddnb.com/
index/101037296/Eleanor-Coade.
51.	"John Alexander Brodie," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified June 29, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_ Alexander_Brodie.
52.	Frank Lloyd Wright, "The Meaning of Materials: Concrete," Architectural Record 64 (August, 1928), 99; 102-104.
53.	Dietrich Neumann, "The Century's Triumph in Lighting: The Luxfer Prism Companies and Their Contribution to Early Modern Architec ture," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 54, No. 1 (March 1955), 24—53.
54.	"Église Notre-Dame du Rainey," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified February A 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/ wiki/%C3%89glise_Notre-Dame_du_RaincV-
55.	Karla Britton, Auguste Perret (London: Phaidon Press Ltd., 2001), 144-51.
56.	Martha Groves, "Tour Shows Off the Bloc Architect Wright Played With," Los Angeles Times, January 27, 2008, http://www.latimes.
com/local/la-me-wright27jan27-story.htm •
57.	For Le Corbusier's Unité ¿'Habitation,
PAGE 187
K Marseille, see Edward Ford, The Details of Ï Modern Architecture, Vol. 2 (Cambridge,
; MA: MIT Press, 1996), 182-89.
L Nikita Khrushchev, "On the Extensive Intro-
■	’ duction of Industrial Methods, Improving the I Quality and Reducing the Cost of Con-
■	struction" (excerpts), National Conference I of Builders, Architects, and Workers in the I Construction Materials, December 7, 1954,
; Archis 3, 2009, Volume Project, 2009, http:// IP volumeproject.org/2009/03/industrialised-E, building-speech-1954/.
E Khrushchev, "On the Extensive Introduction i of Industrial Methods, Improving the Quality F and Reducing the Cost of Construction."
B) "Khrushchyovka," Wikipedia, The Free 1 Encyclopedia, 1 uly 25, 2014, http://
I en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Khrushchyovka. gl Ignacio Fernandez Solla, "Industrialized I; Building Speech," Façades Confidential,
I Blog post, modified October 4, 2010, http:// I façadesconfidential.blogspot.com/2010/10/
I ¡ndustrialised-building-speech.html.
|2. "Flousing and Urban Development Act of [	1965," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
I modified March 18, 2014, http://
[ en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Housing_and_Urban_
1 Development_Act_of_1965.
63.	"George W. Romney," Wikipedia, The Free I Encyclopedia, modified August 25, 2014,
1 http://en.wikipedia.Org/wiki/George_W._
E Romney.
64.	See Cynthia Pearson and Norbert Delatte,
Ev "Ronan Point Apartment Tower Collapse
I and Its Effect on Building Codes," in Journal I of Performance of Constructed Facilities,
E Vol. 19, No. 2, 172-77; and "Ronan I Point," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
E, modified Duly 26, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.
I org/wiki/Ronan_Point.
65.	See Konrad Gatz, Curtain Wall Construction F (New York: Praeger, 1967), 42-47.
66.	For the Lambert Bank, see Gatz, Curtain Wall
■	Construction, 51-53. For the Beinecke Rare
S Book and Manuscript Library, see ibid., 54-67.
67.	See Cranston Dones, ed., Marcel Breuer:
[ 1921-1962 (New York: Praeger, 1962), 179-85.
68.	Ada Louise Huxtable, "Architecture Stumbles F On," in New York Times (April 14, 1963), 119.
69.	For the precast roof-cladding panels in the I Sydney Opera House, see Françoise
I Fromonot, Torn Utzon: The Sydney Opera t. House (Milan: Electa, 2000), 113-33.
70.	See Scott Murray, Contemporary Curtain I Wall Architecture (New York: Princeton
I Architectural Press, 2009), 54.
71.	Prestressed Concrete Institute, Architectural I Precast Concrete, 3rd ed. (Chicago: Pre-
E stressed Concrete Institute International,
! 2007), 9-10.
72.	See Denny Lovell, Building Envelopes: An
I Integrated Approach (New York: Princeton F Architectural Press, 2010), 132-39.
73.	Susanne Fritz, "Concrete in Architecture (1): A Material Both Stigmatized and Celebrated,"
I Architonic, Blog post, n.d., http://www.archi-I tonic.com/ntsht/concrete-in-architecture-1-I a-material-both-stigmatised-and-celebrated/ I 7000525, accessed September 9, 2014.
74.	Prestressed Concrete Institute, Architectural | Precast Concrete, 3rd ed. (Chicago:
I Prestressed Concrete Institute International,
E 2007), 10.
75.	See W.D. Fisk, A.G. Mirer, and M.D. Mendell, f "Quantitative Relationship of Sick Building
fc' Syndrome Symptoms with Ventilation Rates," I Indoor Air 19, No. 2 (April 2009), 159-65.
Dack Quinan, Frank Lloyd Wright's Larkin I Building: Myth and Fact (New York: j Architectural History Foundation;
I Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991), 69. r- See Reyner Banham, "The Services of the
Larkin 'A' Building," Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians 37, No. 3 (October 1978), 195-97.
78.	For example, see The Barrett Company, Handbook of Barrett Products, 2nd ed. (New York: Madison Square Press, 1927); https:// archive.org/details/HandbookOfBarrett ProductsABriefDescriptionOfTheDifferent Products.
79.	"Highlights from the History of Dow Corning Corporation, the Silicone Pioneer," Dow Coming History (Dow Corning Corporation), c. 2007, https://www.dowcorning.com/ content/publishedlit/01-4027-01 .pdf, accessed September 9, 2014.
80.	See "Metal Curtain Walls," Architectural Forum (March 1950), 81-96.
81.	Derry Klosowski, "Dr. Edwin P. Plueddemann," Journal of Adhesion 35, No. 1 (1991), 1-5.
82.	Leonard Boiler, "Polysulfide Sealants," in ASTM, Committee C-24, Building Seals and Sealants (Philadelphia, PA: American Society for Testing and Materials, 1976), 40-53.
83.	Mel Toub, "Factors Affecting Silicone Volatile Levels in Fabricated Silicone Elastomers," Rubber World 226, No. 3 Pune 2002), 36-39.
84.	See Doseph Lstiburek, "BSD-104: Understanding Air Barriers," Building Science Corporation, October 10, 2006, www.buildingscience.com/documents/ digests/bsd-104-understanding-air-barriers.
85.	Dane Wu, "Air Barriers: Impermeable or Permeable? The Challenge of Selecting an Air Barrier," Masonry Magazine, modified December 12, 2012, http://www. masonrymagazine.com/features/1474-air-barriers-impermeable-or-permeable.html.
86.	Scapegoat Journal: Materialism 2 (2011): p.
14.	http://www.scapegoatjournal.org/docs/ Scapegoat_lssue_02_MATERIALISM_ %C2%A71 .pdf.
87.	"What You Should Know About Indoor Air Quality," American Federation of Teachers, n.d., http://www.aft.org/pdfs/healthsafety/ fs_indoorair0806.pdf, accessed September 12, 2014.
88.	"Indoor Air Facts #4: Sick Building Syndrome," United States Environmental Protection Agency Bulletin, February 2001, http://www.epa.gov/iaq/pdfs/sick_building_ factsheet.pdf.
89.	For the criteria to meet Passive House standards, see "Passive House Requirements," Passive House Institute, 2012, http://www.passiv.de/en/02_informations/ 02_passive-house-requirements/02_passive-house-equirements.htm.
90.	Michael Maines, "The Pretty Good House: Finding the Right Balance between Construction Cost and Energy Performance," Green Building Advisor, modified February 6, 2012, http://www.greenbuildingadvisor.com/ blogs/dept/guest-blogs/pretty-good-house.
91.	Michelle Conlin, "Is Your Office Killing You?," Business Week (Dune 5, 2000): front cover.
92.	"Construction Product Innovation: Bright Future for Aluminium," What's New in Building (August 14, 2006), 14; http:// search.proquest.com/docview/236580684? accountid=13314.
93.	"Copper in Roman Buildings," Copper Development Association Inc., n.d., http:// www.copper.org/education/history/60 centuries/greece_rome/copperin.html, accessed September 12, 2014.
94.	Adam Mornement and Simon Holloway, Corrugated Iron: Building on the Frontier (New York: W.W. Norton & Co, 2007), 28-77.
95.	"Portable house proposed to be erected for the Archbishop of Sydney" (lithograph, subinscription: "Hemming's patent improved portable houses, sole manufactory, Clift
House, Bedminster, Bristol), Sydney Living Museums, modified Duly, 2005, http:// sydneylivingmuseums.com.au/research-collections/catalogues-research-tools/ pictures-catalogue.
96.	"Armco-Ferro House," Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore Bulletin, National Park Service, n.d., http://www.nps.gov/indu/ historyculture/armco-ferro-house.htm, accessed September 12, 2014.
97.	For example, see the article on an Austin Company designed and built plant: "Factory in a Stock Room: Lincoln Electric's New Cleveland Plant," Architectural Forum (March 1950), 111-15.
98.	Michael W.R. Davis, Detroit's Wartime Industry: Arsenal of Democracy (Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishers, 2007), pp. 100-102.
99.	Davis, Detroit's Wartime Industry: Arsenal of Democracy, 100-102.
100.	Glenn C. Altschuler and Stuart M. Blumin, The Gl Bill: A New Deal for Veterans (Oxford University Press, 2009), 118.
101.	Thomas Fetters, The Lustron Home: The History of a Postwar Prefabricated Housing Experiment (Defferson, NC: McFarland &
Co., 2002).
102.	Robert Reiss, "When Lustron Lost Its Luster," Columbus Dispatch (Duly 23, 1978); cited in "Meet Carl Strandlund," Lustron Preservation, 2014, http://www. lustron preservation.org/meet-the-lustrons/ lustron-history/meet-carl-strandlund, accessed September 22, 2014.
103.	Mornement and Holloway, Corrugated Iron: Building on the Frontier, 124-29.
104.	For plans and details of wartime and Post-War Quonset Huts, see the blog, US Navy Quonset Hut: Weapons of Mass Construction, n.d., http://quonset-hut. blogspot.co.uk/p/quonset-hut.html.
105.	"The KME History," KME, The Evolution of Copper, n.d., http://www.kme.com/en/the_ kme_group_history, accessed September 10, 2014.
106.See Margaret Knox, "Home Sweet Mobile Home," Mother Jones 18, No. 1, (Danuary-February 1993), 62-65.
107.	Kumar K. Suresh, "Pressure Equalization of Rainscreen Walls: A Critical Review,"Building and Environment 35, No. 2 (2000), 161-79.
108.	Dohn Straube, "Pressure Moderation and Rain Penetration Control," pp. 1-9. See proceedings for the conference, Pressure Equalized Rainscreens: Design and Performance, Ontario Building Envelope Council, November 21, 2001, University of Waterloo, 2001, http://www.civil.uwaterloo.ca/beg/ downloads/pressure_moderation_seminar.pdf.
109.	Thomas Ritchie, "Notes on the History of Hollow Masonry Walls," Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology 5, No. 4 (1973), 40-49.
11O.0ivind Birkeland, Rain Penetration Investigations: A Summary of the Findings of CIB Working Commission on Rain Penetration (Oslo: Norwegian Building Research Institute, 1963).
111.	G.K. Garden, "Rain Penetration and Its Control," Canadian Building Digest 40 (1963), 1^1.
112.	"Understanding the Rainscreen Principle," Metal Construction Association (December 14, 2006): pp. 1-3. See also, http://www. engineeredassemblies.com/med ia/1921 / mca07_Rainscreen.pdf.
113.S.A. Bortz, B. Erlin, and C.B. Monk, "Some Field Problems with Thin Veneer Building Stones," in Barry Donaldson, ASTM, Committee C-18, New Stone Technology Design, and Construction for Exterior Wall Systems (Philadelphia, PA: American Society
PAGE 188
FACADE
for Testing and Materials, 1988), pp. 11-31.
114.	Richard T. Bynum, Insulation Handbook (New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001), p. 4.
115.	"Mineral Wool," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified May 31, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mineral_wool.
116.	Doanna Dowling, "Blanketing the Home: The Use of Thermal Insulation in American Housing, 1920-1945," Association for Preservation Technology Bulletin 40, No. 1 (2009), 33-39.
117.	Albert Meyer, "A Technique for Planning Complete Communities: Part 2," Architectural Forum (February 1937): p. 140.
118.Suhas V. Patankar, Numerical Heat Transfer and Fluid Flow (Washington, DC: Hemisphere; New York: McGraw-Hill, 1980), 102.
119.	"Asbestos, " Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified September 3, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Asbestos.
120.	Dock McCulloch, South Africa's Gold Mines and the Politics of Silicosis (Suffolk: Dames Currey, 2012), 7.
121.	Steve Korris, "A Lesson in History: Founder of Bankrupt Dohns Manville Died of Asbestos-related Illness," Madison-St. Claire Record, modified Dune 17, 2005, http://madison-record.com/ issues/302-asbestos/ 161615-a-lesson-in-history-founder-of- bankrupt-johns-manville-died-of-asbestos-related-illness.
122.	"History of Asbestos," Mesothelioma Center, modified August 2014, http://www. asbestos.com/asbestos/history/.
123.	An account of the Austin Company and their methods may be found in a company brochure, dated 1922, entitled "Building for Big Industries: Engineering, Architecture, Building and Equipment." See https://archive.org/ details/BuildingForBiglndustriesEngineering ArchitectureBuildingAndEquipment.
124.	"Dean Prouvé," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 17, 2014, http://en. wikipedia.org/wiki/Dean_Prouv%C3%A9.
125.See "The Curtain Wall," Architectural Forum (March 1950), 90-91.
126.	George David Smith, From Monopoly to Competition: The Transformations of Alcoa, 1888-1986 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988).
127.	See Dohn Harwood and Danet Parks, The Troubled Search: The Work of Max Abra-movitz(New York: Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia University, 2004), 49-56. "Published in conjunction with an exhibition held at the Miriam and Ira D. Wallach Art Gallery, Columbia University, New York, NY, September 14 - December 11, 2004."
128.	For Lewis L. Strauss' "too cheap to meter" remarks, made in a speech to the National Association of Science Writers (New York City, 1954), plus its context, see "Too Cheap to Meter?" CNS/SNC, updated February 20, 2009, http://media. cns-snc.ca/media/toocheap/toocheap.html. Strauss was, of course, Chairman of the US Atomic Energy Commission.
129.	Roy Porter, London: A Social History (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1995), 353.
130.	"Herman Miller Factory (Bath, UK)," Grimshaw Architects, n.d., http://grimshaw-architects.com/project/herman-miller-factory/, accessed August 4, 2013.
131.	"Richard Rogers: Beginnings," Centre Pom pidou, n.d., http://www.centrepompidou.fr, accessed September 12, 2014.
132.	Linda Brock, Designing the Exterior Wall: An Architectural Guide to the Vertical Envelope (Hoboken, ND: Dohn Wiley, 2005), 174.
133.	Dohn Straube, "Specifying EIFS," Canadian Architect, 46, No. 4 (2001), 31-32.
134.	Brian Libby, "A Friendly Ideological Clash Over Dinner: Pietro Belluschi Meets Michael
Graves," Portland Architecture: A Blog About Architecture in the Rose City, September 2008, http://chatterbox.typepad. com/portlandarchitecture/2008/09/a-friendly-ideological-clash-over-dinner-pietro-belluschi-meets-michael-graves.html, accessed September 12, 2014.
135.	Edwin Horbach, "Resilient Cellular Wall Covering and Applying It," United States Patent and Trademark Office, Dune 25, 1968. See http://www.google.com/patents/ US3389518.
136.	Alfred W. Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986).
137.	Brent Richards, Dennis Gilbert (photographs), New Glass Architecture (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006), 11.
138.	See Georg Kohlmaier and Barna von Sartory, Houses of Glass: A Nineteenth-century Building Type (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1986).
139.	Indeed, the Parisian arcades were also the inspiration for Walter Benjamin's Arcades Project (Passagenwerk), written between 1927 and 1940, a seminal work of cultural criticism. For the significance of this unfinished project, see Susan Buck-Morss, The Dialectics of Seeing: Walter Benjamin and the Arcades Project (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989).
140.	T.C. Barker, The Glassmakers: Pilkington,
The Rise of an International Company, 1826-1976 (London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1977), 31.
141.	"The Palm House," in Glasshouses, Bicton Park Botanical Gardens, 2014, http://www. bictongardens.co.uk/index. php?route=product/category&path=66.
142.	How to Plan and Construct Modern Storefronts of Extrudalite and Llbbey-Owens-Ford Glass Products (Toledo, Ohio: Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass, 1946).
143.	"Glass Tax," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified December 27, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass_tax.
144.	Hentie Louw, "Window-glass Making in Britain ca.1660-ca.1860 and Its Architectural Impact," Construction History7 (1991), 47-68.
145.	Hermione Hobhouse, The Crystal Palace and the Great Exhibition: Art, Science and Productive Industry: A History of the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851 (London: Athlone, 2002), 126.
146.	Dohn Butt and Kathleen Tillotson, Dickens at Work (London: Methuen, 1957), 181.
147.	Ufuk Ersoy, Seeing through Glass: The Fictive Role of Glass in Shaping Architecture from Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace to Bruno Taut's Glashaus, PhD dissertation, University of Pennsylvania, Danuary 1, 2008, pp. 188-256. See http://repository.upenn. edu/dissertations/AAI3328551.
148.	"The Great Exhibition: Its Palace and Its Principal Contents," in A Guide the Great Exhibition (London: Routledge, 1851), p. 29.
149.	See Hans Scharoun, "Three by Three Dimensional Glass House," drawing, Stadtbaukunst-Fruhlicht 10, No. 158 (1920).
150.See Ludwig Mies Van der Rohe, "Skyscraper Project in Friedrichstrasse, Berlin 1920," drawing, Fruhlicht 4, No. 124 (1922).
151.	See Carl Krayl, "The Crystalline Star House and the Glass Sphere," drawing, Stadtbaukunst-Fruhlicht 8, No. 124 (1920).
152.	Vitrolite Baths and Kitchens for All America (Toledo, OH: Libbey-Owens-Ford Glass, 1941).
153.	"Glass," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified September 5, 2014, http:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glass.
154.	Katherine K. Leitch, Structural Glass T logy: Systems and Applications, M. Ena °‘ thesis, MIT, Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Dune 2005
See dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/*3’ ^
1721.1/31200/61398836. pdf ?.
155.	"Wired Glass Resists Entry," British Gl
Magazine (1923), 26.	ss
156.	"Float Glass," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified Duly 14, 2014 htt
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Float_glass. ’
157.	K.L. Mittal and A. Pizzi, Handbook of Se Technology (Boca Raton: CRC, 2009) IR3"*
158.	"Toughened Glass," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 31, 2014
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Toughened ’
glass.
159.	"Laminated Glass," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 22, 2014
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laminated ’
glass.
160.	Pilkington and the Flat Glass Industry (St Helens, UK: Pilkington Brothers Ltd, 2010)
161.Scott Murray, "New Directions and' New Priorities," in Contemporary Curtain Wall Architecture (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009), 51-52.
162.	Reyner Banham, "Grass Above, Grass Around," New Society 42, No. 783 (Octohnr 1977), 22-23.
163.	Murray, Contemporary Curtain Wall Architecture, 53.
164.	"ARC132 - Quotes Books and Buildings," Quizlet, n.d., http://quizlet.com/11515150/ arc132-quotes-books-and-buildings-flash-
cards/, accessed September 12, 2014,
165.	Leitch, Structural Glass Technology: Systems and Applications, 2.
166.	"Lasting Innovation: 20 Years of Structural Silicone Glazing Success," Dow Corning Corporation, 2006, http://www.dowcorning. com/content/publishedlit/62-1465-01.pdf.
167.	Lorraine Lin and Bruce Danziger, "The Imaginative Engineer: Peter Rice (1935-1992)," Structure Archives, Danuary 2007, http://www.structurearchives.org/article. aspx?articlelD=476.
168.	"Dohn Hancock Tower," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified Dune 21, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dohn_Hancock_ Tower.
169.	Peter Rice, Hugh Dutton, and Martine Erussard, "Cité des Sciences," in Peter Rice, Hugh Dutton, Structural Glass (London: E & FN Spon, 1995), 55-64.
170.	Lei Fu, Glass Beam Design for Architects:
A Brief Introduction to the Most Critical Factors of Glass Beams and Easy Computer Tool, Master of Building Science dissertation, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, August 2010, p. 16. See http://digitallibrary.usc.edu/cdm/ref/
collection/p15799coll127/id/15570.
171.	Paulo D. da Sousa Cruz, ed., Structures and Architecture: New Concepts, Applications and Challenges (Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2013), p. 308. Selected papers from the Second International Conference on Structures and Architecture, School of Architecture of the University of Minho, Guimarâes, Portugal, Dune 2013.
172.	Dames O'Callaghan, "Apple Cube Mk2,
5th Avenue, New York," Eckersley O'Callaghan, November 2011, http://www.
eckersleyo callaghan.com/projects/project
apple-cube- mk2.html. See also, http://www.
eckersleyo callaghan.com/pdf/Apple%20
Cube%202.pdf.
173.	Dames O'Callaghan, "Adventures with Structural Glass," Leverage from the EU, Glass Performance Days, 2012, p. 2. See
http://www.gpd.fi/Global/GPD/South h
FAÇADE
PAGE 189
America/South%20America%202012/ Proceedings/James%20O'Callaghan.pdf. j Pliny the Elder, "The Nature and Cultivation of Flax, and an Account of Various Garden Plants," in Pliny the Elder, The Natural History, ed. and trans. J. Bostock, H.T, Riley I (London: H.G. Bohn, 1855), Book XIX, Ch.
1 23. Written circa 77 AD.
1175.	Hermann Klos, "Kastenfenster," in Das
I Fenster im 20. Jahrundert (Baden-Wurttem-I berg: Rottweil, 2010), 3-37.
1176.	Crosby, Ecological Imperialism: The Biologi K cal Expansion of Europe, 900-1900, passim.
[l77.See "Steiff Factory (Minimum Documentation
■	Fiche 2007)," Docomomo, 2007, http://rlicc.
I asro.kuleuven.ac.be/rlicc/docomomo/
I Registers/2008%20Machine/Germany/ 5_
§ Giengen_Steiff%20Fabrik.pdf. See also,
I Ignacio Fernández Solía, "The Stieff Factory K and the Birth of Curtain Walling," Façades V Confidential, November 27, 2011, http://
B façadesconfidential.blogspot.com/ 2011/11/
■	steiff-factory-and-birth-of-curtain.html. |l78.Anke Fissabre and Bernhard Niethammer,
B "The Invention of Glazed Curtain Wall in I 1903-The Steiff Toy Factory," in Proceedings i of the Third International Congress on Con-K struction History, Cottbus, May 2009, p. 4.
I See http://www.bma.arch.unige.it/ pdf/CON-| STRUCTION_HISTORY_2009/ VOL2/Fissabre-I Anke_Niethammer-Bernhard_layouted.pdf.
179.	Banham, The Architecture of the Well-H tempered Environment, 156-60.
180.	Le Corbusier, Précisions Sur Un État Présent J De L'architecture Et De L'urbanisme (Paris:
1; G. Crès, 1930), 64.
181.	American Blower Corporation, "Letter to
i Le Corbusier dated January 24," Foundatio i Le Corbusier (Paris, 1930).
\ 182.Harvey Bryan, "Le Corbusier and the 'Mur
■	Neutralisant': An Early Experiment in Double
■	Envelope Construction," in Servando
R Alvarez, Jaime López de Asiain et al., eds.,
I Architecture and Urban Space: Proceedings I of the Ninth International PLEA Conference I, (Berlin: Springer, 1991), 257-62.
183.	Harris Sobin, "L'Air Exact to L'Aérateur:
I Ventilation and Its Evolution in the Archi B tectural Work of Le Corbusier," in Judith I Kinnard and Kenneth Schwartz, eds., Pro-I ceedings: 84th ACSA Annual Meeting
I: and Technology Conference (Washington,
I DC: ACSA, 1996), 140-45.
184.	Edward Mazria, The Passive Solar Energy
I	Book: A Complete Guide to Passive Solar I: Home, Greenhouse, and Building Design
II	(Emmaus, PA: Rodale Press, 1979), 45.
; 185."Lee Porter Butler (1940-2005)," North i Carolina Modernist Houses/Triangle I Modernist Archive, Inc., 2014, http://www.
B. ncmodernist.org/butler.htm, accessed I September 12, 2014.
186.	John Morris Dixon, "Glass under Glass:
■	Hooker Office Building, Niagara Falls, NY,"
K. Progressive Architecture 64, No. 4 (April
1983), 82-85.
187.	Reyner Banham, "Monumental Windbags,"
1 New Society 11, No. 287 (April, 1968), 446-47.
188.	Nathaniel Coleman, Utopias and ■ Architecture (Routledge, 2005), 3-5.
189.	Gottfried Semper, The Four Elements of
t Architecture and Other Writings, trans. Harry ; Francis Mallgrave, Wolfgang Herrman I (Cambridge: Cambridge University, 1989).
B First published 1851.
190,See entry for Alexander Parkes dated "AD I 1865, May 11," in Patents for Inventions: i Abridgments for Specifications (UK: UK I Patent Office, 1857), pp. 255-56. See http:// ft books.google.com/books?id=0nCoU-2tAx8 I C&pg=PA255#v=onepage&q&f=false. B'91."1939 Nylon," DuPont Corporation, 2014,
http://www2.dupont.com/Phoenix_Heritage/ en_US/1939_c_detail.html, accessed September 12, 2014.
192.	Charles Higham, Trading With the Enemy: An Exposé of the Nazi-American Money Plot, 1933-1949 (New York: Delacorte, 1983), 99.
193.	Otto Piringer and Albert Baner, Plastic Packaging: Interactions with Food and Pharmaceuticals (Weinheim: Wiley-VCH, 2008), 32.
194.	"Who is Birdair?," Birdair, n.d., http://www. birdair.com/about, accessed September 9, 2014.
195.	"Tomorrow's Life Today," Life 43, No. 20 (November 11, 1957).
196.	Roger Nicholas Dent, Principles of Pneumatic Architecture (London: Architectural Press, 1971), 96.
197.	Reyner Banham, "A Home is Not a House," in Art in America 2 (April, 1965), 70-79.
198.	"Polytetrafluoroethylene," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified September 2, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ Polytetrafluoroethylene.
199.	"ETFE," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 26, 2014, http:// en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ETFE.
200.	Manuel De Landa, A Thousand Years ofNon-linear History (New York: Zone, 1997), 11-25.
201 .John E. Findling, Chicago's Great World's Fairs, Studies in Design and Material Culture (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1995).
202.	Paul Scheerbart, Glasarchitektur (Berlin: Verlag Der Sturm, 1914), 55.
203.	Kathleen James-Chakraborty, "The Drama of Illumination: Visions of Community from Wilhelmine to Nazi Germany," in Richard A. Etlin, ed., Art, Culture, and Media Under the Third Reich (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002), 181-96.
204.	Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).
205.	David Owen, "The Psychology of Space: Can a Norwegian Firm Solve the Problems of Times Square?," The New Yorker (January 21, 2013). See http://www.newyorker.com/maga-zine/2013/01 /21 /the-psychology-of-space.
206.	"Nanjing Road," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified June 24, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nanjing_Road.
207.	Richard Kelly, Dietrich Neumann et al., with contributions from Robert A.M. Stern, Sandy Isenstadt, and Margaret Maile Petty, The Structure of Light: Richard Kelly and the Illumination of Modern Architecture (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press/Yale School of Architecture, 2010).
208.	Bryan Appleyard, Richard Rogers: A Biography (London: Faber & Faber, 1986).
209.	Cedric Price, quotation from Talks at the Architectural Association, recording, 1990.
210.	"Lifetime of White LEDs," Wayback Machine, US Department of Energy, archived April 10, 2009, http://apps1.eere. energy.gov/buildings/publications/pdfs/ssl/ lifetime_white_leds.pdf.
211.	"DMX512 FAQ," United States Institute for Theatre Technology, 2012, http://www.usitt. org/content.asp?contentid=373, accessed September 12, 2014.
212.	Toyo Ito, "A Garden of Microchips: The Architectural Image of the Microelectronic Age," in JA Library2 (1993), 4-15.
213.	Marc-Antoine Laugier, An Essay on Architecture, trans. Wolfgang and Anni Herrmann (Los Angeles: Hennessey &
Ingalls, 1977). First published 1753.
214.	"Corinthian Order," Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, modified August 9, 2014, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Corinthian_ order.
215.	Foremost among these would be John Muir,
considered the father of the National Parks movement in the United States.
216.	Richard L. Hindle, "A Vertical Garden: Origins of the Vegetation-Bearing Architectonic Structure and System (1938),"Stud/es in the History of Gardens and Designed Landscapes 32 , No. 2 (January 2012), 99-110.
217.	Kenneth Frampton and Silvia Kolbowski, eds.,
Idea as Model (New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies/Rizzoli, 1981), 69-70.
218.Suzanne S. Frank, IAUS, the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies: An Insider's Memoir: With 27 Other Insider Accounts (Bloomington, IN: AuthorHouse, 2010), 49.
This was also the time frame when Walter De Maria's iconic New York Earth Room was installed at Dia's Wooster Street gallery in SoHo. See http://www.diaart.org/sites/ main/earthroom. Both installations are part and parcel of the greater Land Art movement of the late 1960s and 1970s, founded more or less by Robert Smithson.
219.Suzanne LaBarre, "Green over Gray,"
Metropolis Magazine, September 2009,
http://www.metropolismag.com/
September-2009/Green-Over-Gray/.
220. Stanley Hart White, "Vegetation-bearing Architectonic Structure and System" United States Patent and Trademark Office, April 5,
1938. See google.com/patents/US2113523.
221.Suzanne S. Frank, IAUS, the Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies: An Insider's Memoir: With 27 Other Insider Accounts, 49.
222.	Édouard Francois, "Tower Flower," Maison Édouard François, 2004, http://www. edouardfrancois.com/en/all-projects/ housing/details/article/145/tower-flower/#.
VB-NivldV8E, accessed August 2, 2013.	il
223.	Tomohisa Miyauchi,"Singapore, Capital City for Vertical Green," A+U Special Edition 12:07 (2012), 5-157.
224.	Patrick Blanc and Véronique Lalot, The Vertical Garden: From Nature to the City
(New York: W.W. Norton, 2008), 179.	H
225.	Henri de Parville, Causeries scientifiques:
Découvertes et inventions progrès de la science et de l'industrie: Vingt-neuvième année L'Exposition universelle (Paris: J.
Rothschild, 1890), 210.
226.Simon Schaffer, "Enlightened Automata," in Simon Schaffer, William Clark, and Jan Golinski, eds., The Sciences in Enlightened Europe (Chicago: University of Chicago Press 1999),
126-65.
227.	Schaffer, 126-65.
228.	Lynn Becker, "Sweet Nothing: Mies van der Rohe's Gloriously Simple Crown Hall Isn't Just Restored, It's Improved," Chicago Reader (September 2, 2005), 14-17. See http://www.chicagoreader.com/chicago/ sweet-nothing/Content?oid=919761.
229.	"The House that Runs Itself," Popular MechanicsVol. 63, No. 6 (June 1935), 805.
230.	Kurt VanLehn, ed., Architectures for Intelligence: Twenty-second Carnegie Symposium on Cognition (Hillsdale, NJ: L.
Erlbaum Associates, 1991), 230.
231.	Michael A. Fox, "Self Replicating Robotic Strategies as a Catalyst for Autonomous Architectural Construction," in Julie A.
Jacko, ed., Human-computer Interaction:
Users and Applications (Berlin: Springer,
2011), pp. 307-17. Proceedings of the 14th International Conference, HCI International 2011, Orlando, FL, July 9-14, 2011.
PAGE 190	FAÇADE
chapter 4. façade futures
BACK TO THE FUTURE:
THE FIRST PARAMETRIC FAÇADE
When English architects John Weeks and Richard Llewelyn Davies are commissioned in the mid 1960s to design a large London hospital including a national inpatient research facility, architecture turns possibly for the first time to digital computation as its principle design and engineering tool. As part of a philosophy for a building that must accommodate rapid changes in the field of medicine, Weeks - an admirer of the process-oriented work of Dohn Cage and Merce Cunningham - collaborates with engineers to produce a cost-saving alogirithm to generate the hospital's façade. Weeks decides to "abandon an architect-designed dimensional system" altogether, allowing the computer to dictate the most structurally efficient pattern composed of identical mullion and beams.
Weeks announces the project in the exhibition "Cybernetic Serendipity" at London's Institute of Contemporary Arts in 1968, amidst a jumble of digital devices capable of automatically producing images (repeating and tesselating patterns), looping animations, sounds responding to the immediate environment, and even for pumping out convincing computer haiku.
Weeks writes in the ICA's catalogue:
"Design parameters such as height and loading characteristics were fed into the stress computations. This was the only design process which controlled the external appearance. ... The apparently random intervals between the mullions are the direct expression of an objective ordering process. The appearance of the [hospital] buildings was not determinable until the results of the calculations were seen; the designers of the building did not intervene."
1968 Dohn Weeks un-	Peter Zinovieff's
veils his parametrically	Music Computer.
designed hospital in the
exhibition "Cybernetic
Serendipity" at
London's Institute of
Contemporary Arts.
Rowland Emett's "Forget-me-not"	Meanwhile Bruce Lacey
computer confronts the flower power	explains cybernetic art
generation at the ICA.	to Princess Margaret.
1968 Northwick hospital, by Dohn Weeks: façade pattern generated by parametric design, determining efficient intervals in mullions.
PAGE 191
2017 Northwlck Park hospital 50 years later: the sobriety of its façade offering no clue to its status as the first paramatrically-deslgned building, its concrete mulllons spaced not according to modernist aesthetics but to digital computation of the most efficient possible load-bearing system.
PAGE 192	'.CADE
EXPIRATION OF THE CURTAIN WALL
Once the symbol of the modern, the curtain wall is now showing its age. Its lightness and its speed of construction comes with a price: less than half the lifespan of more solid brick or masonry construction. The glass and aluminum curtain wall, which bloomed in the postwar world, is nearing its physical expiration date of 43 years...
2007 Global health care company Hoffmann-La Roche's 15-story Building 76 in Nutley, New Jersey, aging and condemned for being energy Inefficient, has its existing glass façade removed from top to bottom, with a new façade installed from bottom to top. Total cost: $5.8 million.
The building stock of Western Europe, dominated by pre-1960s façades, is in urgent need of renovation...
PRE-1960	1961-1990
PAGE 194
FAÇADE
SOLAR FAÇADISM:
CHANGING ROLE OF THE SERVICE TOWER
1962 Manchester's Cooperative Insurance Society building, designed by Gordon Tait and the tenant's own architect, G.
S. Hay, boasts the massive regenerative power of its mechanical systems stored in the service tower, which contains "Three 500 ton centrifugal compressors equivalent to making 1,500 tons of ice every day. Cooling tower with capacity of 283,100 gallons every hour. 4,000 air-conditioning grilles requiring 48 miles of rolled steel strips..." At 139 meters, the uninhabited and unadorned concrete service tower is the third-tallest building in Europe.
FAÇADE
PAGE 195
Vy\
k
PAGE 196
FAÇADE
FAÇADE AS MASK
In a kind of gradual, organically occuring form of façadism - the practice of preserving only the façade while the larger building behind is demolished - the Plaza Hotel in Recife, northeastern Brazil, is the solid frontispiece to a deep, block-long building behind it, which, as if being gradually deprived of oxygen the further it gets from the façade, becomes progressively more decrepit, a combination of unfinished and derelict. In front, enduring façades from the Dutch / Portuguese colonial era.

2010 In Melbourne, the 32-floor, AUD$350-million Swanston Square project takes the root meaning of façade as "face" literally. The tower contains the typical luxury array - spa, rooftop movie theater, barbecue facilities, lounge - and a façade whose specially-shaped balcony balustrades form an image, from a distance, of the face of William Barak (ca. 1824-1903), an icon of the struggle for Aboriginal rights. Barak's face gazes down the axis of melbourne towards the Shrine of Remembrance. "It could be Melbourne's equivalent of Mount Rushmore." (Philip Goad, quoted in Simon Dohanson and Dason Dowling, "New face of Melbourne rises 32 storeys," The Age, September 15, 2010.)
"Using halftone line-art reduction, we have figured the balcony profile to render the image legible at a distance ... For us, this seemingly abstract methodology provides an ideal new structural palette for residential buildings. We hope everyone will have their own interpretation and their own reading of this scheme."
— ARM Architects
FAÇADE
PAGE 197
PAGE 198
FAÇADE
nil i ill i			
ALGAE Façade			
From 2020 in Germany, regulations dictate that every house must generate the same amount of enerav as it uses. Conseauentlv.			1
—the pressure is on façades not just to appear jnore green, or to be more efficient in terms of the heat they transfer between inside and outside, but to actually generate power, and in this case, even life. Solarleaf, together Colt, Arup, and SSC, offers the "bioreactor ■façade," which claims to be "the first building, integrated system to generate biomass." The -sheer surface area of a building, exposed to so much sunlight, is exploited for the nurturing of algae inside super-thin glass water tanks, which double as façade panels. The (micro) algae generate heat for the building and can be harvested in the building's plant room into biomass fuel for generating electricity...
PRODUCT OVERVIEW | SOLARLEAF
SOLARLEAF
BIOREACTOR FAÇADE
PURPOSE OFTHIS PRODUCT:
6/oreocto/- Façade -A dynamic façade system for the production of renewable energy using algal biomass and solar thermal heat
BUILDING INTEGRATION:
The system is suitable for both new buildings and existing b«i/(/ings, and for industrial, commercial, residential and public buildings.
FEATURESAND BENEFITS:
Full integration of low energy design for energy efficient buildings with a Passivhaus standard; conversion of natural light to biomass and heat local storage and use of solar thermal energy; sustainable energy design - near to CO, neutral; dynamic and adaptive shading, since with the increasing intensity of solar radiation the transparency and the degree of total energy transmission (g-value) decrease;living and dynamic user experience created by the emerging air bubbles and the variations of colour of the SolarLeaf elements; also applicable as a primary façade system with additional benefits in terms of high thermal and acoustic insulation.
Please read on to understand more about how it

PAGE 199
Plant room of a Solarleaf house, where heat is removed from the "culture medium" - the algae/ biomass, either to be used immediately to warm the building, or stored for later.
2013	Working model: the BIQ House, installed at the International Building Exhibition in Hamburg. According to the exhibition's website: "The BIQ building shows that in the future façades will be able to serve a number of different functions, and be much more than an aesthetic cladding to protect against rain and cold. Whereas the north-east and north-west façades of the building are stylishly attention-commanding, the south-east and south-west façades feature panels of algae that produce heat and biomass to supply the building with energy from renewable sources. In addition, the façade also serves the conventional purposes of insulating the building from sound, heat, and cold, and provides shade in bright sunlight."
1	SolarLeaf external louvre
2	Brackets with thermal breaks for the transfer of loads to the primary substructure
3	Pipework for the medium to enter and leave
Global radiation, Munich

Sub-frame, rolled steel U-sectlon Pivot fixing allowing rotation Metal cladding Supply of pressurised air, controlled by magnetic valves
Components of the bioreactor façade. Pivots allow the louvers to turn In the direction of the while air jets stimulate algae growth and anima the façade.
061
PAGE 200
FAÇADE
TOILET FAÇADE
Using the same principles as the bioreactor façade, a building could become its own off-grid sewage treatment plant. Liquids (plus additional phosphoric salts) are piped into the façade, feeding algae living in 18 mm-wide water-filled façade panels. Solids produce biogass in an anaerobic bioreactor, which is also fed through the façade to stimulate algae growth. The system can produce enough heat to cover running costs but not its 3,000 euro / square meter installation cost. Dan Wurm of Arup explains to the editors: "We are trying to make a prototype. What we need is an investor."
HEAT
Dezentralised Energy and Nutrient Recovery -Waste Transformed into valuable Carbon
// sv
r-v
COD 48g, 60L
Grey Water Treatment
Flushing Water
PERMEATE 6L, N10g, P1g
E . external use or as i If biogas generation
_J !
I Mixing Device
Anaerobic
Membrane
Biogas
Bioreactor
METHANE =0,07mä (0.05 FROM ALGAE, 0,02 FROM WASTE)
Digested Redsidue
FLUXES ARE GIVEN PER PERSON AND DAY
FAÇADE
PAGE 201
Achieving a multi resource recovery from household waste water holds new opportunities to rethink our wastewater treatment system
Space- and cost-saving centralised system
Decentralised wastewater treatment
A decentralized and space-saving wastewater treatment system has been developed which combines new Alternative Sanitary Systems (NASS) and advanced process engineering with the innovative and cutting-edge bioreactor façade. The concept is based on both the separate collection and treatment of waste water streams and the generation of algae which might be considered either as valuable nutrients or as input to a biogas plant. Furthermore, the Solar-leaf Cycling Resources concept harvests these algae by utilising substances which in conventional WWTP have to be eliminated by means of spending additional energy.
Separation of waste and waste water steams will include:
•	Black water consisting of flushing toilet water with faecal matter (and toilet paper) and
•	Grey water consisting of wastewater without faeces (from kitchen, bath room, laundry, etc.),
•	Food and organic waste from kitchens (private, restaurants, canteens).
Black water and organic or food waste, respectively, will be treated by anaerobic digestion applying an anaerobic membrane bioreactor (AnMBR). The nitrogen and phosphorous con-
taining permeate of the AnMBR will be used as nutrients supply for the autotroph generation of algae in the Solarleaf façade. Biogas generated in the AnMBR will be either separated into C02 and methane to provide the necessary carbon source for the autotroph growth of algae or will fuel a micro CHP unit thus generating the necessary C02. Depending on its composition, grey water instead will be treated in a conventional aerobic process (e.g. moving bed reactor) or by means of a membrane bioreactor (MBR) and will be reused in the building for flushing the toilets and will be used to fill the modules of the BIQ façade.
Solid digestate from the AnMBR might be processed by applying a Hydrothermal Carbonisation (HTC) thus generating an additional valuable output which underlines the enormous potential the Solarleaf Cycling Resources concept provides to shape a new waste water treatment system.
PAGE 202	FAÇADE
CATALOGUE OF FAÇADE OPERATIONS
When it came to prominence as part of architectural discourse, the decorous façade stood as an architectural super-element coordinating the door, windows, and walls united into a singular and signature composition. In the 21st century, more attention is lavished on the façade - by architects, design blogs, city commissioners, and developers - than on any other element.
But rather than a coordination of the elements that make up the whole, the façade is now a thing in and of itself, in the form of a skin and a shape. A desperate quest begins not for a syntax of constituent elements but for innovation in the contortions of the façade - operations that can in themselves be catalogued...
FAÇADE
PAGE 203
2017 Early sketch of Grenfell Tower façade system, which illegally combines combustible alumlnum-|u0|yethy|ene cladding with Celotex „35000 PIR insulation plates, also
combustible.
"Cost pressures on the Grenfell refurbishment appear to have been intense. It emerged last month that the project team specified a cheaper cladding, saving £293,368, after the Kensington and Chelsea Tenant
Management Organisation suggested in an email the need for 'good costs for Cllr Fielding Mellen [the council's former deputy leader].' (Guardian, Duly 13, 2017.)
London fire probe focuses on cladding
With 17 confirmed dead but dozens of people still missing, fire chiefs say no more survivors are expected to be found in London’s 120-apartment Grenfell Tower
Fire spreads to Cladding: Added to tower block 24th floor within in 2016 - could be to blame for 15 minutes	rapid spread of fire
\	Design specifications suggest
,'lj	renovation work used “ventilated
.	cavity” cladding
SMH	°T
TnBsm.	wan	Mmm.
Cladding
Ventilated cavity - — 50mm void to vent moisture could act as chimney to spread fire
Cladding Celotex	Twin alurr
time: Fire believed to have started on fourth floor
-Main
entrance
FR5000
insulation
150mm thick
sheets, 3mm thick, with polyethylene core
Sources: Press Association, Construction Enquirer, Architects Journal
PAGE 204
FAÇADE
bibliography
Assmann, Dan. The Mind of Egypt: History and Meaning in the Time of the Pharaohs. Harvard University Press, 1996. 55.
Blount, Thomas. Glossographia; Or, A Dictionary Interpreting All Such Hard Words, Whether Hebrew, Greek Or Latin... As Are Now Used In Our Refined English Tongue. Tho. Newcomb, and are to be sold by Humphrey Moseley, and George Sawbridge, 1656.
Browning, Robert. Fifine At The Fair.
Smith Elder, 1876.
Ching, Francis D. K. and Mark M. Darzombek, Vikramaditya Prakash. A Global History of Architecture. Wiley, 2 edition 2007.
"Coats Coat Coat Store as Novel Sales Scheme." Popular Science, Duly 1936.
Dallaway, Dames. Anecdotes Of The Arts In England; Or, Comparative Remarks On Architecture, Sculpture, And Painting, Chiefly Illustrated By Specimens At Oxford. London: Printed forT. Cadell and W.
Davies, 1800.
Description de L'Egypte. Taschen, 2007
Diderot, Denis. Diderot Pictorial Encyclopedia of Trades and Industry.
Dover Publications, 1993.
Duell, Mark, and Sam Web. "Now The Walkie Talkie Building Is Melting Bicycles: Dazzling Light Reflected From Giant London Skyscraper Scorches Bike Seats (And You Can Even Fry An Egg)," Daily Mail, September 13, 2013. www.dailymail.co.uk/ news/article-2409710/Walkie-Talkie-building-melting-bicycles-Light-reflected-construction-City-skyscraper-scorches-seat.html (Accessed April 2, 2014.)
Goldberger, Paul. "'Facadism' on the Rise: Preservation or Illusion?" The New York Times, Duly 15, 1985.
Dencks, Charles. Modern Movements in Architecture. Penguin Books, 1987, 208-10.
Dohanson, Simon and Dason Dowling,
"New face of Melbourne rises 32 storeys." The Age, September 15, 2010.
Liang, Sicheng. "Architecture of the Motherland." Chinese National Science Popularization Society, October 1954.
Lubow, Arthur. "Face Value." The New York Times, Dune 8, 2008. www.nytimes.com/ 2008/06/08/magazine/08Front-t.html? pagewanted=print&_r=0 (accessed February 8, 2013).
Mälek, Daromir. In the Shadow of the Pyramids: Egypt during the Old Kingdom. University of Oklahoma Press, 1986, 51-52.
"OED Online." Oxford English Dictionary. www.oed.com(accessed Duly 30, 2013).
Palladio, Andrea. The Four Books of Architecture. New York: Dover Publications, 1965.
Reichart, Dasia, ed. Cybernetic Serendipity: the computer and the arts. London: Studio International, 1968.
Ring, Trudy, Robert M. Salkin, Sharon La Boda. International Dictionary of Historic Places: Middle East and Africa Vol. 4. Routledge, 1996, 580.
Römer, Dohn. The Great Pyramid: Ancient Egypt Revisited. Cambridge University Press, 2007. 182-183.
Shafer, Byron E. Temples of Ancient Egypt. Cornell University Press 1997.
Shen, Kuo. Dream Pool Essays (Meng Xi Bi Tan). Translated in Science and Civilization in China, Doseph Needham, 1986.
Sinkevitch, Alice. AIA Guide to Chicago. Harvest Books, 2004.
Stevens Curl, Dames. The Egyptian Revival: Ancient Egypt as the Inspiration for Design Motifs in the West. Routledge, New Ed edition 2007.
Yi, Ding, Lu Yu, Yong Hong. Geomancy And The Selection Of Architecture Placement In Ancient China. Shi Dia Zhuang, Hebei Science and Technology Press, 1996, 273.
façade façade Stephan trüby
Alberti, Leon Battista. The Architecture of Leon Battista Alberti in Ten Books. Lond Edward Owen, 1755.
Forssman, Erik. Dorisch, Donisch, Korinthisch. Studien überden Gebrauch der Säulenordnungen in der Architektur des 16.-18. Jahrhunderts. Brauschweig / Wiesbaden: Vieweg, 1984, 37.
Horn-Oncken, Alste. Über das Schickliche Studien zur Geschichte der Achitekturtheorie. Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Rupprecht, 1967.
Kruft, Hanno-Walter. Geschichte der Architekturtheorie. München: Beck, 162 198.
Mecklinger, Axel, Olga Kriukova, Heiner Mühlmann, Thomas Grunwald. "Cross-Cultural Differences In Processing Of Architectural Ranking: Evidence From An Event-Related Potential Study," Cognitive Neuroscience, 2013.
Melters, Monika. Kolossalordnung, Zum Palastbau in Italien und Frankreich zwischen 1420 und 1670. Berlin/München: Deutscher Kunstverlag, 200, 10.
Mühlmann, Heiner. Ästhetische Theorie der Renaissance: Leon Battista Alberti. Bochum 2005, 11.
Mühlmann, Heiner. "ForewordVorwort," in Exit-Architecture, Design between War and Peace. Vienna/New York: Springer, 2008,
12.
Mühlmann, Heiner. Kants Irrtum. Kritik der Neuroästhetik. München: Fink, 2013, 107.
Mühlmann, Heiner. Nature of Cultures. A Blueprint for a Theory of Cultrue Genetics. Vienna/New York: Springer, 1996.
Neumeyer, Fritz. "Nachdenken über Architektur," Quellentexte zur Architekturtheorie. München: Prestel, 2002, 32.
Neumeyer, Fritz. "Was ist eine Fassade? Lernen von Leon Battista Alberti," in Christoph Mäckler, Stadtbaukunst: Die Fassade. Dortmund: Institut für Stadtbaukunst der TU Dortmund, 2011, 9
FAÇADE
PAGE 205
Ijßechslin, Werner. "Fassade, ein später Egriff- The Façade, a Recent Concept," pgidalos Nr. 6, "Fassaden / Façades." Ippcember 15, 1982, 33.
«Oppenheim, llan, Fleiner Mühlmann,
I gerhard Blechinger, Ian W. Mothersill, Peter (Hilfiker, Flennric Dokeit, Martin Kurthen, ■Günter Krämer and Thomas Grunwald.
/ «grain Electrical Responses To High- And ■|_0v\/-Ranking Buildings," Clinical EEG and INeuroscience, Nr. 40, 2009.
«Oppenheim llan, Manila Vannucci, Heiner Ivlühlmann, Rainer Gabriel, Hennric Dokeit,
I ugrtin Kurthen, Günter Krämer, Thomas I grunwald."Hippocampal Contributions To fhe Processing Of Architectural Ranking,"
I Neurol mage, Nr. 50, 2010.
Pugin, A. W. N. The True Principles of Ï pointed or Christian Architecture. London: Bjracewing Publishing 1841. 54.
Summerson, John. The Classical Language of Architecture (World of Art). Thames and Hundson Ltd. 1980. 12.
ITzonis, Alexander, Liane Lefaivre. Classical Architecture: The Poetics of Order. The MIT Press, 1986.



image sources and courtesy
P8 Window Dressing / Popular Science, Duly 1936. Publised by Popular Science Pub. Co.; © All rights reserved by Warren Chrismas / www.flickr.com/photos/ warrenchrismas/9690624309/sizes/l/; photo by Stuart Davis; "Apple store fifth avenue" by Ed Uthman is licensed under CC-BY-SA-2.5.
P9 "Sommer, Giorgio (1834-1914) - n. 5650. II Duomo di Siena" by Catfisheye is licensed under CC-BY-PD-US; "Rotterdam nieuwe Pauluskerk" by Wikifrits is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0; "Basilica Palladiana, daytime, 2013" by Pottercomuneo is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P10 "Kheops-Pyramid" by Nina Aldin Thune is licensed under CC-BY-2.5; photo by Difei Ma.
P11 Diderot, Denis. Diderot Pictorial Encyclopedia of Trades and Industry. Dover Publications, 1993; Copyright Hinweis© 1999-2013 Begrenzt auf Alibaba.com und/ Oder seine Tochtergesellschaften und Lizenzgeber. Alle Rechte vorbehalten.
P13 Designboom © 2014.
P14 "Petra" by Carlalexanderlukas is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P15 "Petra before the Siq, Southern Dordan" by Zairon is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P16 Ding, Yulu and Yong Hong. 41 HiiffcM Geomancy and the selection of architecture placement in ancient China. Hebei Publishing & Media Network, 1996.
P17 Foguang temple photo by Di Fei ©
2014 The Great Mirror.
P18 Pan, Guxi and Dianzhong He.lii&jiS $f!S. Decoding Yingzao Fashi. Nanjing Southeast University Press, 2005; The Complete Works of Liang Sicheng Vol. 7. China Architecture & Building Press.
P 20-21 Spring Morning in the Han Palace by Ying Qiu, 1540. Taipei National Palace Museum Collection.
P22 Guo, Qinghua. The structure of Chinese timber architecture: twelfth century design standards and construction principles. Chalmers University of Technology, School of Architecture, Department of Building Design, 1995.
P23 The Library Building south elevation, University of Texas by Paul P. Cret. Alexander Architectural Archives; Changzhou City Wujin Hospital by Dinpei Li. "A Hospital Design." The Chinese Architect Vol. 5, 1933.
P24 Cenival, Dean-Louis de. Living architecture: Egyptian. Grosset & Dunlap, 1964; "Tombe de Nagada" by Dacques de Morgan is licensed under CC-PD-Mark.
P26 Cenival, Dean-Louis de. Living architecture: Egyptian. Grosset & Dunlap, 1964; © All rights reserved by Su55 / www.flickr.com/photos/11413503@ N03/2942186979/sizes/z/.
P27 Illustration of Jewish Slaves Building Pyramids in Egypt© Bettmann / CORBIS; ©2001 Mary Ann Sullivan; "Sahure-Pyramid" photo by Don Bodsworth; Description De L'Egypte.
P29 Description De L'Egypte; "Place du Caire" byTangopaso.
P30 Cenival, Dean-Louis de. Living architecture: Egyptian. Grosset & Dunlap, 1964; "Deir el-Bahari" by Hedwig Storch is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0.
P31 Bahnhof, Stuttgart, Deutschland © Dörg Rom Alle Rechte vorbehalten.
P36 Serlio, Sebastiano and Giovanni Domenico Scamozzi. Tutte Topere d'archlttetura, et prospetiua. Giacomo de' Franceschi, 1619.
P46 "Hotel Novotel Bucuresti" byTetcu Mircea Rares is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0; "Toronto Stock Exchange" by nodomain.cc is licensed under CC BY 2.0; photo by Doe Mabel.
P47 Malcolm Warrington, Victorian Newspaper and Magazine Illustrations;
© Fotolibra 2005-2014. All rights reserved; Photo by Eric Butrius; joseph a / www.flickr. com/photos/josepha/6175065059/sizes/o/; © 2012-2013 by Forgotten Buffalo; army, arch / www.flickr.com/photos/army_ arch/6326010526/.
P52 Microsoft Encarta; Murray, Scott. Contemporary Curtain Wall Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009.; © Owen Franken/Corbis; Valley News.
P53 Moberly Monitor; Desse David Harris; Elsa Snyder; flickr.com/photos/iainb/.
PAGE 206
P54 Building Science Corporation;
Calvin Lu.
P55 QUONSET; Dwight Burdette;
"PRADA BOUTIQUE AOYAMA" by Wiiii, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; NIKE Inc.
P56 Don Randolph.
P57 Accent Exteriors; justurbanism.com.
P58 Hedrich Blessing / Chicago History Museum.
P59 Routledge, R. Discoveries and Inventions of the Nineteenth Century. Hardpress Editions Art Books, 1900.; George Samuel Measom.
P60 Building Magazine; Russ London; Ben Garrett; © Vanni Archive / Art Resource, NY.
P61 Hedrich Blessing / Chicago History Museum; Arthur Siegel; Dack Cave /
Oregon Historical Society.
P62 Architectural Record; SethTisue.
P63 Ezra Stoller / ESTO; Schaal, Rolf. Curtain Walts Design Manual. New York: Reinhold Pub. CorP , 1962.; The Mason City Globe-Gazette; Do Baert.
P64 Balthazar Korab; Bill Wetzel.
P65 Michael Shellenbarger/ University of Oregon Library; Doe Mabel.
P66 Wubbo Siegers; Permasteelisa Cladding Technologies; Brett Lees-Smith; Bert Hoetmer.
P69 Mark Hogan; Dan Tik; Herzog & De Meuron; Addison Godel; Steve Silverman; Barkow Leibinger.
P70 © University of the West of England, Bristol.
P71 Marta Gutowska
P72 "Sterreichische Postsparkasse Vienna" by Gryffindor, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Belmont House" by Ballista, licensed under CC-BY-3.0.
P73 Bemis, Albert Farwell, and Dohn E. Burchard. The Evolving House. Cambridge, MA: The Technology Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1933.
P74 Sam Watters; Bemis, Albert Farwell, and Dohn E. Burchard. The Evolving House. Cambridge, MA: The Technology Press, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1933.; Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
Gift of Donald D. Walker, 1986.
P75 Design & Architecture Museum, University of California; Institut français d'architecture archives; Frampton, Kenneth, and Dohn Cava. Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1995.; Michael Hein.
P76 Fondation Le Corbusier; Domus;
Paula Soler-Moya.
P77 "National museum of western art" by 663highland, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Addison Godel; Michael Rougier / Time & Life Pictures; Fondation Le Corbusier.
P78 Addison Godel; microrayon. wikispaces.com.
P79 Yale Visual Resources; façadesconfidential. blogspot.com;
Richard Burghause.
P80 Lamb, Charles M. Housing Segregation in Suburban America since 1960:
Presidential and Dudicial Politics.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.; The Daily Telegraph.
P81 "MetLifeGC" byDnn13, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; IBM Archive; Ezra Stoller / ESTO.
P92 Bloomberg L.P.; SSA Techno Construction Private Limited.
P94 ARCAM.
P93 Deremiah Cox; Ruby, Ilka, Andreas Ruby, and Dessica Bridger. Re-inventing Construction.Berlin: Ruby, 2010.
P95 Mathiasrex Maciej Szczepahczyk-Frank Kovalchek; Roman Klementschitz-jeancliclac / BIGSTOCK®.
P96 Historic Houses Trust / New South Wales Government; Danine Rizzetti; Steve Shook / Insulated Steel Construction Company Collection.
P97 Davis, Michael W. R.. Detroit's Wartime Industry: Arsenal of Democracy. Charleston, SC: Arcadia Pub., 2007.; Chicago Tribune historical photo; David D. Dackson; Library of Congress.
P98 St. Louis Gutter; Tata Steel; Circle Oaks.
P99 New Castle News; Ohio Historical Society; The Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller.
P100 QUONSET; KabulPress.org; Herman, Dan K.. Navy medicine in Vietnam oral histories from Dien Bien Phu to the fall of Saigon. Defferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2009.
P82 "SF Transamerica top CA sharpened" by Daniel Schwen, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; David Moore; Horst Kiechle.
P101 KME Italy S.P A.; Kalzip®; "Ikea multistory Leeds" by Mtaylor848, licensed under CC-BY-3.0.
P83 Dieter Danssen; SHoP Architects;
mashedmusings.wordpress.com;
arthitectural.com.
P84 SSPL via Getty Images.
P85 Phillip Denny; Pencil Points Magazine; Museum of History & Industry Photograph Collection.
P86 Dow Corning; Tremco Manufacturing Company.
P87 Canadian Wood Council; Architectural Forum; Richard Longstreth.
P88 Foshan Yuantong Adhesive Co., Ltd.; Dow Chemical Company.
P90 Ger Pak / Vintage Alliance; astronautix. com / US Army; General Electric Company; Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller; Clark, Clifford Edward. The American Family Home, 1800-1960. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1986.
P91 Scapegoat Dournal; Building Science Corporation.
P102 Carol M. Highsmith; Ron Davis Studio; angelicarbrem.blogspot.com; flickr.com/ people/etslee.
P103 © Ian Bracegirdle I Dreamstime.com; emillesofieish.wordpress.com; REUTERS / Mike Hutchings; Gulf Stream Coach Inc.; Olesia Plokhii / Boston.com; Nguyen Thanh Long.
P104 Brock, Linda. Designing the Exterior Wall: an architectural guide to the vertical envelope. Hoboken, N.D.
P105 Dohn Wiley, 2005.; Brown, R. D. English Farmhouses. London: R. Hale, 1982.; Dave Derbis.
P106 Frederick Barr; flickr.com/photos/ luisbustamante; Blog TO.
P107 Buchanan, Peter. Renzo Piano Building Workshop: complete works. London: Phaidon Press, 1993-2008.;
Michel Denance; Dim Steinhart.
P108 Donathan Ochshorn / Ochshorn Design; Atelier 5 / Balthasar Burkhard.
P110 Carter B. Horsley / The City Review; flickr.com/photos/thegoatisbad.
p 111 Jonathan Chanca; Luca Buccano; Sarah Ackerman; Stephanie Braconnier; iwan Baan; John hill; Damon Garrett; Tony Hlsgett; flickr.com/people/florette1972.
p112 djd / puren.
p 113 Cloase, Paul Dunham. Thermal Insulation of Buildings. New York: n.p.,
1g47.; Cristina Schubert.
pl14flickr.com/photos/asbestos_pix;
Valley Morning Star.
p 115 Prouvé, Jean, Alexander von Vegesack, Bruno Reichlin, and Catherine Ayot. Jean Iprouvé: The Poetics of the Technical Object. We il am Rhein: Vitra Design Stiftung, 2006.; Architectural Forum; "Prouvé clichy 007" by patrick.charpiat, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Arnold Newman / Fotofolio.
P116-117 Architectural Forum.
P118 Meredith L. Clausen; Schaal, Rolf. Curtain Walls Design Manual. New York: Reinhold Pub. Corp., 1962.
P119 Grimshaw Architects; © Palgrave Macmillan; Philip Wolmuth; Richard Einzig.
P120 Ken Bergman; flickr.com/people/ radunzel; Saul Zaik; Calvin Seibert; justurbanism.com.
P121 "Monte Carlo hotel (Las Vegas)" by Antoine Taveneaux, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Warmedammverbundsystem (WDVS) teilweise auf Altbau" by Hand-werker, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "The Luxor, Las Vegas" by popejon2, licensed under CC-BY-2.0.
P122 Kalwall / Translucent Daylighting Systems.
P123 Kalzip; Hammer & Hand; Spray Foam Distributing; Dr. W. Feist.
P124 Howard Digital.
P125 David Glaves; flickr.com/photos/ czd72; Centre historique des Archives nationales / Atelier de photographie;
The Libbey-Owens-Ford Company.
P126 PPG Industries; Dillon, Edward. Class, tyEdward Dillon. S.I.: Methuen, 1907.;
Grupo Olmar.
p128 Julius Shulman / J. Paul Getty Museum ' Collection.
p129 Pittsburgh Plate Glass Company; PPG Industries; Ford Motor Company; centre-
9lass.com.
P130 PPG Industries.
P131 PPG Industries; Seele GMBH; flickr. com/photos/26002352@N06; glass-making, net.
P132 Foster + Partners; "Boston JohnHancock Tower" by Bobak Ha-Eri, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Carnegie Mellon School of Architecture.
P133 Rice, Peter, and Hugh Dutton. Structural Glass. 2nd ed. London: E & FN Spon, 1995.
P134 Kirsty E. Smith; wall21.cn; Todd Philip Guglielmo; Nabil Fanous Architects.
P135 "Apple Store" by InSapphoWeTrust, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Rob Boudon;
Bos, Freek. Challenging class 3: Conference on Architectural and Structural Applications of Glass. Amsterdam: IOS Press, 2012.; "Apple Store" by Marlith, licensed under CC-BY-3.0.
P136 Herzog, Thomas, Roland Krippner, and Werner Lang. Façade Construction Manual. Basel: Birkhauser-Publishers for Architecture, 2004.
P137 Woods, May, and Arete Swartz Warren. Glass Houses: A History of Greenhouses, Orangeries and Conservatories. New York: Rizzoli, 1988.
P138 Sonia Garcia; Stoerche-bw; XAXOR. COM; Fensterbau Rutsch GmbH.
P139 flickr.com/people/howardcarless;
Lee W. Nelson; John Chapman.
P140 Historical Archive of the Steiff Factory, Giengen; Herzog, Thomas, Roland Krippner, and Werner Lang. Façade Construction Manual. Basel: Birkhauser-Publishers for Architecture, 2004.
P141 Federico Perugini; Sergey Norin; Richard Pare; Nikolai Vassiliev / qwz.
P142 Larry Speck; Cemal Emden;
Foundation Le Corbusier; Addison Godel.
P143 Holcim Foundation for Sustainable Construction.
P144 US Inspect Marketing; EKOSE'A HOMES.
P146 Barbara Elliott Martin; Terri Meyer Boake
P147 Herzog, Thomas, Roland Krippner, and Werner Lang. Façade Construction Manual. Basel: Birkhauser-Publishers for Architecture, 2004.
PAGE 207
P148 Terri Meyer Boake; Green Glaze Windows.
P149 Lacaton & Vassal.
P150 Edmund Sumner.
P151 Herzog, Thomas, Gernot Minke, and Hans Eggers. Pneumatic Structures:
A Handbook of Inflatable Architecture. New York: Oxford UP, 1976.; John S. Johnston.
P152 MoDiP; Science & Society Picture Library; "First polyethene pillbox" by Geni, licensed under CC-BY-3.0. The Salt Lake Tribune; Naugatuck Daily News.
P153 Dent, Roger Nicholas. Principles of Pneumatic Architecture. London: Architectural, 1971.; The Express (Lock Haven, Pennsylvania).
P154 oldlifemagazines.com / Time & Life Images; Xavier Miserachs / Museum of Contemporary Art, Barcelona; Francois Dallegret.
P155 Architectural Design / John Wiley & Sons Ltd.; Ortner & Ortner Baukunst; Pink Ponk Studios; Chip Lord.
P156 John M Poltrack, New Ipswich, NH; David Geiger / Geiger Berger Associates; Carl Mydans / Getty; Ishii, Kazuo.
Membrane Structures in Japan. Tokyo, Japan: SPS Pub. Co., 1995.
P157 Koch, Klaus, Karl J. Habermann, and Brian Forster. Membrane Structures: Innovative building with film and fabric. Munich: Prestel, 2004.; LeCuyer, Annette W. ETFE Technology and Design. Basel: Birkhäuser, 2008.; Chris Bosse.
P158 Iwan Baan; Oliver Blum; Anish Kapoor; Wolfgang Volz / Christo and Jean Claude.
P159 LeCuyer, Annette W. ETFE Technology and Design. Basel: Birkhäuser, 2008.;
Anna Gowthorpe / PA.; Simon Quinton.
P160 GKD - Gebr. Kufferath AG.
P161 John Thompson; Guillaume Piolle;
Elgin Collection; Dick Schmitt.
P162 Hugh Ferris / Avery Collection;
Thomas Ledl.
P163 Rozenberg, CG/ Architektur-och designcentrum; Bundesarchiv,
Bild 183-1982-1130-502.
P164 Andy Eick; Irving Underhill;
Charles O'Rear.
P165 Tom Thai; Antonio Tajuelo.
P166 Ezra Stoller / ESTO; Samuel H. Gottscho.
PAGE 208
P167 Smallbones; Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown; Canadian Centre for Architecture (CCA); Richard Rogers Partnership.
P168 Blade Runner. Directed by Michael Deeley. Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video, 1999.; Forgemind ArchiMedia.
P169 Untwist Technology; © Christian Richters / UNStudio.
P170 Blanc, Patrick, and Véronique Lalot.
The Vertical Garden: From Nature to the City. New York: W.W. Norton, 2008.
P171 © Ad Meskens / Wikimedia Commons; Charles Eisen; "Wimpole folly" by Tysto, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; MOPIants.
P172 Seiji Yamauchi; Morris, William, and Gillian Naylor. William Morris by Himself: Designs and Writings. Boston: Little, Brown, 1988.; Sunghwan Yoon; Andrew Prokos.
P173 "Monastery of the Grande Chartreuse" by Floriel, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Fondation Le Corbusier.
P174Jan Schabert; Bernard Plossu / Fonds National d'art contemporain; Scalbert, Irènèe. A Right to Difference: The Architecture of Jean Renaudie. London: Architectural Association, 2004.; quaintliving.com.
P175 Herman Hertzberger; Borasi, Giovanna, Mirko Zardini, Adam Bobbette, and Harriet Russell. Sorry, Out of Gas: Architecture's Response to the 1973 Oil Crisis. Montréal: Canadian Centre for Architecture, 2007.; Ryan Somma.
P176 Cathy Farley.
P177 Frampton, Kenneth, and Silvia Kolbowski. Idea as Model. New York: Institute for Architecture and Urban Studies, 1981.; Emmett Zeifman; City of Fukuoka.
P178flickr.com/photos/ericdp; A. B. Walker / Life Magazine; Site Architecture; Maison Edouard Francois; Chris Yunker.
P179© Arup; "Supertree Grove, Gardens by the Bay, Singapore" by tee_eric, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Marco Garofalo; Patrick Bingham-Hall.
P180 Mélissa Charland, Jonathan Desjarlais.
P181 Raphael Azevedo Franca; MJR Postcards and Covers.
P182 Popular Science Magazine; retrorenovation.com.
P183 "Tugendhat view" by Simonma, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Paolo Rosselll; Modern times. Directed by Charlie Chaplin. United Artists, 1936.
P184 Angelo Invernizzi / Villa Glrasole;
The Kingston Daily Freeman; Popular Mechanics.
P185 Coderch Archive; © fonds jean prouvé; Courtesy Krueck & Sexton / Hedrich-Blessing.
P186 Michael Moran; SITE Architects; Shigeru Ban Architects; Santiago Calatrava LLC.
P187 flickr.com/photos/dynamosquito; Urban Art Projects.
P188 cyberneticserendipity.net;
Cybernetic Serendiptity, ed. Jasia Reichart (Studio International, 1968).
P189 © Gili Merin.
P192 Norman A. Henderson.
P193 Andy Marshall / www.flickr.com/ photos/fotofaçade/325185764/.
P194 ARM Architecture.
P195 Juliana Ribeiro Muniz Westcott.
P196-197© Arup.
P208 Collage by Anny Wang.
FAÇADE
PAGE 209
2017 Interloper: close to the Vondelpark In Amsterdam south, a uniform neighborhood of Dutch renaissance brick façades, standardized in the 19th century and never strayed from since completion of the plans by Louis Paul Zocher, a radically different façade suddenly appears. The glass, steel and basalt building - built on r the footprint of a former parking garage on the Koninglnneweg -fronts EENWERK, a gallery presenting one work of art at a time. Known as the mini Whitney, the intervention receives surprisingly ■»opposition from locals, its set-back and subtlety immunizing it from criticism, together with its classic Dutch quality of transpar-6ncy: massive windows offering an untrammeled view inside...
BALCONY
Emmanuel Macron, one day into his presidency of France, greeted by Angela Merkel on a balcony of the chancellery in Berlin. Daily Mail account of the meeting: "Macron needs a stiff drink: New French leader takes a swig of wine after Merkel torpedoes his plans to restructure the EU during their first meeting." (Daily Mail, May 15, 2017.)

BALCONY
PAGE 1
contributor tom avermaete
-the balcony is the modem architectural element par excellence, its vicissitudes since the 19th century reflecting - and enabling - those of society at large: beginning as an awkward appendage, a "fake appetizer" to the real business of the façade (Quatremère de Quincy), it became a health-giver (sanotoriums), mediator between public and private realms, universal civilizer employed in colonialism, a platform for broadcasting radical ideologies and later personal micropolitics (mini-gardens), sure-tlre tool of social democracy, registration of mass individualism °n the face of the metropolis, privileged promontory over the ^treet, storage space, wasted space, bonus (real estate) space...
role in projecting private identity publicly now made redundant by the digital realm...
balcony
Pi
BALCONY
BALCONY
PAGE 3
bALCONY: SOMETHING EXTRA
Unlike its cousins, the terrace and the loggia (dubbed by modernists as the "street in the sky"), the balcony projects -s0metimes propped up, sometimes cantilevered - from the facade. This is the essence of the balcony's strange state 0f exception: it is both inside and outside, private and public, an architectural crescendo and totally superfluous.
|n the imagination of Viollet-le-Duc, the origins of the projecting balcony are militaristic; its ambiguous status as c0nnected to the building yet detached reflects the need both to shield oneself but also strike enemies from above. Aloof yet highly visible, the balcony has enduring associations with royal prerogative. The jharoka balcony of Mughal India was a device so inseparable from the rituals of power that Shah Dahan forbade it to his rivals.
yyhat happens, then, when royalty and aristocrats are displaced as a locus of architectural power, projected through the balcony? In Europe, the rise of the middle classes diffuses the balcony's monarchical association, tilting it towards leisure and urban display - seeing and being seen. Balconies proliferate along Haussmann's wide Parisian boulevards -to the intense displeasure of critic Quatremère de Quincy, who thinks they are a crass fashion violating centuries of architectural order.
At the turn of the 20th century, medical theories associate the balcony with improved health and hygiene. In his novel The Magic Mountain, Thomas Mann employs the balcony of an Alpine sanatorium as metaphor for the moth-eaten world of European intellectual culture: lofty and detached, inhabited by those too fragile for the pungent reality below. As Mann wrote his massive book, the First World War shattered the contemplative universe of the balcony.
Revolution and fascism skew the balcony violently towards its public pole. Between the First World War and fascism -the dubious golden age of the political balcony - it becomes a stage from which to orchestrate mass spectacle.
The balcony positions the leader in direct, visible connection with the masses, but elevated above them. In the 1930s, Mussolini reanimates a medieval balcony type, the arengario, having them constructed wherever he might go.
The balcony-as-political-platform persists in the postwar world, but loses its centrality: after lending itself so willingly to demagoguery, the balcony as it was - singular, domineering - is thoroughly discredited ("Enough with the balcony!"
! became a slogan of Italian anti-fascist politics). TV and other media supersede the balcony appearance as a means of image-making, and the micro-managed nature of modern politics doesn't make for compelling balcony scenes (though Latin-American populism, c.f. Evita, still makes a strong case for the political balcony).
Socialist governments find a new use for the balcony: as a means of emancipation adorning mass public housing projects. Heraldic configurations of wide balconies are a signature feature of Karl-Marx-Hof in inter-war Vienna, and from then balconies are the principal device for granting fresh air, light, and visibility to the working and middle classes. In postwar housing blocks the idea becomes generalized, and eventually degraded and ridiculed again, like the political balconies before it. Monotonous Brutalist balconies become a target for postmodernist critics, who want the balcony to embrace its ornamental character rather than hide beneath modernist sobriety.
The appeal of the balcony-clad public tower block recedes, replaced by the notion of dispersed low-income housing, while the middle class's recolonization of cities from the suburbs begins in the United States. The balcony assumes the playful ornamental aspect imagined for it by Venturi and Scott Brown, but in the luxury condos and towers of the gentrifying global city this is either as part of a signature façade to market "free" extra square meters, or as an enticement (sometimes tacked on, like a piece of jewellery). Rather than a platform for engagement with the urban (Haussmann), or a crusading egalitarian demand (socialism), the luxury balcony imports suburban separation into the city: raised to vast heights, the connection with the fabric of the city becomes purely symbolic, unreal.
'985 Egalitarian luxury: balconies at the Dombai ski resort in the Caucasus, nussia, feature concrete hood and wooden louvers, delivering privacy and a sense of power - each one like a military command post - while Playing a part in a communal story, all oriented towards the mountains, registering, each with equal importance, the existence of every resident r'd'e building's facade.
BALCONY
PAGE 5
‘u14 Balconies along the streets of Voorburgstraat, Vijverhofstraat, Pd Bainerstraat in Rotterdam, all used in highly personal ways: satellite dishes, idols, a sign saying "enjoy, relax," storage space, a9arden, a simulation of a forest, or just empty...
PAGE 6
BALCONY
handrails
mesh front
steel balustrades
cantilevered platform
precast concrete slab
reinforcements
The 21st century prefabricated balcony, with lineage stretching back to Haussmann's Paris...
inside
outside
2009 Aqua
Tower,
Chicago.
1860 Haussmannian balcony, Paris.
1614 St. Peter's, Vatican.
1926
Bauhaus,
Dessau.
1451
_ Palazzo ■ Venezia, Rome.
1628
Diwan-e-Aam, Agra Fort.
2005 VM
Blouses,
■.Copenhagen.
1975 Les Choux de Créteil, Paris.
PAGE 8
BALCONY
THE BALCONY'S EXRESSIONS
With ancestry in military architecture and the theatre, the balcony evolves through two principle imperatives: political power and every day leisure. While these expressions could not seem more different, they are intertwined in a global migration of the balcony across continents, and from shahs to proletariat...
Heliotherapeutic Architecture
Áuoo|eq sioeöjnog aqi
suo|ie|SUBJi BÄiqejqseiAj
jBuaiBBMg |B3q aqi
(eiuoy 1U8J0UB) eue¡uaei/\| aqx
(LUS||e|UO|OQ)!
(Lüs¡|e|oos)¡
The Venetian opera box (Renaissance)___________
■	Áuoo|eg ueqjfi msn aqj_
■	Auoo|eg uo-ppy gm
6u|uuiqj_ ¡eqriQ Ajpuneq Áp|Q s^eqriQ
pesodxejeAo Á}|ueqjn Áj|ue/\
|(uoippuoo juejjno)
saiuoo|eq -I0MO} 9M1
(ixisieiuoioo-isod) peau u0>|b;s|i/\| 'sen|BA pejje¿sue.ij_
PAGE 10
BALCONY
ca. 1308-1311 Temptation: Duccio di Buoninsegna's Maesta altarpiece. "Then the devil took Him into the holy city; and he had Him stand on the pinnacle of the temple, and said to Him, 'If you are the Son of God throw yourself down. For it is written, 'He will give His angels charge concerning you,' and, 'On their hands they will bear you up, lest you strike your foot against a stone.'" (Matthew 4:5-6). Josephus, writing in the 1st century, speculates that the location of Christ's second temptation was Herod's royal portico, which towered 140 meters over the Kedron Valley.
BALCONY
PAGE 11
1998 Reminder: a muezzin performs the adhan (call to prayer) from a minaret's balcony at Ertugrul Gazi Mosque, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan.
PAGE 12
BALCONY
1906-1912 Irrational balcony:
Casa Mllà, Barcelona, Antonio Gaudí.
BALCONY
PAGE 13
1925-1926 Rational balcony: Bauhaus, Dessau, Walter Gropius.
PAGE 14
BALCONY
2008 While a crowd marches through Seattle, protesting Proposition 8, the California State constitution amendment seeking to ban gay marriage, a woman above them stands naked at the threshold of her balcony. Several people notice their bold observer, and soon she's the center of attention. A writer for the local paper, The Stranger, dubs her Lady Gaydiva.
H
BALCONY
PAGE 15
2012 Women and children peer from a balcony in Jerusalem as the anti-Zionist ultra-orthodox Jewish sect Eda Haredit protests the repeal of the Tal law, which exempts Yeshiva students from mandatory military service.
PAGE 16	BALCONY
IMPURE FORMS OF THE BALCONY
As a platform that accesses the exterior, the balcony shares certain features with the veranda (or porch), terrace, loggia, and the "street in the sky." But whereas the veranda, terrace, and loggia are typically shared spaces, resting on some kind of solid, un-cantilevered platform - the ground, a roof, a protruding level below - the balcony's cantilever, cellularity, and elevation make it unique, an individual private space suspended above the public realm. The loggia and the modernist's street-in-the-sky that followed it are about circulation as much as vistas and visibility, providing an exterior passageway around the building.
veranda
Roofed platform along the outside of a house, level with the ground floor. Origin: early 18th century, from Hindi vararida and Portuguese varanda (railing, balustrade). Synonym: porch.
terrace
Level paved area next to a building. Origin-16th century (denoting an open gallery, |ale^ar'Y platform or balcony in a theatre). From Old p3 for rubble, platform; based on Latin terra
' earth.
1920s Skerryvore, Ontario.
10th century Papiol Castle.
2010 Koh Samui resort, Thailand.
ca. 1913 Private residence, Australia.
1856-1860 Miramare Castle.
1870 Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
BALCONY
PAGE 17
loggia
Gallery or room with one or more open sides, especially one that forms part of a house and has one side open to the garden.
Origin: mid 18th century, from Italian, lodge.
1549-1567 St. Anthony of Padua, Yucatan, Mexico.
1376-1382 Loggia dei Lanzi, Rome.
1670-1708 Grand Trianon, Versailles.
2010 Loggia along the Ronco River, Forli, Italy.
street in the sky
Public access gallery giving passage from apartment to vertical circulation, as well as between apartments. Closely associated with the work of Peter and Alison Smithson (1928-1993; 1923-2003), streets In the sky would "constitute a social entity [and] would thus become places with their own Identity. Two women with prams can stop and talk without blocking the flow, and [these streets] are safe for small children, as the only wheeled vehicles allowed are the trades-men's hand- and electrically-propelled trolleys." (Marco Vldotto, Alison + Peter Smithson.)
1969-1982 Byker Wall, Ralph Ersklne, Newcastle.
1998 Stairs in the sky: Gifu Kitagata Apartments, SANAA, Kitagata, Japan.
1972 Robin Hood Gardens, London.
PAGE 18	BALCONY
VIEWING PLATFORM
A cousin of the platform, the viewing platform is a dramatically cantilevering, greatly elevated surface on which people or things can stand, appearing wherever visitors are called upon to gaze into the void...
Kölnbreinsperre Skywalk, Malta, Austria.
Grand Canyon, Colorado.
5 Fingers Krippenstein, Dachstein, Austria.
Kitzsteinhorn, Salzburg, Austria.
Welterbeblick Skywalk Haistatt, Austria.
IguaziLFalls, Brazil.
BALCONY
PAGE 19
VERTIGO: FAIR GAME yyhile architecture scrambles to fulfil j every possible comfort and security requirement, somehow vertigo is the one area in which it can still be playful and challenging, while ultimately ; reassuring us of its structural integrity.
I Chicago's Willis Tower (formerly the Sears Tower) offers a glassed-in cantilever over the city 412 I meters up, an opportunity more for selfies and an OMG moment than contemplation of the city...
PAGE 20	BALCONY
ELEMENT OF SUSPENSE
Sections from the International Residential Code (IRC) reveal the hidden engineering necessary for the balcony to be a habitable zone -otherwise only revealed when something goes wrong.
R311.5.1 Attachment. Exterior landings, decks, balconies stairs and similar facilities shall be positively anchored to the primary structure to resist both vertical and lateral forces or shall be designed to be self-supporting. Attachment shall not be accomplished by use of toenails or nails subject to withdrawal
2012 "Positively anchored."
R311.5 Construction.
August 14, 2012 Collapsed balconies in a tenement building of the Tamil Nadu Slum Clearance Board, Otteri, India.
BALCONY
PAGE 21
December 23, 2010 A man throws himself from the balcony In the Romanian Parliament, shouting to Prime Minister Emil Boc beforehand, "Boc, you've taken away the rights of our children!"
He suffers fractures to the face.
SECTION R312 GUARDS
R312.1 Where required. Guards shall be located along open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, ramps and landings, that are located more than 30 inches (762 mm) measured vertically to the floor or grade below at any point within 36 inches (914 mm) horizontally to the edge of the open side. Insect screening shall not be considered as a guard.
R312.2 Height. Required guards at open-sided walking surfaces, including stairs, porches, balconies or landings, shall be not less than 36 inches (914 mm) high measured vertically above the adjacent walking surface, adjacent fixed seating or the line connecting the leading edges of the treads.
Exceptions:
1.	Guards on the open sides of stairs shall have a height not less than 34 inches (864 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.
2.	Where the top of the guard also serves as a handrail on the open sides of stairs, the top of the guard shall not be not less than 34 inches (864 mm) and not more than 38 inches (965 mm) measured vertically from a line connecting the leading edges of the treads.
R312.3 Opening limitations. Required guards shall not have openings from the walking surface to the required guard height which allow passage of a sphere 4 inches (102 mm) in diameter.
Guards shall be provided...
PAGE 22
BALCONY
ORIGIN STORIES:
MAENIANA
Rome's first balconies are called maeniana, after one Maenia, who transforms a municipal obligation into a real estate opportunity - and defines what would become the balcony's lasting profile, at the nexus of urban engagement, social status, and added value. Maenia's home is in the path of the construction site of the Basilica Porcia at the Forum Romanum. In return for selling his home and allowing its demolition, he reserves the right to construct a platform over a column in the forum which would provide him unobstructed sightlines to the amphitheater: "Maenius took the right for himself of a single column, above which he extended a roof out of sliding plants from where he himself and his descendants could watch gladiatorial games." (Pseudo-Asconius, quoted in Katherine E. Welch, The Roman Amphitheater: From Its Origins to the Colosseum, 2007, 32-33.)
One of the first balconies is in effect an open air theatre box, but the principal quickly spreads through the Empire...
Circus Maximus, drawn in 1580 in a book by Onofrio Panvinio, historian and archeologist. The entrance to the maeniana is indicated in the lower left of the drawing.
Another account traces the name to another Maenius, consul in 338 BC, censor in 318 BC, and a famed war hero. Festus records: "They are called maeniana for Maenius the censor who was the first to extend wooden beams in the Forum beyond the columns so that the upper spectacular could be enlarged." (In Katherine E. Welch, The Roman Amphitheater, 32-33.)
MAENIANA MANIA
"[l]t appears that as they were inconvenient in narrow streets, the praefectus urbis in 368 AD enforced older laws against their construction, and the emperors Theodosius and Flonorius extended the prohibition so as to include provincial towns as well as Rome, unless there was a space of at least ten clear feet between the opposite maeniana." —William Smith, A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities, 1890.
"The Corso is a street a mile long; a street of shops, and palaces, and private houses, sometimes opening into a broad piazza. There are verandas and balconies, of all shapes and sizes, to almost every house - not on one story alone, but often to one room or another on every story-put there in general with so little order or regularity, that if, year after year, and season after season, it had rained balconies, hailed balconies, snowed balconies, blown balconies, they could scarcely have come into existence in a more disorderly manner."
—Charles Dickens, Pictures from Italy and American Notes, 1846.
Migrating from the Roman amphitheater, the maenianum appears as a projection from a house over a narrow street in ancient Pompei (photographed in 1905).
BALCONY
PAGE 23
arengario
In the middle ages, Northern Italy develops a new type 0f balcony, associated with the arengario, or communal (0wn hall. Structures like the arengario at Monza arrange the façade around prominent balconies, known as parlera, charged with civic symbolism: they are the platform from which edicts of the commune are issued to the people after being debated in the meeting hall within.
1293 Monza, Italy: parlera on the southern face of the Arengario di Monza. The term arengario comes from arringare, meaning "to address."
PAGE 24
BALCONY
ORIGIN STORIES: THE PRIMAL HOURD
In his Dictionnaire Raisonne, Eugène Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc traces the balcony's origin not to Rome but to an 11th-century anti-siege device: the hourd. Distinct from the fortress walls in terms of both material (the hourd is of wood, not stone) and its construction schedule (it is built only after the fortress wall is complete), Viollet-le-Duc's ur-balcony is a clip-on military accessory, exploiting wall punctures and two corbels for anchoring. The privileged perspective granted by the balcony is originally, according to this geneaology, for the purpose of attack and defense rather than any optic pleasure.
Hourd "Scaffold closed with planks; app|;ecj to military architecture, It is a wooden structu standing at the top of the curtain walls and tnüï. for receiving defenders, overlooking the foot VfSrs masonry and giving a wider flanking projection very favorable to the defense."
—Vlollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle 1854-1868.
"From the wall-walk (1), the carpenters ran a first piece A through the lower hole, then a second piece B, leaning over. Passing through the crenel, the worker sat astride this second piece B, as Indicated by the detail in perspective B', and entered the link C in its joint. The head of this link was combined to the piece B with a peg; a bollard D was entered forcibly from the back to stiffen the whole system. Structural bands were placed on top of it, this made It easy to put up the double posts E, in between which beams were slid and used as anterior guard, then, the roof, covering the hoard and the wall-walk, was fixed securely In order to protect the defenders from projectiles thrown across. The notches G were arranged between the facing beams to allow them to aim. In this way, crossbowmen posted on the hoardings could send projectiles through multiple arrow slits and throw stones through the machicolation [floor opening] K on the assailants. From the wall-walk, other crossbowmen or archers still had permanent arrow slits L, through which, under the hoards, they sent spears on the besieger.
The communication from the wall-walk to the hoard was established directly by the crenellations, their merlons were high enough to let a man through. The cover was made of strong beams on which big slate or tiles were laid, and if they feared incendiary projectiles, pelts, big woolen fabrics, manure or grass. This armoring was done at the top of curtain walls or towers of every fortified town undergoing a siege, the masonry crenellations on their own were used during peacetime or by ordinary guards. Thereby, the crenels were like many doors connecting the hoardings with the wall-walk at a number of points; and if the hoards were to burn or to be destroyed by the pierriers (swivel guns) of the besiegers, a defense made of masonry was^ still standing and providing protection to the soldiers filling the ramparts. —Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de /'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle 1854-1868.
PAGE 25
While under siege, a remarkably calm group of workmen install the "hourd": "Fig. 9 shows, in a perspective view, maneuvers of carpenters posing the hoardings of the Coucy dungeon. We see how the small drawbridges on the battlement were perfectly sufficient to assemble these structures roof truss after roof truss, because as soon as they were placed, the circulation was immediately established outside allowing them to nail the boards of the rampart walk and the beams of the coverage. We must certainly admit that the carpenters of this time were very good at hoisting, and one just needs to see the structures they have erected to be convinced, but the practical means used here are so well explained by the layout, and these means are so safe, so little dangerous compared to what is being done every day, that the hourdage of the Coucy dungeon probably did not represent any serious difficulty."
—Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de I'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle, 1854-1868.
BALCONY
PAGE 26
BALCONY


BRETECHE
Viollet-le-Duc also makes mention of the hourd's cousin, the breteche: a closed-in secondary wooden structure set atop the main stone structure.
Like the hourd, the breteche projects beyond the building's walls, allowing it to serve, if necessary, as a platform for launching projectiles, but its principle innovation is to transition the balcony from a military installation to a political platform.
14th century Breteche built into the roof of Strasbourg treasury tower.
1388 Bâtiment de la Douane de Constance, with wooden bretèche added to the corner of a hourd, an innovation offering surveillance and protection at a 45 degree angle.

BALCONY
PAGE 27
"From the fourteenth century, bretèches were no longer merely works of military architecture; town houses were furnished, on the front side of the public square, with a bretèche, made of wood or masonry, a kind of balcony where one issued announcements, read public documents, proclamations, and court sentences. One said 'bretéquer' to proclaim. ... The bretèche of the city hall of Luxeuil Is still intact. This custom was adopted in all municipal buildings in Europe. In Italy, the boxes are elevated above the ground in the middle of a sloped wall, like the palace of Siena, or upper porches, or balconies, as at the Doge's Palace in Venice. In Germany, not only public buildings are lined with bretèches but palaces; private homes almost always have a multi-storey gatehouse, so a projecting half turret is often placed above the door. At Nuremberg, Innsbruck, Augsburg, and Prague, the houses of the 14th, 15th and 16th centuries all have one or more closed bretèches at their front, which allows one to remain covered and see everything that is happening on the street. In France, bretèches particularly affected the form of turrets, and were then placed preferably at the corners of buildings.''
—Viollet-le-Duc, Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle, 1854-1868.
Late 15th century Luxeuil city hall, France. No longer a wooden add-on, the breteche is now a permanent stone component of the clty'sprlnciple civic building.
PAGE 28	BALCONY
JHAROKA:
DIVINE BALCONIES IN INDIA'S MUGHAL PALACES
During the Mughal Empire, Akbar the Great (1542-1605) transforms the pre-Mughal Hindu ritual of greeting the sun into a daily ceremony of greeting the Islamic ruler.
The shah's balcony, called a jharoka, positions the emperor closer to the heavens, allowing his subjects to simultaneously greet "the sky-adorning sun and the world-conquering Emperor." The jharoka is crucial for the ceremony itself, called Jharoka-i Darshan, and for conveying the emperor's supernatural power. Even when empty, it implies his enduring presence.
In his Padshahnama (1648), Abdul Hamid Lahori, chronicler of Mughal history in the time of Shah Jahan, describes the emperor's balcony appearance:
"About two or three gharis after sunrise, the mercy crowned monarch appears at the palace window which is called in the Hindustani language the Jharoka-i Darshan [Balcony for Viewing], Upon His Majesty's appearance, the assembled masses in the plane beneath the window perform their obeisance and all their temporal and spiritual desires are gratified ... The object of the institution of this mode of audience, which originated with the late Emperor Akbar, was to enable His Majesty's subjects to witness the simultaneous appearance of the sky-adorning sun and the world-conquering Emperor, and thereby receive without any obstacle or hindrance the blessing of both luminaries. By their presence in this space ... the harassed and oppressed of the population may freely represent their wants and desires."
1657 Illuminations from Lahori's Padshahnama suggest the modest height of the jharoka, keeping the ruler only just out of reach of his subjects. Below the balcony hangs a bell which subjects ring to request his attention.
J
BALCONY
PAGE 29
Yhe Jharoka-i Darshan (Balcony for Viewing),
; a requisite element in ' ny palace designated for the Shah's appearance, a symbol of his omnipresence throughout the empire.

ca. 1727-1734 Darokha ca. 1628-1645 Jharoka from at Rajasthan City	Diwan-i 'Am, Lahore, Pakistan.
Palace, Jaipur.
ca. 1559 Peacock Courtyard of City Palace complex, Udaipur, India.
1500-1599 Balcony of Man Mandir, Varanasi.
1 "In 1611, [Emperor] Jahangir complained that amirs on the borders were behaving as if they were rulers, and to a discourage it he banned a number of practices considered imperial prerogatives. Prohibited first was the use of the jharoka, followed by bans on the salutation of amirs by officers, prostration before amirs, and holding elephant fights, among other things ... Despite Jahangir's order two independent sources report that Islam Khan, the governor of Bengal, introduced the practice of jharoika. One ... wrote, 'He carried the customs of high office (tiuzuk-i amarat) to such a high pitch that he used the jharoka for
exhibiting himself to the high and low ... which ... [is] ... fitting only for kings.' This is confirmed by a rare eyewitness account of an officer, Mirza Nathan, who served under Islam Khan. Mirza Nathan recounts that Islam Khan erected a jharoka consisting of a small pavilion resting on a 'platform higher than the height of two men.' He notes that paying homage to the governor Islam Khan became mandatory, and when some of his officers refused they were imprisoned."
—Catherine B. Asher, "Sub-Imperial Palaces: Power and Authority in Mughal India," Ars Orientalis, 1993.
I ca. 1638-1648 At
Delhi's Red Fort, elite members of the court are allowed an audience I with the Shah at his ■ second, more private j jharoka (right), in the I inner court. The inno-I vation is expanded by I Jahan, whose palaces ■elude both a diwan-i 'am (public reception hall) and a diwan-i khass (private reception hall).
END OF THE JHAROKA
Between 1659 and 1670, Shah Jahan's son Aurangzeb outlaws practices of imperial glorification - including the practice of Jharoka-i Darshan. Because of its roots in Hindu ritual, the sun-greeting ceremony is deemed unacceptable for a Muslim ruler. (Aziz Ahmad, Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment, 1999.)
PAGE 30
BALCONY
IMPERIAL APPROPRIATION
During the colonial period, British monarchs rediscover the jharoka, using it three times over the course of their rule to symbolize authority before the people. The most extravagant is the Delhi Durbar of 1911, when George V and Queen Mary visit India for a month of processions and public appearances, and declare that India's capital will shift from Kolkata to Delhi.
1911 Plasticity of the balcony: the jharoka, originally used by Islamic shahs to assert divine authority, Is taken up by Britain's King George V and Queen Mary for a spectacle of colonial rule.
1911 Postcard of King George V and Queen Mary's appearance at the jharoka of Shah Jahan's Red Fort, Delhi. The balcony proves more durable than the empires that make use of it.
PAGE 32
BALCONY
NAMES OF THE MASHRABIYA
Shielded from view but offering access to air, providing shade but also the ability to see the street without being seen, the mashrabiya is an in-between version of an in-between element.
"According to the Encyclopedia of Islam, mashrabiy'ya 'designates a technique of turned wood used to produce lattice-like panels ... to adorn the windows in traditional domestic architecture.' The term itself has become associated with lattice windows in Egypt, although it is referred to differently depending on locale: it is known in Yemen as takhrima (that which is full of holes), in Tunis as barmaqli, and in Algeria it is primarily associated with Ottoman/Turkish architecture. In Iraq, such devices are referred to as shamashil, which are wooden, boxed screens supported on brackets with a projecting, shading cornice.
In Deddah, Saudi Arabia, a mashrabiy'ya is known as rowshin, which in its simplest form is a framework with panel infill but without carving."
—Bechir Kenzari and Yasser Elsheshtawy, The Ambiguous Veil: On Transparency, the Mashrabiy'ya, and Architecture, (2003).
1890s Mashrabiyas of Lahore, both projecting into the street and perfectly shielded from it. Upper right: two boys peek from an openable hatch. Middle left: figure visible.
BALCONY
PAGE 33
2014	Modem mashrabiyas: on a street devoid of pedestrians, their original shielding function becomes almost moot. (Photographed by Wolfgang Tillmans in his Book for architects.)

Convento de Santa Catalina, Santa Cruz de Tenerife.
Moorish,
Lima.
Moorish, Cuzco, Peru.	Moorish, Potosí, Bolivia

PAGE 34	BALCONY
MASHRABIYA DIASPORA
The Umayyad Caliphate (651-750) spreads the mashrabiya throughout its empire; so do the Ottomans later on, and then so does Spain, which finds it appropriate to the tropical cities of its colonies in the New World. Despite its origins as a specifically Islamic architecture, the genius of the mashrabiya - offering sight unseen, air but not exposure - means it can to flourish anywhere, under different systems and different names...

New

Spain
16th
Centu
ca
Moorish, Trujillo, Peru.
House in Li Candelaria Bogota.
Casa Colon, Las Palmas, Gran Canaria.

BALCONY
PAGE 35
Barmaqli / Moucharabieh, Tozeur, Tunisia.
Muxrabija,
Valletta,
Malta.
Shanasheel / shanashil / shanshil Baghdad.
Ottoman Empire . century^
rritory
Rawshn, Deddah,
Cairo
Massawa, Eritrea.	Zanzibar, Madagascar. Takhrima, Mocha,
Yemen.
PAGE 36
BALCONY
PERUVIAN CONQUEST
The multiple descriptors assigned to Lima's balconies -colonial, Moorish, limeña - reflect the amalgamation of styles transmitted across continents over centuries. Territories of Spain are ruled by Islamic dynasties from 711 AD until the start of the Inquisition in 1478. As Christian forces conquer Spain, Muslims are known as mudejares, meaning "those permitted to stay." Mudejares are made vassals to the new Christian monarchs and famed as the most talented craftsmen in Spain, and subsequently New Spain. By the 13th century, the word mudejar also comes to mean a style of design and craft drawing on Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Baroque, and Islamic Nasrid influences. The conquest of the New World brings the mudejar style to a new continent, where its Islamic roots are further diluted in a new Christian-Baroque Latin context. A wooden balcony resembling the mashrabiya found throughout the Arab world becomes popular in residential and official buildings across Peru. Lima in particular is known for its flair for balconies, a reputation that persists into the 20th century when the 1929 Pabellón del Peru at the Exposición Iberoamericana de Sevilla showcases a Balcon Limeña.
1730 Torre Tagle Palacio, Lima.
1929 Pabellón del Perú of the Exposición Iberoamericana de Sevilla, Seville. Exported from Spain, the mashrabiya returns as an exotic import.
BALCONY
PAGE 37
ca. 1860Tapada by Johann Moritz Rugendas, a German painter known for his "ethnographic" paintings.
ca. 1860 The Tapada of Lima, photographed by local street studios.
1860 Street of mashrabiyas: Calle Mercaderes, Lima.
WEARBALE MASHRABIYA / "PORTABLE HOUSE"
Islamic Influence pervades other customs In colonial Spain: illustrated in paintings, poetry, and literature are the mysterious tapada, or veiled women, of Lima. Although its origins in the hijab are disputed, the veil of the tapadas is commonly assumed to be at least partially a result of Spain's Islamic history. The affectation of revealing one eye is regarded by colonial lawmakers as overtly seductive and potentially deceptive, both traits that are qualified as "offenses to God." As a consequence, the tapada is banned in 1590. León Pinelo's 1641 text Velos antiguos y modernos en los rostros de las mujer suggests how ideals of femininity are associated with the mashrabiya, with its enclosed freedom:
"Man always walks on the bright and on the public; the woman always on the dark, enclosed at home and closer to the night. Then, if this is her shape, she goes completely covered, because on all of her the attention is the same, completely consecrated to retire, dedicated to the silence.
If she goes out of the house, she must be covered by the shadows of the night, by the black veils that symbolize her, as the walls are not keeping her any more. The saints ask why in the formation of Eve the Holy Ghost used that sentence, 'the rib that took from Adam, God made it into a woman'; and it is common sense and understood that the woman is house, and like this^ie should be fugd, so^^ doesn't walk and move freely, and ifvshelgoes S'dtiit shoilld be like a portable house: fenced, closed, and coveretS^B —Antonio de León, Velos Antímos i mH/emos en lost rostros de las mugeres, sus conuenier^ps i daños, 1w|^r
PAGE 38	BALCONY
OUTLAWED: BRAZIL'S MUXARABI
Arabic influence, transmitted through Portuguese colonialists, takes hold in the dense lattices of the muxarabi - before the Portuguese rulers themselves turn against it as an obstacle to Europeanization, a dangerous device for public seduction, and even a potential hide-out for revolutionaries...
"Until the 19th century it was common for houses with one or more floors to have a type of balcony from which you could see what was happening on the street without being seen. These were the muxarabis, also known as gelosias, whose main objective was to safeguard women of the house from the gaze of people from the street. This custom was inherited from the Arabs. In his Efemérides Brasileiras, the Baron of Rio Branco reported that 'the Rio de Janeiro of colonial times had the appearance of a city of the East.'
"When the royal family arrived in 1808, they quickly promoted a 'reeuropeizapao' [re-Europeanization] of Brazil. One of the first steps of Joao VI was to create the Quartermaster General of Police of the Court and the State of Brazil. The office of Quartermaster General of the new institution was entrusted to a Brazilian, the judge and ombudsman Paulo Fernandes Viana.
The broad mandate of the Superintendent - a sort of mayor - included a zeal for cleanliness, health and safety. Viana took his position and handed down an edict on June 11, 1809, ordering the muxarabis to be removed within eight days and replaced with wrought iron or wooden balustrades.
"With the end of these patriarchal cloisters, women were free to do something unthinkable in the time of muxarabis: flirt through the window. The mogas janeleiras [window girls], as they became known, emerged in the mid 19th century. Discrete and delicate, they communicated with suitors through flowers. A white rose button hinted that the girl wanted marriage. Marigold denoted suffering, sorrow. The scarlet dahlia meant 'you're marvelous.' Forget-Me-Nots, 'do not forget me.' Carnation, 'I cannot do it anymore.' Pansy, 'I exist only for you.' White carnation, 'hope for an answer.' A fragrant rose bud, 'I only have eyes for you.' A lot of florists are required for all this love."
—Adolfo Morales de los Rios Filho, O Rio de Janeiro imperial, 2000.
"Today there are very few examples of muxarabis left. The arrival of the Portuguese Court was a death blow for them. Officially, it was claimed that the country was losing its colonial air, and needed to assimilate new European trends, i.e. Neoclassicism, which prohibited the 'spurious' influence of Arab architecture, permitting only the Greco-Roman tradition. It is said, however, that the Prince Regent was afraid of possible attacks against himself and members of the court that could be camouflaged by the trellises. The truth is that the operation begun by quartermaster Paulo Fernandes Viana had a devastating impact on the muxarabis. In Rio de Janeiro there remained none. 'The impression was that they had stripped their homes to their underwear.'" —Silvio Colin, "Técnicas construtivas do período colonial," Coisas da Arquitetura blog, September 6, 2010.
Paulo Fernandes Viana, 1758-1821, responsible for banning the muxarabi in Brazil.
18th century Sao Paulo muxarabi design by_
A. Pachecho (from Dosé Mariano Filho, Influencias musulmanas na arquitetura tradicional brasileira).
BALCONY
PAGE 39
2014 Only remaining muxarabi in former Portuguese city of Olinda, northeastern Brazil, after they are outlawed in the early 19th century. Still a stage for politics today: graffiti below the muxarabi says "Raising the price of public transport is theft" and "World Cup, go to shit."
PAGE 40	BALCONY
THE LONELINESS OF THE BEAUTY RAILING
China's Beauty Railing - the railed-off balcony found in the upper floors of traditional Chinese homes - is also known as Xi Shi Railing and King of Wu's Railing, after its emergence during the Wu Dynasty, 495-473 BC. The king's enemy Goujian gifts the King of Wu a young woman named Xi Shi, one of the four beauties of Ancient China, in an attempt to distract him from the affairs of the nation. Falling in love, the king constructs an array of gardens and buildings for the two of them to enjoy together, creating the railing as a place for the couple to relax.
In beauty railing iconography, girls or young women confined to the domestic space lean and preen against the railing, longing for a man, or for the outside world.
The trope peaks during the Song Dynasty (960-1279), when poets are inspired by their visits to courtesans, and sometimes adopt a female voice to write of loneliness and the solace sought at the balcony. Female Song poets such as Qingzhao Li, Shuzhen Zhu, Yuniang Zhang, Lady Wei, and Lady Yanrui portray the beauty railing as an escape from confined living quarters, where their movements are restricted.
Qing and Ming Dynasties Beauty railing in Huizhou's traditional residential buildings.
1368 Beauty railing balcony, Liken, Wuyuan, Diangxi.
Tz'u No. 6 (Waiting For You) by Qingzhao Li
Lonely in my secluded chamber,
A thousand sorrows fill every inch of my sensitive being.
Regretting that spring has so soon passed,
That rain drops have hastened the falling flowers,
I lean over the balustrade,
Weary and depressed.
Where is my beloved?
Only the fading grassland stretches endlessly toward the horizon;
Anxiously I watch the road for your return.
1890 Muqiao Zhou, The Long Invasion, published in Feiyingge Huabao. A print depicts a prostitute in old Shanghai using a telescope to view the city from the balcony.
BALCONY
PAGE 41
2013 Miao Girls in costume, standing on the balcony during the Dragon Ship Festival, Guizhou, China.
"[T]here are four to five square meters of space in the entrance of the building's main hall, where a rectangular wood chair with an S-shaped or curved railing is installed on the outside edge of the space, named 'ganxi' in the Miao language, and 'beauty railing' in Chinese. This is a symbol of the traditional residential architecture in the southeast areas of Guizhou. In everyday life, the balcony will be the resting place for the people after working in the field. During the good weather of a full-moon night in the summer, it will be the place to view the moon and stars and to take in the view while leaning on the railing. During rain or spare time, women will do sewing work at the balcony. When there are guests in the house, they will be first brought to rest at the balcony to view the beautiful landscape of the village. If there is free land, the owner of the house sometimes plants fruit trees or bamboo under the 'ganxi,' to bring good smells to the space."
—Dingfa Pan, vice president of the Miao Research Group in Leishan Town, "The Interpretation of Diaojiaolou in Qianhu Miao Village at Xijiang," Shanxiang Wenxue 5,
2011.
ca. 1929 Actress Linyu Ruan poses at the beauty railing.
PAGE 42
BALCONY
THE BALCONY SCENE
No work of literature is so intimately tied to an element of architecture as Romeo and Juliet is with the balcony. Yet Shakespeare didn't place Iluliet on a balcony, but at a window. In Verona, tourists swarm an attraction known as the House of the Capulets, a villa declared to be Duliet's home around 300 years after the play is written, when it was purchased by concerned citizens looking to preserve the (fictional) heritage of the city.
Before "Juliet's Villa," Verona, no singular balcony.
After Transformation to "Juliet's Villa" includes more than just the addition of a stone balcony - it comes with a whole Rennaissance makeover.
"Then came the vexing question of the balcony. 'Romeo and Duliet' simply would not be 'Romeo and Duliet' without the balcony even though Shakespeare's text refers only to 'Duliet at the window above' after Romeo vaults over a wall into the Capulets' orchard. The only problem was that the house on Via Cappello did not have a balcony until the 1920s, when, according to Mr. Tamassia, one was taken from another building on the same period and affixed to 'Duliet's villa.' Even Duliet's tomb is said by some to have been constructed from a horse trough."
—Alan Cowell, "Verona Dournal; Dear Duliet: Let Me Tell You About My Problem," New York Times, March 15, 1993.

BALCONY
PAGE 43
1936 Romeo and Juliet, directed by George Cukor.
1871 Romeo and Juliet, by Ford Madox Brown.
1968 Romeo and Juliet, directed by Franco Zeffirelli
1996 Romeo and Juliet, directed by Baz Luhrmann.
L
PAGE 44	BALCONY
THE VENETIAN ALTANA
During carnival and religious ceremonies, the Venetian army performs fake battles - with real violence - on bridges throughout the city. Known as guerra di bastoni, or war of sticks, soldiers beat each other to show off their combat skills. With the narrow streets crammed with citizens desperate for a good view, those living along the canal spot a business opportunity: they take to renting out their wooden rooftop balconies - altanas - to those who wanted a good view of the action. Altanas soon flourish throughout the densely packed city where overlooks are otherwise sorely lacking.
1494 Balcony scene: drama unfolds above the street in Vittore Carpaccio's II miracolo della reliquia della Santa Croce.
1610 Roof balcony - or altana - overlooks a bridge battle in Giacomo Franco's Guerra con le canne sul Ponte dei Carmini.
1550-1560 Matheo Pagano, Procession of the Doge on Palm Sunday.
BALCONY
PAGE 45
THE VENETIAN OPERA BOX
Around 1550, two patrician theater owners, Ettore Tron and Alvise Michiel, latch onto the balcony trend and incorporate ; viewing boxes - interior balconies - called palchi, into two new, though very short-lived, theaters. The convenient darkness and seclusion of the theatre balcony box makes The Ten' -the local Desuits empowered policing cultural events in the c|ty - nervous. They threaten to ban comedies at the theatres featuring balcony boxes if "the heads of this council cannot be assured with truth that all the boxes of the place are open at the rear, and crossed with wooden boards so that everyone who passes by can see inside these boxes ... and with further condition that the boxes have to be open day and night."
An ultimatum is issued: keep the candles lit and the privacy doors open or the theaters will be shut down. The alleged illicit behavior continues, and the theaters are ordered to close, and are subsequently demolished, their scraps given to charity. But it is too late to stop the balcony box: 15 years later, when the Tron family builds a new theater, it has fully operational balconies, which become standard in theatres everywhere...
ca. 1600-1670 Anonymous, Acrobats performing at the Commedia dell Aries.
1954 Boxes at La Fenice, the Venice Opera House.
1635 The box theater: Alfonso Chenda, Theater in Palazzo del Podesta.
PAGE 46
BALCONY
Late 15th century Chateau de Blois, Louis XII wing: Gothic balconies correspond with the apartments of the King and the Queen and allowed them to watch jousts and military tournaments.
J3AL.CONS	102	BalCOHS	103
1886 Selection of cast iron balconies from the catalogue of legendary Foundry of Val d'Osne, lauded for their work presented at the Great Exhibition in London 35 years previously.
BALCONY
PAGE 47
1755-1849 Antoine Chrysostome Quatremère de Quincy.
1.	Paul Amedee Planat, Encyclopédie De L'architecture Et De La Construction: Tables Du Texte Et Des Dessins (Paris: Aulanier et cie, 1892).
2.	Quatremère de Quincy, Dictionairre Historique de l'architecture, contenant dans son plan les notions historiques, descriptives, archéologiques. Biographiques, théoriques, didactiques et pratiques de cet art, 2 vols (Paris: Librarie d'Adrien LeClere, 1832).
3.	Ibid., 148-149.
4.	Ibid., 142-146.
5.	Ibid., 148-149. "Rien ne d'épare plus l'ordonnance des palais et des maisons que ces saillies presque toujours en porte a faux, dont une puérile hardiesse de construction semble tirer honneur. Rien ne gâte plus la forme des croisées 9ue cette longueur démesurée nécessaire a
I ouverture du balcon."
Paris, 19th century: La mode des balcons
Tom Avermaete
While the modern balcony exploded on the scene In early 19th century Paris - the new vistas of Haussmann's boulevards finding their perfect ally in the domestic projected viewing platform - It was not simply a newfangled element or mere fashion, as contemporary commentators would have it. The balcony in fact had an architectural pedigree, subjected to several stages of evolution described by Paul Amedee Planat in his 1892 Encydopédie de L‘Architecture et de la Construction:
"In the 15th century, artistic experiments made themselves felt in the balconies more than in any other part of architectural ornamentation. We find then the balcony under Gothic influence with chimeras, flowers, gargoyles; the Italian influence then appeared to simplify this, to replace the curves with straight lines. The Renaissance introduced into this construction of balconies a capricious freedom. We see the stone balcony of the transition period, not yet pierced, ornamented with two gargoyles at its corners, already with the straight support and squared edges of Italian art, as it appears at the Chateau of Blois in the so-called Louis XII wing. Then the gargoyles disappeared, the balustrade was perforated in complicated designs. Sometimes, and without doubt in memory of medieval days, long draperies with heavy folds were hung from the balustrade; but this time they were of stone. From the beginning of the 17th century caryatides frequently replaced brackets as supports for the balcony, and it took on the strong, powerful, rather cold aspect of the architecture of the time.''1
By the 19th century, balconies had changed not just in form but more importantly in number: the modern "mode des balcons" was, according to architectural historian Quatremére de Quincy, so severe that "there is no modern house that does not have several [balconies]."2 Popularization fundamentally changed the meaning of the balcony. In his Dictionnaire Historique d‘Architecture (1832), de Quincy describes the balcony as an intruder into architectural culture. Forgetting its history in more recent centuries, he claims: "Les anciens seem not to have used balconies, as separate protruding or applied elements at each window. The majority of their houses had little or no openings to the street. The window openings were high, so that they could not be used to look at the outside. ... The use of the balcony [is] of 'les peuples modernes."'3 (148-49.)
Because of its indeterminate status - "of its nature, independent of the main construction"4 - the balcony was a frivolous appendage, a "hors-d'oeuvre postiche" (false appetizer) for the building, for which "architecture is most often sacrificed, especially the exterior facades and the proportions of their details." The balcony was wrecking the Parisian facade: "Nothing disturbs more the order of palaces and houses then these projections that are almost always cantilevered and seem to take pride in a childish boldness of construction. Nothing spoils the form of the openings more than the inordinate length of the balcony ... These elements are foreign to good architecture."5 In what Planat would later describe as de Quincy's modern project "to create the body of a universal history of architectural notions of all times and countries," the balcony simply didn't fit...
PAGE 48
BALCONY
1880 View from a Balcony, Gustave Caillebotte, Impressionist known for depicting figures gazing onto Haussmann’s boulevards from its new balconies, here makes the balcony itself the subject.
BALCONY
PAGE 49
HAUSSMANN'S balconies
garon Haussmann's massive "renovation" of Paris, launched in 1853, creates new boulevards, parks, and squares, opening up vast new territory ripe for the balcony. Wide new boulevards provide prime real estate for surveying the panorama of modern life. In fact, this only accelerates a process already underway, as the balcony view, once reserved for aristocratic and regal architecture, becomes part of the world of the rising bourgeoisie and the buildings associated with it.
Haussmann's carved avenues call for balconied buildings from which to admir the elongated views.
1880 Casual spectacle: two Parisians idle on the balcony, by Caillebotte.
PAGE 50
BALCONY
Prefabricated cast iron balconies spanning a Haussmannian grey elephant
DAUTOMNE
Individual buildings qoyv serve a larger function: to ac^jentuate the avenue's vista.
-

BALCONY
PAGE 51
balconies
Wraparound decentralize to the horror
"A subtle hierarchy distinguishes the 'monsieur du premier' [man of the first floor] (above the shopkeeper's mezzanine), who had a balcony overlooking the avenue and a decorated living room, from the more and more modest tenants stacked up to the fourth floor - the tenant at the top floor paying a little less, for the inconvenience of being near the servants floor and having a five-story climb, but having the advantage of more air, more light, and a large balcony. Thus the class hierarchy inherited from the old regime is transposed without any interruption into the new social scale of the bourgeoisie.
"Following from this contradiction, the formal development of bourgeois architecture will be slower than the development of the class it concerns - this hierarchy of floors is present in many cases until the Second Empire. Nevertheless, the tendency towards equalization will be more important than these considerations of prestige and it will manifest itself by means of a curiously spontaneous evolution, from the very end of the Second Empire until the 1890s: the multiplication of balconies on various floors of the building - a multiplication so characteristic that it constitutes a reliable criterion for dating.
"On the one hand, the window with a sill will often be replaced by a French window with a balconnet - giving the illusion of the continuity between interior and exterior characteristic of the balcony. On the other hand, the partial balconies develop double or triple openings, with the added merit of indicating on the outside the position and importance of the reception rooms (the balcony is almost necessarily linked to the idea of reception), allowing for an axial composition of the facade, which makes it autonomous in comparison to its neighbors - but without affecting the regularity of the lines' general organization (this system is certainly the origin of the development of the enclosed balcony -the bow window - which replaces it after 1890)."
—François Loyer, Paris XIXe Siecle: L'Immeuble et la Rue, 1987, 138-139.

PAGE 52	BALCONY
READYMADES
Balcony catalogues, already available in 19th century France with ornamental railings available for pre-order, reappear in 21st century form in an online balcony emporium...
1886 Selection of cast Iron balconies from the catalogue of the Foundry of Val d'Osne, lauded for their work presented at the Great Exhibition in London 35 years previously.
BALCONY
PAGE 53
Iron Dove Queen Balcony
From: $757 to $2,396
SpanishyFrench Style, unique home jewel.
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6 "planter balcony Hue Bale onie s: 2 ft stand on platform,re ctamgular or curved Fits: 3* ,4*,5' and 6' doors or windows
Iron Lady Balcony
From: $1,245 to $2,551
Definitively En^ish Style, all solid forged iron
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6 "planter bale any Hue Balconies: 2 ft. stand on platform,re ctamgular or curve d Fits: 3',4',5' and 6' doors or windows
Iron Lady Baroque Balcony
From: $922 to $2,944
Medieval English/french, Great for your castle. All solid forgings and castings
7	EZ order system:
1.	Measure your window or door.
2.	Select your b alcony style and price range: Click on the picture to view p latfbzm options.
3.	Platform selection: Chckonplatform type: true or fake, rectangular or curved.
4.	Size selectionpage: 42",55", 67" and 80"
5.	E- commerce page: click up date price and
checkbalcony specs.
6.	Add your choice ofaccessoriesfcolors.
7.	ORDER Y OUR BALC ONY
Light Iron Dove Balcony
From: $639 to $2,208
We accept aflp ayment typ es.
You will recewe ymr balcony in about 4 weehs, depending onproduction foie
Ws.dfl msh aiders; «me models might be in
stock.
Iron Knuckle Balcony
From: $548 to $1,656
Mediterranean style with grapes castings and li^it belly.
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6 "planter balcony True Balconies: 2 ft stand on platform, rectangular or cuiv Fits: 3',4',5' and 6' doors or windows
Plain Picket Balcony
Spanish/Mexican style, g^eatfor most architectural styles
From: $545 to $1,349
American "old school", with a roman touc
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6" planter balcony Hue Balconies: 2 ft stand an platform,rectangular or curved Fis: 3', 4', 5' andô'doors or windows
Pot Belly Balcony
From: $600 to $1,815
Spanish^outh American style, goes well on a small house as well in a mansion.
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6" planter balcony
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 611 planter balcony True Balconies: 2 ft stand on platform, rectangular or cuiv Fits: 3', 4', 5' and 6' doors or windows
Ring Band Balcony
From: $591 to $1,734
Contemporary with a touch of tradition. American we would say.
False Balconies: 3 inch no base and 6 "planter balcony
2013 Selection of wrought iron balconies available for purchase online. Includes models that are "great for your castle" or "a small house."
PAGE 54
BALCONY
THE SANITORIUM CRAZE 1854 With no known cure for tuberculosis, the consumptive botanist Herman Brehmer travels to the Himalayas with a hunch that the altitude would increase his heart rate and help his lungs expunge the disease. He recovers, proselytizes in his medical doctoral thesis, "Tuberculosis is curable," then establishes the world's first sanitorium in Görbersdorf, Germany. Nestled among the fir trees in the Waldenburg range near the Austrian border, the Brehmersche Heilanstalt für Lungenkranke triggers the sanitorium movement that would sweep across Europe and North America. Balconies are what make a sanitorium a sanitorium - introducing the fresh air and permeability into solid, heavy western institutional architecture.
"Brehmer advocated high altitude ([Gorbersdorf] is at 518 meters), abundant diet with some alcohol, and exercise in the open air under strict medical supervision. The results were regarded as highly successful, surpassing any previous treatment."
— O.R. McCarthy, "The key to the sanatoria," Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, August 2001).
Consumptive patients taking their daily cure on the balconies of Gorbersdorf. Sanitorium architecture blurs the line between inside and outside, with beds and lounge chairs brought onto balconies and porches (the chaise lounge is invented for the purpose).
BALCONY
PAGE 55
THE PROGRESS OF THE SANATORIUM TREATMENT OF CONSUMPTION IN ENGLAND.
By Jane H. Walker, M.D.,
1899 Schatzalp Hotel, Switzerland, with indented balconies, shielded from the wind.
The sanatorium treatment of consumption is after all a system of elaborated common sense, applied to a long and tedion° illness, and for it to be a success all the factors which make up the convenient term “hygiene” must be introduced: a permanent supply of fresh air, a large quantity of nourishing and digestible food, carefully regulated exercise and rest, and the removal of all causes of worry and anxiety. The medical element is, of course, paramount, and the medical attendant must be of a particularly hopeful and cheerful disposition, and be capable of communicating his hopefulness to his patients. Still, after all, it is but a human agency, and as such, cannot be expected to work miracles. If I may venture to say so, Mr. Gibson’s articles, good and useful as they were in educating public opinion, erred very much in the direction of leading the public to suppose that in the open-air treatment is to be found acertain cure for all cases of phthisis, and they gave false hopefulness to many. People in practically a dying condition came to Nordrach from Australia and many other distant parts, on the strength of those articles, and the mortality was considerably increased, and there was thereby some danger of bringing discredit on the whole sanatorium movement.
The sanatorium treatment is capable of still further expansion. For example, children of tuberculous parents, whose physical resistance is presumably below par, might very usefully spend some time in a suitable sanatorium, from prophylactic considerations. There should be sanatoria for children who are definitely tuberculous, and with these should be combined some arrangements for education for those who are able to avail themselves of them. The cure of tuberculosis in growing children is a far slower process than in people whose growth is completed.
What I may call for brevity “maternity sanatoria” might be formed with great advantage to the community. By this I
September 29, 1900
A medical consensus builds: following the Lancets finding that the "open air method" is the only successful medical treatment for tuberculosis, the following year The British Medical Journal also endorses the sanito-rium, which is "after all a system of elaborated common sense," requiring most importantly " a permanent supply of fresh air."
PAGE 56	BALCONY
DAVOS & THE MAGIC BALCONY
Whereas tuberculosis is disproportionately a disease of poverty, caused by its stifling, confined indoor conditions (anti-tuberculosis publicity slogans urge the vulnerable to "always sleep with the window open"), apparently the only effective cure is mainly available to the rich. In Thomas Mann's 1924 novel, Magic Mountain, the protagonist is cloistered high in the alps in a luxurious sanitorium. Feigning sickness, Hans Castorp moves through the prescribed activities, taking mild exercise and plenty of fresh air. His colleagues at the sanitorium take to their deck chairs, arranged outside, usually on balconies, where they sit, even in snow storms, encased in heavy blankets for hours, day after day taking their jour médical. (Mann has personal experience with alpine sanitariums: his wife, Katia, recuperated from tuberculosis in Davos in 1907.) Europe's center of sanitariums is the Swiss mountain resort of Davos, where several countries subsidize their own heavily balconied institutions to rehabilitate their nation's sick...
"Hans Castorp stayed out on his balcony, looking down on the bewitched valley until late into the night... His splendid lounge chair with its three cushions and neck roll had been pulled up close to the wooden railing topped along its full length by a little pillow of snow; on the white tablé at his side stood a lighted electric lamp, a pile of books, and a glass of creamy milk, the 'evening milk' that was served to all the residents of the Berghof in their rooms each night and into which Hans Castorp would pour a shot of cognac to make it more palatable."
—Thomas Mann, The Magic Mountain, 1924.
ca. 1912 Thomas Mann snaps a photo of the balcony, equipped with day bed for extended exposure to the elements, at Waldsanatorium Arosa, Davos, where his wife is treated for tuberculosis.
WALDSANATORIUM AROSA
BALCONY
PAGE 57
1913 Beau-Site Sanitarium: classic Swiss Alpine architecture, with the addition of wooden balconies and loggias.
"Most of the new hotels and all of the sanitoriums are now built facing due south and in a slightly circular form, to avoid all possibilities of breezes and draughts. Each room is provided with an enclosed balcony almost as large as the room itself, and here the patients rest and breathe the pure, clear mountain air as many hours per day as possible. Whether the weather be good or bad out-of-doors they must remain. Tables, electric bells, and electric lights are now installed on the balconies, so that even the evenings may be pleasantly passed there, and many a game of cards is played in winter by the patients long after the sun has set and with the thermometer far below the freezing point, the players clad in furs from head to foot."
—"SEEK HEALTH IN ALPS: Thousands with Weak Lungs Take Cure at Davos. CHANGE FROM OLD METHODS Famous Swiss Resort Where Consumptives Sit Out on the Balconies During the Bitter Cold of Winter," The Washington Post, May 18, 1902.
1907 Queen Alexandra, Davos, with canopied balconies (indented in form rather than projecting) and roof pavilion/ terrace.
1918	Deutsche Krieger Kurhaus, run by the Society for the Care of German Soldiers in Switzerland, recuperating after the First World War. (Formerly the Sanitarium Valbella Dr. Philippi, and founded in 1880.)
'907 Holland House: as if peering from a cruise ship, patients crowd the balconies of the new extension, built with funds from the Society for promoting the Interests of Chronically III Dutch 'wth Limited Means (founded in 1887).
PAVOS: SANITORIUM CITY
PAGE 58
BALCONY
1942 Consumptive patients take their daily cure on the balconies of Hochgebirgsklinik, Davos.
FROM DAVOS...
BALCONY
PAGE 59
T0 DENVER
1920 Open air treatment spreads to the US, where Colorado becomes known as the "World's Sanitarium," with one third of the state's population visiting facilities such as the Bethesda Sanitarium, Denver, to seek treatment for tuberculosis.
PAGE 60	BALCONY
THE BALCONIED HOSPITAL
The medical establishment begins to treat other illnesses with climatic therapy. Doctors advocate for the inclusion of private balconies in new hospital construction, with maternity wards especially encouraged to provide newborns with as much fresh air as possible.
1902 Belgrave Hospital, children's ward, London.
Balconies for children and babies,
Great Ormond Street Hospital, London.
1900 "There is also designed to be on this ffo a babies' ward, with an open balcony lookino ' 1 onto Clapham Road."
BALCONY
PAGE 61
rfE WINDOW TENT
the sick do not have the means i retreat to the fresh air of the iountains or countryside, and if their ome is not equipped with a balcony, ie window tent draws fresh air into a ubble over the bed while keeping the 3om for the most part insulated.
1907 W.E. Walsh's patent for the Window Tent: "It is obvious that [fresh air] treatment can only be supplied to those who are enabled to leave the more congested portions of the city and spend their lives in the suburbs or the country or in some spot where it is possible to pitch a tent and obtain the necessary fresh air. In the tenement and more crowded districts of cities where no yards are provided it is ordinarily impossible for the patient to find space in which to rear a tent or shed ... The objective of the present invention is to provide a ventilating-box or window tent which is adapted to provide for the patient substantially the same conditions [as] open-air life in a tent or shed and without many of [the] inconveniences incident to living in this manner."
Window tent, retracted.
1909 Another type of window tent in use, exposing the consumptive patient to fresh air while quarantining him from other members of the household. "The tent is placed in the lower half of an American window, but it doesnoKiuitefillthe lower hal^tf the frang; a s|race of about three
room." "Tuberculosis: a treatise ■Knerican authors on i s etiology,
PAGE 62
BALCONY
Writing in Dr. Lovell's weekly column for the Los Angeles Times, "Care of body," Neutra explains, "Our high mechanical development easily controls our living conditions. Our knowledge about our own bodies releases us from slavery and Nature becomes a friend. The house and dress of the future will give us control of our environment, without interfering with our mental and physical nakedness. Our rooms will descend close to the ground and the garden will become part of the house. The distinction between indoors and out-of-doors will disappear... He will sleep in the open.


FROM HEALTH TO WELLNESS
In 1920s America, the benefits of the sanitarium are imported by architects originating in Europe into the design of private homes for the wealthy. When Dr. Lovell commissions houses by Richard Neutra and Rudolph Schindler, he stipulates that the houses be built with "sleeping balconies," partially shielded loggias.
sleeping balcony
1923-26 Rudolph
Schin
House, hjewport Beicl., mk I
■HHK	anI
1927-29 Richjgffil Neutra's LadeH House, -Hollywoj® Hills.

BALCONY
PAGE 63
PAGE 64
BALCONY
THE POLITICAL BALCONY
Balconies themselves are apolitical and need activation to be politicized. Dedicating a building for church use, as was the case for the Palazzo Venezia, is one way. (The Palace was a Papal residence off and on beginning in 1451.) The Palazzo's balcony becomes famous though as Mussolini's platform. It is from this balcony that on Dune 10, 1940 he declares war against France and Britain in front of a large crowd. After the war, the balcony is an embarrassment; only in 2011 is it reopened to the public after being kept off limits for decades. Renovation of the building's facade restores the long neglected projection, which connects directly to II Duce's former office.
■
"Fighters of the land, the sea and the air, Blackshirts of the revolution and of the legions; men and women of Italy, of the Empire, and of the kingdom of Albania: Listen! An hour marked out by destiny has struck in the heavens of our Fatherland. This is the hour of irrevocable decisions. The declaration of war has already been delivered to the ambassadors of Great Britain and France. We go to battle against the plutocratic and reactionary democracies of the West who at every moment have hindered the advance and have often endangered the very existence of the Italian people..."
—Benito Mussolini, Dune 10, 1940.
PAGE 66
1937 Marcello Plancentinl shows Mussolini how the new masterplan will frame the view of St. Peter's from Via della Concillazlone.
MUSSOLINI PERFECTS THE POPE'S VIEW
At the height of fascism, under the supervision of both Benito Mussolini and the Vatican, architects Attilio Spaccarelli and Marcello Piacentini design and oversee the creation of Via della Conciliazione, demolishing parts of the medieval district that fronts Gian Lorenzo Bernini's famed piazza, to clear a straight shot to the Tiber. Much of the debate about Mussolini's controversial plan to "free the majestic temples of Christian Rome from the parasitic and profane constructions" of later eras centers on whether it violates Bernini's original intention to make the piazza a comfortable enclosure rather than the launchpad for a long vista, best viewed by the pope from his balcony.
ca. 1910 View of St. Peter's from Via della Conciliazione.
1748 St. Peter's and neighboring Borgo district.
BALCONY
PAGE 67
2010 Pope Benedict XI conducts urbi et orbi.
BALCONY BLESSING
Every Christmas and Easter, the Pope delivers the Apostolic blessing known as "Urbi et Orbi" (to the city and the world) from the balcony of St. Peter's, overlooking St. Peter's Square. The balcony's religious symbolism is supercharged by its political enabling 80 years previously...
ca. 1936-1950 Cleared view of St. Peter's.
at . o	;	w—
1936 Spaccarelli and Piacentini's fascist-era clearance.
PAGE 68	BALCONY
BALCONIES FOR THE REVOLUTION
Fascism, revolution, independence, homecoming, alliance, coronation... whatever the event, the century's greatest eruptions are all registered with strikingly similar scenes of ultimate triumph on the balcony - the element that marries the theatrical and the political...
1953 After his death, Stalin joins Lenin in the mausoleum, now made of concrete and clad in stone, with a larger tribune.
1904-06 Mansion of Mathilde Kshesinskaia: depicted In a socialist realist painting (already embracing the leader-on-the-balcony motif), Lenin address the revolutionary crowd below.
"From the palace balcony, above which waved the impressive banner of the Central Committee, orators carried on a continuous mass meeting, not only by day but by night. Often out of the darkness some military detachment would approach the building, or some crowd of workers with a demand for an orator. Accidental groups of citizens would also stop before the balcony, their curiosity aroused by some uproar in the newspapers. During the critical days, hostile manifestations would draw near to the building for a time, demanding the arrest of Lenin and the driving out of the Bolsheviks. Under the streams of people flowing past the palace one felt the seething depths of the revolution. The house of Kshesinskaia reached its apogee in the Duly Days. 'The chief headquarters of the movement,' says Miliukov, 'was not the Tauride Palace, but Lenin's citadel, the house of Kshesinskaia with its classic balcony.'"
—Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, 1930.
1926 Next phase: Doseph Stalin, on the tribune of Lenin's provisional wooden mausoleum, Moscow.
Mansion of Mathilde Kshesinskaia, a prima ballerina romantically involved with Czar Nicholas II. Shortly before the October Revolution the house is occupied by the Bolshevik Central Committee; the balcony becomes a political focal point for public gatherings.
BALCONY
PAGE 69
1920 All balcony, no building: El Llssitzky proposes to elevate Lenin over the masses by means of a sculptural cantilever, simply removing the building that would theoretically stand behind it. In the Russian revolution, the balcony is freed from its domestic anchoring and thrust into dynamic public square.
As high as he gets: Lenin addresses Red Army troops from a wooden tribune on Moscow's Sverlag Square.
PAGE 70	BALCONY
GERMANY'S DUELING BALCONIES
The abdication of the Kaiser in the chaos of defeat at the end of the First World War yields one of history's most famous balcony battles. Social Democrat Philipp Scheidemann gets wind that revolutionary Karl Liebknecht intends to declare Germany a socialist republic. Preempting him, Scheidemann - in defiance of his own party - makes a speech from the Reichstag: "The old and rotten, the monarchy has collapsed. The new may live. Long live the German Republic!" Less than two kilometers away, Liebknecht makes a competing revolutionary proclamation for the masses. Dual balconies set the stage for an actual political duel...
1914 Prologue: Kaiser Wilhelm II visits Prince William, Potsdam.
November 9,1918 Philipp Scheidemann declares Germany a Republic from a balcony of the Reichstag.
November 9,1918 Karl Liebknecht declares Germany a Socialist Republic from the balcony of the Stadtschloss.
"Tens of thousands of Berlin workers massed in front of the building; Scheidemann spoke from a balcony and tried to preach calm, but he then yielded to the shouting, and made the decision to proclaim the Republic - an almost revolutionary initiative for which Ebert was to criticize him sharply. A little later, at the Imperial Palace, Liebknecht, who had already been speaking from the roof of a motor car, had the 'German Socialist Republic' proclaimed by acclimation. Then he went on to the balcony of the dwelling-place of the Hohenzollerns and announced:
'The rule of capitalism, which turned Europe into a cemetery, Is henceforward broken. We remember our Russian brothers. They told us when they left: 'If within a month you haven't done as we did, we shall break with you.' It only took four days. We must not imagine that our task is ended because the past is dead. We now have to strain our strength to construct the workers' and soldiers' government and a new proletarian state, a state of peace, joy and freedom for our German brothers and our brothers throughout the whole world. We stretch out our hands to them, and call on them to carry to completion the world revolution. Those of you who want to see the free German Socialist Republic and the German Revolution, raise your hands!'
A forest of arms was raised."
—Pierre Broue, The German Revolution: 1917-1923 (1971).
BALCONY
PAGE 71
1947 Ruins of the Stadtschloss. In the wake of the Second World War, Liebknecht's balcony remains although there is little left behind the facade it is attached to - the dangling remains of revolutionary aspirations.
1988 At the tail end of communism, a bronze relief depicts Liebknecht's famous balcony speech, installed in the Neuer Marstall (New Stables), an imperial building restored by the GDR. Llebknecht now floats In mid air, with no actual balcony to support him.
1962 Socialist postmodern: after the rise of the Iron Curtain, the GDR's new Council of State recreates the Stadtschloss facade with parts of the original balcony as the"Karl Liebknecht Portal" on an otherwise modern building.
[!
PAGE 72	BALCONY
IL DUCE'S ARENGARIO
While Mussolini's urban renewal projects erase medieval portions of Italian cities in an attempt to restore classical greatness, one medieval typology is given new life: the arengario, which Mussolini resurrects in principle though not always in form...
1938 Mussolini on his Genoa arengario.
Marcello Piacentini (1881-1960) demolishes the medieval district of Brescia to make room for a modern city hall with a square for mass gatherings. In the process, he rediscovers the virtues of the arengario as a political platform.
1932 Arengario at Piazza della Vittoria, Brescia. The pulpit Piacentini conceives for II Duce is the work of sculptor Antonio Maraini. Made of Pin stone, it is covered in reliefs depicting scenes of Brescia's history.
BALCONY
PAGE 73
arengario in the colonies
The government has a number of go-to architects and urban planners relied upon to design and build colonial infrastructure abroad. Addis Ababa is remade to demonstrate the benefits of the new regime; other cities receive new government buildings (Including a number of Casa del Fascio), featuring a prominent arengario. The speaking platforms await the day that Mussolini will come to greet his colonial subjects. In most cases that day never arrives.
1924 In Libya, Benghazi's new city hall reflects a classical Italian style, with large balcony / loggia.
1937 Mussolini on the balcony of Benghazi's City Hall.
Asmara, Eritrea, by Bruno Scalfani.
1935 Casa del Fascio, Kos, Greece, by Armando Bernabiti.
1937 Casa Littorio, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia.

PAGE 74	BALCONY
RESISTING THE BALCONY...
For the Casa del Fascio in Como, Giuseppe Terragni resists exhortations from government officials to punctuate his modern facade with a signature balcony for Mussolini. Instead, Terragni builds a rationalist framework of open squares, all of equal size, without any symbolic hierarchy.
1932 Terragni's Casa del Fascio: all facade, no balcony (except for outdoor walkways).
1938 Lacking a singular balcony, propagandists do their best by decorating the Casa del Fascio's loggias to mark a visit by FHitler.
1939 In a gambit to keep the bureaucrats away from his facade, Terragni offers an arengado, rooted to the ground outside the building, pairing his rationalism with an ornate horse sculpture. The arengado is never built.
BALCONY
PAGE 75

..EMBRACING the balcony
In 1933- Terragni and his team submit a proposal for the Casa del Littorio in Rome, the planned headquarters for the National Fascist Party. This time, the facade is closed, punctured only by a single balcony for II Duce. Describing the project in a statement with fellow architects and artists, Terragni leaves no doubt about the theatrical, transformational nature of the balcony (while leaving plenty of doubt about his sincerity)...
"Everyone will be able to see Him. He is like a God, outlined against the sky; above Him there is no one. The entire facade glorifies His power, His genius; standing alone, high above, surrounded by light, He will be visible from all sides of the great boulevard which is the heart of Rome, the pulse of the world, from Piazza Venezia to the arches of the Colosseum.
II Duce will stand before adoring multitudes; He will belong to everyone, He will be one with everyone."
—Antonio Carminati, Pietro Lingeri, Marcello Nizzoli, Ernesto Salvia, Mario Sironi, Giuseppe Terragni, and Luigi Vietti, quoted in "The Political Content in Italian Architecture during the Fascist Era," Dennis P. Doordan, Art Journal, Summer 1983.
1933-1934 In studies for curving the facade of the Casa del Littorio, the balcony remains the central puncturing point in a bulbous play of light and shade.
"The position of the arengarlo as the elevated focal point of the facade has a counterpart in the Papal Benediction loggia on the facade of St. Peter's. Given the limitations of the site, the curved facade of Scheme A could be considered the mural equivalent of Bernini’s colonnade, which reaches out to 'embrace' the crowds gathered in the piazza. The similarity in the conception of these two buildings as the architectural expression of powerful communal experiences is too strong to ignore." —Dennis P. Doordan, "The Political Content in Italian Architecture during the Fascist Era,"
Art Journal, Summer 1983.


BALCONY
PAGE 77
December 11,1937
From the balcony of the Piazza Venezia, Mussolini declares Italy's withdrawal from the League of Nations.
PAGE 78
BALCONY
FORMULA FOR THE POLITICAL BALCONY
The factors that govern a balcony's political potential can be captured in a formula: the balcony's reach beyond the facade (x1), its width (x2), its height above the ground plane (x3), which determines a potential connection with a crowd; the space from x1 to the building opposite (x4), which determines the area available for the massing of a crowd; and the aural reach of a voice from the balcony, which can be augmented by technology or good acoustics (x5).
Is there an ideal ratio of these factors that would make for the most effective political balcony? Projection from the façade (x1) is the balcony's key feature, but too extreme a projection means that a speaker is over the crowd instead of in front of it. A generous width (x2) permits a leader to be flanked by comrades and allies, but too ample a balcony diffuses the focus. As for height (x3), speakers tend to favor second- or third-floor balconies - commanding heights, but still at a distance where they can connect with the crowd - though this in turn depends on distance from nearest building (x4) and acoustics (x6), since a larger crowd and greater vocal projection make greater heights both more feasible and desirable (though barring the use of a Dumbotron - which renders the balcony old-fashioned anyway for this purpose - there is still the issue of visual contact.)
Ecuadorean Embassy, London
Balcony where Julian Assange
appears, his only non-mediated
access to the public (and to fresh B
air, being essentially imprisoned in Hi
the embassy). Almost	^
embarrassingly small (x3) value
nevertheless grants favorable
acoustics (x5), an advantage
undone by the use of a	x*=i7m
microphone.
Palazzo Venezia, Rome
"Mussolini's Balcony," where the
dictator makes many a famous	Si
speech. Favorable (x3) ratio for
dominating presence but not	l~—
connection.
Cada Rosada, Buenos Aires	fei
Evita's balcony, also renowned as
the setting for Madonna's
depiction of the Argentinean
figurehead, looks out at wide	x.=270lI
boulevard, yielding very high (x4)
value.
St. Peter's, Vatican
The pope's balcony, with enormous vista (x4), proves effective for generating spectacle both from the point of view of the faithful and from the leader.
Lenin Tribune
El Lissitzky's proposed moveable tribune for Lenin is all balcony and no building. The height Is average in comparison to other political
X3 = 19m
I--------
X1 =870m
170m
170m
balconies, but it is unbeatable in terms of potential audience size, enabled by its movabllity and
subsequent infinite X4 dimension.
BALCONY
PAGE 79
Building B Facade Line
Paramaters of the political balcony:
projection (x1) width (x2) height (x3)
distance from (x1) to building opposite (x4) aural range (x5)
530m
Tiber River
oo
BALCONY
PAGE 81
1938 Shortly after declaring the Anschluss with Austria, Hitler, with Josef Goebbels, peers from the balcony of the Viennese Hotel Imperial before making a microphone-assisted speech. The modern electric microphone allows fascism to turbo-charge the balcony's political potential. Hitler discovers the epoch-making power of the microphone for his speech at the opening ceremony of the 1936 Olympics, where radio coverage makes the presence of the microphone particularly vital. (Propaganda minister Joseph Goebbels personally oversees this, putting some 300 radio microphones at the service of foreign reporters.) Thereafter Hitler's balconies and other speaking venues are always equipped with Neumann Microphones - the first mass-produced condenser mlc, developed In 1928 by Georg Neumann, sometimes also called the "Hitler Bottle." He typically used three of them. Unparalleled In Its ability to transmit the expressiveness of the human voice, the Naumann Is the precondition for Hitler's gargantuan balcony scenes: "They [the Third Reich] could, for the first time, not only transport the words and the Information, but they could transport emotion. And that was revolutionary." (Klaus Heyne, microphone expert, quoted In Jackl Lyden, "Couple's Custom Microphones Carry Colorful Past," NPR, April 20, 2008.)
PAGE 82
BALCONY
HITLER ON THE BALCONY
Hitler adopts the term "fascism" from Mussolini, as well as a yen for balcony appearances. In Nuremberg, Hitler's habitual residence is the Hotel Deutscher Hof, which is constructed with the addition of a second-floor "Führer Balcony." Triumph of the Wiil( 1935), Leni Riefenstahl's masterpiece of Nazi image crafting, makes the Deutscher Hof balcony a set piece, complete with a night rally below it, and an illuminated "Heil Hitler" sign.
1927 Testing the balcony:
Adolf Hitler and Benito Mussolini in an early appearance at Fuhrerhaus, Munich.
1935 Like a modern billboard, the Deutscher Hof balcony is installed with an illuminated slogan for Leni Riefenstahl's Triumph of the Wilt.
"About ten o'clock tonight I got caught in a mob of ten thousand hysterics who jammed the moat in front of Hitler's hotel, shouting, 'We want our Führer.' I was a little shocked at the faces, especially those of the women, when Hitler finally appeared on the balcony for a moment. They reminded me of the crazed expressions I saw once in the back country of Louisiana on the faces of some Holy Rollers who were about to hit the trail. They looked up at him as if he were a Messiah, their faces transformed into something positively inhuman. If he had remained in sight for more than a few moments, I think many of the women would have swooned from excitement."
—William L. Shirer, Berlin Diary: The Journal of a Foreign Correspondent, 1934-1941.
BALCONY
PAGE 83
1938 Anschluss: from the balustraded balcony of the newest part of the Hofburg palace, the Neue Burg, facing the Heldenplatz, Hitler declares unification before 250,000 cheering Viennese. "In front of German history, I declare my former homeland now a part of the Third Reich. One of the pearls of the Third Reich will be Vienna."
1869 Gottfried Semper's unrealized blueprint for the Heldenplatz, which Hitler intended to pursue after the Anschluss.
PAGE 84	BALCONY
THE TIDE TURNS FOR THE BALCONY
In 1933, Hitler's architect, Albert Speer, adds a balcony to a new wing of the Reich Chancellery to accommodate the Fuhrer's public proclamations. Twelve years later, when Berlin is taken by the Allies, the same stone platform becomes a stage to mock Hitler.
1936 SS Soldiers march below the balcony of the Old Reich Chancellery, part of a celebration of Hitler's birthday.
"In the early evening hours of January 30, 1933, Adolf Hitler appeared at the window of his new office to present himself to a chanting crowd gathered in front of the Berlin Chancellery at Wilhelmstrasse 78. Located on the second floor, the chancellor's office had three windows, all overlooking Wilhelmplatz. It occupied a modern section of the Chancellery that had been completed only three years earlier under the direction of Eduard Jobst Siedler and Robert Kisch. The functionalism of Siedler and Kisch's annex had caused considerable outrage among those eager to preserve the neoclassicist milieu of
Wilhelmplatz. For Hitler, however, during the first hours, days, and months of his chancellorship, the new annex produced concerns of a very different sort. Not only did it become usual for crowds to gather under the new German chancellor's office window, demanding to see the Führer and making it impossible for Hitler to work inside. The huge, albeit plain, windows of his office also turned out to be inappropriate for the purpose of staging Hitler's visual appearance. Siedler and Kisch's window design forced Hitler to assume awkward postures to enjoy public visibility.
In fact, rather than displaying the
PAGE 85
1945 Allied soliders take the balcony at the remains of Speer's Reich Chancellery, Berlin.
Führer as a powerful attraction, the frame of the window dwarfed the Führer's body and thereby undermined spectacular self-presentation. Hitler's first public appearance in the role as Reich chancellor thus offered a mixed blessing. The window was really too inconvenient,' Hitler remarked later to his master architect Albert Speer.
'I could not be seen from all sides. After all, I could not very well lean out.' A man of extreme obsessions and unsteady emotions, the new Reich chancellor set out to have the problem fixed immediately ... Because Siedler and Kisch's design failed to display Hitler as an object of theatrical to-be-
looked-at-ness, Hitler had Speer add a new 'historic balcony' to the facade at Wilhelmplatz. Siedler protested this new addition, claiming that Speer's balcony would violate the building's aesthetic integrity. Hitler, however, resolutely dismissed these objections: 'Siedler has spoiled the whole of Wilhelmplatz. Why, that building looks like the headquarters of a soap company, not the center of the Reich. What does he think? That I'll let him build the balcony too?"'
—Lutz Koepnick, Framing Attention: Windows on Modem German Culture, (2006).
PAGE 86
BALCONY
1158
ifiUtt
ca. 1945 End of the fascist balcony: after Mussolini's death, his balcony remains. The walls from which it protrudes are covered with banners calling for "No More Dictators!" and "No More Balconies!"
BALCONY
PAGE 87


1962 Blood on the Balcony, a documentary by Pasquale Prunas, produced by Roberto Rossellini gets its first showing In New York. A defiant Mussolini is juxtaposed with an abstraction of his famous final image, a man strung up by his feet, not from a balcom but from the scaffolding of an unfitted Standard Oil service station in PiazBnW Loreto, Milan.
PAGE 88
BALCONY
POSTWAR POLITICAL BALCONIES
Dictators leave the stage, allowing the balcony to become a platform of (mostly) victory, emancipation, revolution, independence...
I960 Gamal Abdul Nasser, Damascus, during its 1960 Marshal Tito, unknown location,	1961 John F. Kennedy and
two years as part of the United Arab Republic with Yugoslavia.	Nikita Khruschchev, Vienna.
Egypt-
1961 Ferhat Abbas, King Hassan II, Casablanca. 1967 Nicolae Ceausescu, Bucharest.
mu	>»u i na ■ l	a^wumw.
1945 Winston Churchill, Whitehall, London.	1945 Dawaharlal Nehru, Simla, India.
1971 Mao Zedong, Zhou Enlai, Lin Piao, Beijing. 1974 Valery Giscard d'Estaing, Rue de la
Bienfaisance, Paris.
BALCONY
PAGE 89
1974 Isabel Perón, Royal Palace, Buenes Aires.
1979 Pope Jean-Paul II, White House, Washington, D.C.
1982 Ronald and Nancy Reagan, White House, Washington, D.C.
1986 Marcos's farewell, Malacanang Palace, Manila.
1986 Mario Soares, Lisbon.
1988 Alan Garcia Perez, Presidential Palace, Lima.
1989 Vaclav Havel, nominated for Czecho-	1989 Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani,
Slovakia's post-communist government, greets a Azadi Square, Tehran, crowd from the Melantrich publishing house over Wenceslas Square.
1993 Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Officers Club, Governors Island, New York.
PAGE 90	BALCONY
TOKYO
Two balcony manifestations two years apart crystalize national dilemmas in the post-imperial age...
1969 Imperial power reduced to stage-managed pleasantries: Emperor Hlrohlto, decades on from renouncing his own divinity, appears not alone but flanked by his family on the balcony of the Imperial Palace, accepting New Year's banzais from an enthusiastic crowd
1970 Attempted reactivation of the balcony: railing against the neutering of postwar lapan, author and right-wing avant-gardist Yuklo Mishlma storms the balcony of the Japan Ground Self-Defence Force Ichigaya Camp in Tokyo. While his colleagues In the Shield Society take hostage the commander of the Eastern Self Defense Force, Mlshima speaks from the balcony for nearly two hours, delivering a manifesto for the restoration of the Emperor's powers and attempting to incite an infantry regiment to revolt against Eisaku Soto's government. The 1,000 soldiers assembled below mock and jeer him. Retreating in shame he commits seppuku.

BALCONY
PAGE 91
MUNICH
In 1972, the balconies of Munich's Olympic Village provide the stage for the first live television appearance of terrorism. The village, designed for some
10,000	athletes and visitors, with an array of green spaces, terraces, and cascading balconies, is meant to symbolize friendly territory and to avoid "undesired monumentality" (in the words of the official post-Olympic report), burnishing West Germany's demilitarized post-war image. Eight members of the Palestinian group Black September break into the Olympic Village, killing two members of the Israeli Olympic team and taking nine hostage, demanding the release of 234 Palestinian prisoners held in Israeli jails and two leaders of Germany's Red Army Faction. Once the events unfolding in Apartment 1 at Connollystrasse 31 are known to the police, balconies take on another import as the central figures of a media circus. German police scale the building and position themselves on balconies for negotiations and then an incursion, actions the Black September militants are able to watch on TV inside the apartment. The crisis culminates in a botched ambush and subsequent massacre at Fürstenfeldbruck airport, with all nine remaining hostages killed by the terrorists.
1972 Munich Olympic Village, with gardens, walkways, and terraced apartment blocks designed by archtiects Werner Wirsing and Günther Eckert. Security measures are kept to a minimum in order to evoke an atmosphere of openness and friendliness.

PAGE 92
BALCONY
LOSING CONTROL OF THE BALCONY
On December 21, 1989, Romanian leader Nicolae Ceausescu steps onto the balcony of the Central Committee Building in Bucharest to try to retake control of his country amid growing unrest. He begins a speech to what he thinks is a supportive crowd, which carries pro-Ceausescu banners and idol-like images of the leader. But these are carries only by workers coerced into giving the appearance of political continuity. In the streets behind the square, massing protesters disrupt the show. In the face of heckling Ceausescu loses control, abandoning the balcony. The next day, from the same balcony, revolutionaries celebrate the fall of communism.
Minutes into his speech, a commotion in the distance catches Ceausescu attention. Sounds of discord grow louder; Ceausescu pauses. A voice near the video camera wonders if shots have been fired.
mfelisTs SfeotiMt?
Someone is shooting
The TV broadcast of the speech is dropped, but a cameraman continues to film without transmission. Instructed to move the camera away from the balcony should anything unusual happen, the footage shows adjacent buildings and clear sky, while the audio catches Ceausescu and his wife imploring and chastising the public.
A citizen watching the balcony speech on television takes his video camera to his window and records what is unfolding just a few blocks away from the Central Committee Building. Crowds of people are beginning to gather throughout the city. At the conclusion of his speech, Ceausescu and his wife exit the balcony and remain in the building until the next day when they try to flee the country.
BALCONY
PAGE 93
Film stills (and annotations by editors) from Videograms of a Revolution, a documentary about media recordings of the 1989 Romanian revolution, directed by Harun Farocki and Andrei Ujica, 1992.
The following day the Central Committee building is stormed. Victory is celebrated on the balcony where Ceausescu stood the day before.
Television transmission is restored. Perhaps finally sensing the seriousness of the unrest, Ceausescu reveals new plans to improve quality of life.
Ceausescu tries to calm the crowd, gesturing for silence. Someone emerges onto the balcony to warn of possible danger.
PAGE 94
BALCONY
BOTTOM-UP BALCONY
In a dramatic role reversal, the crowd can seize the balcony, transforming the stage of power into one of resistance. No oration needed. Without a campaign budget, a balcony can accommodate the hanging of homemade signs or flags. At other times, the balcony is where a protest has to make do when the streets are too dangerous to take.
1968 Occupation of the Sorbonne's Grand Amphitheater during the May '68 protests, Paris.
1968 Students in Wenceslas Square, Prague, during protests against the Soviet invasion.
1970 Students of Colorado State University call on their colleagues to go on strike, protesting the Vietnam war and recent murders of four students at Kent State, Ohio, by the National Guard.
1986 Paintings of President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines and his wife Imelda Marcos are pulled from the palace in Manila and held over the balcony railing. ]ust hours earlier the pair had made an impassioned speec from the same balcony. By the time their likenesses are tossed over the balcony, they are on their way to exile in the US.
BALCONY
PAGE 95
1997 State police in Alagoas, Brazil protest for a better wage.

2004 Militants shortly after storming the governor's office of Khan Yunis, in the Gaza Strip.
2002 Basque separatists from ETA proclaim "Democracy for the Basque Country!" "Basque Country arise! Stop fascism!" In Bilbao.
2004 One week before US presidential elections, John Kerry supporters proclaim their support from a balcony in Madison, Wisconsin.
2004 While on the streets of Nicosia supporters of a referendum on the Annan Plan for Cyprus march for a yes vote, above them, an elderly woman stands on a balcony behind a large black and white banner proclaiming "no."
2005 After the parade marking his second inauguration, a balcony separates hollering supporters of US President George W. Bush from his detractors below.
2012 On a balcony opposite the Moscow court house where members Pussy Riot are on trial, a balaclavad protester wavea^ a flag bearing the raised fist inside the symbol of Venus. ™
PAGE 96
BALCONY
21 ST CENTURY POLITICAL BALCONIES
After its exploitation in the 20th century by political strongmen, and its subsequent symbolic role in countless upheavals, the balcony must now be used with caution by political leaders, as a platform for friendliness and approachability...
tricolor national flag
Coat of Arms of Bolivia
Wiphalas flag representing the
inriinennn« normU,
painting of Simon Bolivar and Antonio
Vice President of Bolivia
official
guests
2010	Populist: diverting attention from themselves with an array of posters, banners, flags, and symbols, Bolivia's President Evo Morales and Vice President Alvaro Garcia Linera appear on the balcony of the National Congress in La Paz after the swearing-in for their second presidential term.
President of Bolivia
BALCONY
PAGE 97
POTUS
FLOTUS
microphone
2018 Innocuous: The President of the United States appears with his family and the Easter Bunny at the South Portico Balcony (aka the Truman Balcony) for the annual White House Easter Egg Roll.
easter bunny
flowers	official seal of
the President of the United States
PAGE 98
BALCONY

2011	As the Occupy Wall Street movement marches In Lower Manhattan with the slogan "We Are the 99%," denizens of the Financial District watch the protests from the balcony of Cipriani's, drinking cocktails and snapping photos. The scene suggests a new type of political balcony: the counter-counter-balcony, nonchalant in the face of agitation.
BALCONY
PAGE 99
"Can you hear me? I am here today because I cannot be there with you today.
But thank you for coming. Thank you for your resolve and your generosity of spirit. On Wednesday night, after a threat was sent to this embassy and the police descended on this building, you came out in the middle of the night to watch over it and you brought the world's eyes with you. Inside this embassy, after dark, I could hear teams of police swarming up into the building through its internal fire escape..."
2012	History repeated as farce: from the balcony of the Ecuadorian Embassy in Knightsbridge,
London, WikiLeaks founder Dulian Assange attempts to evoke the revolutionary lineage of the balcony speech. After skipping bail and securing asylum inside the embassy, saving him from extradition to Sweden to face charges of sexual assault (and, Assange fears, subsequent extradition to the US to face charges for publishing confidential documents), Assange addresses media and supporters, kept 3 good distance away by a ring of Met police. Leaning sheepishly towards the railing of the Dullet balcony, Assange is in dangerous territory: the balcony's slightly cantilevering, inside-outside character takes on new importance in a situation where he relies upon staying within the sovereign territory of another nation to avoid arrest.
PAGE 100	BALCONY
THE SOCIAL BALCONY
Parallel to the political exploitation of the balcony in the 20th century as an instrument to exert power, often dictatorially, in the turbulent Europe of the 1920s and 30s, the balcony is seized upon by politicians and architects as a tool of mass emancipation. Already associated with bourgeois leisure and health, the balcony is the obvious element for architects to latch onto in their newfound social mission. Against the backdrop of the Second World War and the Weimar Republic, the high rise is seen by modernist architects, including Le Corbusier and Gropius, as a typology ready not only to accommodate population growth but also to reform and spiritually elevate man. The social architecture of the 20th century is a continuation of a theoretical trajectory that included 19th century ideas of utopian socialists such as Robert Owen (1771-1858), Charles Fourier (1722-1837) and Ebenezer Howard of Garden City fame (1850-1928). All three believed that altering a person's exterior experience could shape them into a more productive, fulfilled human being. After the elite's fascination with the sanitorium, the balcony is seized upon by the ascendant socialism as an emancipatory tool for the masses.
In Dessau, Bauhaus head Hannes Meyer calls his social housing scheme Balcony Access Housing (though his balconies are not individual projecting balconies).
Karl Ehn's Karl-Marx-Hof in Vienna, completed in 1927, marks the balcony's social awakening. Vincent Scully notes it as a radical appropriation of Frank Lloyd Wright's broad balconies, "the monumental embodiment of Social-Democratic solidarity and defiance," inspired by the American architect's proto-suburbia:
"The Heiligenstadt Houes of 1927, called, loyally and provocatively, the Karl-Marx-Hof [are set up] in battle line to face the main street on one side and the urban railroad station on the other. They were the symbols of left-wing Vienna set out for all their friends and enemies to see. Beyond them north and south along the Heiligenstadt Strasse stretched spacious enclosed courtyards, long and wide, protected by narrow iron-grated entrances from the hostile forces outside. In those courtyards the aura of Wright is very strong - long balconies, interwoven planes." (Scully, "Frank Lloyd Wright and the Stuff of Dreams," Modern Architecture and Other Essays, 2003.)
1934 Arne Dacbobsen's Bellavista Housing Estate, Copenhagen.
1931 Großsiedlung Siemensstadt worker housing, Berlin.
BALCONY
PAGE 101
||27 Generously balconied Karl Marx-Hof, Vienna, by Karl Ehn: the |argest single block of apartments in the world.
PAGE 102
BALCONY
INSIDE OUTSIDE
Le Corbusier's unbuilt L'lmmeuble Villa (1922 -1929), a block composed of stacked villas, exacerbates the principle of the balcony (each one filled with large plants), puncturing holes through the entire thickness of an apartment slab, turning the building into a porous, light-filled structure.
Le Corbusier sketches the benefits of the indented balcony: exposure to sun, shelter from rain.
BALCONY
PAGE 103
A second iteration of the idea shows two radically different forms of outdoor space: the balcony in the form of indentations, again full of vegetation and outdoor seating; and a more typical, constrained, cantilever form, big enough just for one person comfortably.
PAGE 104
BALCONY
PYRAMID
As official architect of Société des logements hygiéniques a bon marché (Society for Hygienic and Cheap Housing), Henri Sauvage pursues the ziggurat, a recurring form in his work for years, as a benevolent form helpfully generating stepped facades, providing multiple platforms and openings that in turn provide light and air for the residents. Interior balconies overlook the pool, one of a number of health conscious amenities provided.
1931 Henri Sauvage's concours Rosenthal de la place de la Victoire, at Porte Maillot, Paris: Aztec inspired design to generate as many platforms for receiving sunlight as possible.
1924 Sauvage's stepped Apartment rue des Amiraux, Paris.
BALCONY
PAGE 105
Balconies inside the apartment rue des Amiraux, overlooking the pool.
Exterior balconies Interior balconies
PAGE 106
BALCONY
BABY BALCONY
For those left behind by the social housing revolution and its attendant balconies, the add-on baby balcony is an unlikely progressive solution to give impoverished families the benefit of fresh air for their offspring.
BALCONIES FOR BABIES IN FLATS
MEMORANDUM BY THE R.I.B.A.
We have received for publication the following letter on the provision of balconies for infants in multiple-story flats, signed by the President of the Royal Institute of British Architects, Sir Giles Gilbert Scott, R.A., the chairman of the Arts Standing Committee, Professor A. B. Knapp-Fisher, and the chairman of the Science Standing Committee, Mr. S. Pointon Taylor.
Sir,
The importance of including at least a small private balcony to working and middle-class flats, large enough to take a cot for infants up to 2 years, has been brought to the notice of the Royal Institute of British Architects. After careful consideration it was felt that the matter was one of first importance to architects and others who are responsible for the planning of such flats. Moreover, it was felt that it was the duty of the profession, without whose co-operation little could be done, to call attention to the matter, supported by medical opinion. With this in view both medical and architectural evidence was sought, and the following memorandum was prepared and submitted to the Minister of Health, who suggests tnat its pumication may oe tne Dest means ot bringing the matter before those concerned.
The subject divides itself broadly into three headings —namely: (1) The medical and health aspect. (2) The economic aspect. (3) Planning and construction.
Medical and Health Aspect
The baby is essentially an out-of-door creature. It is important that it should start an out-of-door life at once to fit it for a partially indoor life. The critical years arc from birth to 2 years.
Fresh air is one of the first and essential preventives against colds, bronchitis, pneumonia, tuberculosis, rickets, etc. Rickets is a disease which occurs in the first two years of life, and its prevention is rendered more difficult in flats without balcony accommodation. A flat without a private balcony is considered by some as incomplete as a flat without a bathroom.
A small private balcony large enough to take a basket or cradle within easy reach of the mother is what is wanted as a minimum. Quiet is necessary. The roof and ground are of little or no use if the baby is out of sight and the mother worried. The mother must be in reach of the baby, and able to see it if possible.
The south is the best aspect, but east or west, and even north, nearly as good. .Direct sunlight is not essential, and is sometimes too strong. Reflected sky light is as good. High, solid balconies are not desirable. Open wrought-iron balconies on a smalt plinth are best. There need be no fear from draught. Some protection from cats and inclement weather is needed.
Noisy common approach or connecting balconies are not desirable for the purpose, and even a family balcony does not give the same quiet. A recessed balcony does not meet the case as a projecting balcony does, as there is not the same direct sky reflection.
1935 RIBA endorses the baby balcony: "The baby Is essentially an out-of-door creature ... A small private balcony large enough to take a basket or cradle within easy reach of the mother is what is wanted as a minimum."
1923 Portable Baby Cage patent application, Emma Read: "It is well known that a great many difficulties rise In raising and properly housing babies and small cities in crowded cities, that is to say from the health viewpoint... In crowded cities, where the houses are closely arranged, and in large apartments, there is no way for proper ventilation. ... it Is the purpose of the present invention to provide an article of manufacture for babies and young children, to be suspended upon the exterior of a building adjacent an open window, wherein the baby or young child may be placed. This article of manufacture comprises a housing or cage, wherein the baby or young child together with proper toys may be placed."
BALCONY
PAGE 107
BOGGINS’ OPEN-AIR SLEEPING COMPARTMENT BOGGINS’ OPEN-AIR SLEEPING COMPARTMENT
\ iew from the street.	View from the room.
1920s Advertisement for the Boggins' Window Crib: "This outdoor crib is admirably adapted for city apartments.... The illustration shows how comfortable the baby can be in this crib, and how he can be kept in view of his mother or nurse."
1937 A nanny supervises a baby in a tenement "baby cage," London.
The cages are distributed to members of the Chelsea Baby Club who lack gardens and live at the top of high buildings. East Poplar borough council in London proposes to fix wire cages to the outside of all their tenement windows, so that babies can benefit from fresh air and sunshine.
BALCONY
PAGE 109
GROPIUS'S STEEL-FRAME BALCONY BUILDING 1929 Three years after his famous singular balconies at the Bauhaus, Walter Gropius applies a similar shape - the small square promontory - to his High-Rise Steel Frame Apartment Building, which he unveils at the 2nd Congrès International d'Architecture (CIAM) in Frankfurt. The concept is a ten story slab, buildable anywhere to alleviate the housing shortage.

PAGE 110	BALCONY
the impossibility of a universal balcony:
mutations of a modern element across the mediterranean
by tom avermaete
ICHT
LUFT
1929 "The 'new architecture' has unconsciously used these projecting 'balconies' again and again. Why? Because there exists the need to live in buildings that strive to overcome the old sense of equilibrium that was based only on fortress-like incarceration," Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen.

BEFREITES
WOHNEN
86 BILDER
EINGELEITET
VON
SIGFRIED
GIEDION
LICHT
licht LU FT
1932 "60,000 until now, 80,000 it will be!" City of triumphant balconies: Vienna and the Karl-Marx-Hof, by Siegfried Weyr.
1945 "This way or that way - nevertheless, choose SED": balcony as salve after the war, in an election poster from the Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschland (SED).
BALCONY
PAGE 111
1 Sigfried Giedion, Befreites Wohnen (Zürich: O. Füssli, 1929).
2. Sigfried Giedion, Bauen in Frankreicht: Bauen in Eisen - Bauen in Eisenbeton, Klinkhardt and Biermann, 1928/Building in France: Building in lron - Building in Ferro-Concrete, trans., 3. Duncan Berry (The Getty Centre for the Study of Art and the Humanities, 1995), 147.
3.	Ken Worpole, Here Comes the Sun: Architecture and Public Space in Twentieth-Century European Culture (London: Reaktion, 2000).
4.	Paul Overy, Light, Air & Openness: Modern Architecture between the Wars (London: Thames & Hudson, 2007).
5. Article on Karl-Marx-Hof on the day of the opening, Arbeiterzeitung, October 12, 1931: "Glatt, ohne jedes unnütze Zierrat, wurden die Häuser gebaut, aber um so wertvollerer Schmuck sind die Baikone, die in der Ausdehnung der ganzen Front fortgeführt wer den, so dass jede Wohnung einen Balkon hat."
From its very introduction into architectural thinking, the balcony has always been a charged architectural element. After its rejection by elite architectural thinkers like Quatremère de Quincy in the 19th century, as a merely fashionable entity responsible for upsetting the order of the façade, and sullied by its exploitation by various dictators in the early 20th century, rehabilitating the balcony - coaxing it into a universalist catalogue of elements - would become one of the big challenges of the modern movement in architecture.
Already in 1929 - and in parallel with its use as a tool of singular political power - Befreites Wohnert (Freed Living), published as a result of the first Congres Internationale d'Architecture Moderne (CIAM), identified the balcony as a liberating and universally applicable element that had the capacity to introduce llcht, luft, and oeffnung (light, air, and openness) in the modern dwelling.’
The balcony came to be understood as one of the modern elements that had curative and even emancipatory powers for the inmates of old-fashioned tenements.
At the same time as Freed Living, Swiss critic Sigfried Giedion explained:
"The 'new architecture' has unconsciously used these projecting 'balconies' again and again. Why? Because there exists the need to live in buildings that strive to overcome the old sense of equilibrium that was based only on fortresslike incarceration."2 No less than a full-fledged new mode of living, facilitated in no small part by the balcony as enabler of a new enlightened architecture, was desired by the modern architects Giedion parsed.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the balcony was gradually given a more central place in modern architectural discourse and became not only a conspicuous feature of the avant-garde modernist house but was also defined as a universally applicable element with the power to emancipate.3 The 1920s and 1930s would see a proliferation of photographs of modern people engaging in leisure on the balconies of modern houses, underlining how the balcony came to be understood as an armature that enabled the modernity of everyday life.4
The emancipatory and healing character of the modern balcony was not only a matter for the architectural avant-garde, but also resonated in political discourse of the 1930s. In the reformist housing politics of Red Vienna, the balcony played a central role, as a newspaper article featuring Karl Ehn in 1931 on the opening day of the infamous Karl-Marx-Flof illustrates: "The houses were built without any unnecessary ornamentation, but so much more valuable jewelry are the balconies, which continuously expand across the whole front, so that each apartment has one."5 A collage of the housing complex, made right after its completion, demonstrates how the balconies were now central rhetorical and spatial elements in the Viennese politics of making dwellings for a new man. A swirling layering of private balconies surrounds a heroic statue of a modern, universal human being. This reformist coining of the balcony was a recurrent theme in housing politics. In 1945, the Sozialistische Einheitspartei Deutschland (SED) used the balcony as a key element through which it could promote its enlightened policies, followed a few years later by the Austrian Socialist Party, which contrasted on its posters the modernist balcony with the perils of the historical city, making a plea for a new politics of modern and collective living.
In the first decades of the 20th century, the balcony appeared in the housing concepts of both avant-garde architects and politicians as a key architectural element that had not only liberating and emancipatory powers, but could also be generalized and universally applied as a key ficgHb of n^lern Bruno Taut even claimed that: "Bay windows, balconies and loggias noftol the>
PAGE 112
BALCONY
1936 Tel Aviv: the modern balcony as universally applicable element. Collage by Kluger Zoltán, photographer of the Israeli state-in-the-making.
BALCONY
PAGE 113
6	Bruno Taut, 'Für die neue Volkswohnung. für die neue Baukunst Berlins!', in: Die Wohnungswirtschaft, 2. 1925, H.1, (S.Sff.), 4.
7	Nikolaus Pevsner, Pioneers of Modem Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius (London: Penguin books, (1936) 1960), 116.
8 For an introduction to this notion of taxis, see Tzonis and Lefaivre.
9. Ockman, Ibid., 235.
10. Ibid., 235.
11.Tafuri 1987, 267.
12. IIP Oud, letter to JJ. Vriend, April 14, 1956.
13. Correlation is one of the terms Woods discusses in respect to architecture and urbanism in Shadrach Woods, What U can Do, Architecture at Rice, no. 27, 1970.
actual system of architecture."6 Architectural historian Nikolaus Pevsner believed "the medium of this new style of the twentieth century, as opposed to a passing fashion, is universal.''7
ATOMIZATION
Looking upon an architectural element like the balcony as a standard entity that could be universally applied was not new. In the neo-classical studies of Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand or the investigations of Eugène Viollet-le-Duc, architecture was thought through standard constituents. New in modern architectural discourse was the discussion of elements individually, ignoring the question of their relation, which increasingly became a terrain vague. What in treatises of classical architecture was called the "disposition" or "composition" of different elements - generally known as the "taxis" of architecture - seemed to disappear.8 Architectural elements came to be understood as isolated entities, considered in their own right, apart from any other reality.
In his essay "The Case for a Theory of Modern Architecture," John Summerson noted the striking lack of discussion in the modern period of the combination of architectural elements into a larger whole. He suggested that a new rationale had installed itself. The modernist "logic of the engineer" followed a different path to unity: "He seeks it within one component - even if it is a very complex component comprising the whole sectional trace of a large building. And it is a unity of interdependent calculable issues adding up to a total whose criterion is performance."9 Elements were atomized: thought, designed, and assessed in isolation.
Summerson continued: "The engineer is concerned strictly with components and although he may contribute significant inventions he cannot contribute a continuously related system of inventions - Le., a language."10 The architectural element is developed, projected, and constructed without being placed in a larger framework. As Manfredo Tafuri claimed, "the elements of the modern architectural tradition are all at once reduced to enigmatic fragments - to mute signals of a language whose code has been lost - shoved away haphazardly in the desert of history."11
In spite of, or because of, all the universalizing rhetoric that was attached to the balcony, positing it as the best means of access to light, air, and the outdoors, as an element it became semantically neutralized. "I am very annoyed by this modern architecture," wrote Dutch architect IIP. Oud in 1956. "The architecture is fresh, but empty."12 The balcony was deprived of the meaning that might reside in its actual form, isolating it from its relation to other architectural elements and reducing it to a mute receptacle for a variety of meanings imposed from outside.
RECLAMATION
The Team 10 generation of architects, including Van Eyck, Alison and Peter Smithson, Georges Candilis, and Shadrach Woods, attempted to reclaim the relational aspect of the elements of architecture. Their attention to "patterns of association" and "structuring" (Smithson), and "correlation" (Woods)13 was an attempt to reposition or reintroduce architectural elements into a wider framework. Aldo van Eyck maintained that the complexity of modern life could not be allowed to disintegrate into merely rational fragments, but should be expressed by architects and urbanists as a spatial and social whole.
H Forum, "The In-Between," 1959, 248.
Van Eyck elaborated this train of thought in 1959 in an issue of Forum titled "Drempel en Ontmoeting: De gestalt van het Tusjen" (Thresh o I cypBfck Encounter: The Gestalt of the In-Between), where he foe™I on the element of the "pavement, passage, gate, atrium, courtyarJ|terraciBDortico, logcP^ balcony, threshold."14 Relying on the theories of philosopher Martin Buber, .
PAGE 114
BALCONY
1957 Gio Ponti's "inhabitable viewing frames" at Via Dezza apartments, Milan: the micro-political balcony, made for individual appropriation...
Turret-like balconies in plan.
1969 Castle and capsule: inhabitants of Francisco Davier Saenz de Oiza's Torres Blancas in Madrid are simultaneously rooted to the ground and hovering over it in their balconies.
BALCONY
PAGE 115
Forum made a plea for the relations between architectural elements, between elements and people, and between people: "In order to obtain this humanism and habitability, the house and the street, door and window, balcony and roof terrace have become issues again. They are the architectonic forms through which and in which man encounters oneself and his fellowman. ... The gestalt of
15.	ibid., 249.	the 'between' people and the 'between' things."15
I.	THE SOCIAL BALCONY
Articulating relations between people and between things became an important new function for the balcony. In the postwar period, in myriad large-scale housing developments from Stockholm to Barcelona, the balcony becomes the mediator in one of the crucial issues of the period, which sociologist Daniel Bell summarized in 1956 as "the possibility for some few persons of achieving a
16. Daniel Bell, "The Theory of Mass Society: A	sense of individual self in our mechanized society."16 A projection from the
Critique," Commentary, 22 Duly, 1956), 75.	personal realm into the urban, but also potentially an expression of mass rather
than singularity, the balcony was perfectly equipped to deal with the new political imperative of individual emancipation and expression. Compared with its prewar notoriety as a singular platform for dictators, the role of the balcony is reversed: multiplied ad infinitum over the surface of a building, a democratic mass would now share the elevated vista, looking down upon the city in its everyday use, rather than a rallying or reverential mass. But more important than the act of looking down is what the new balcony did for the act of looking at buildings, democratically registering, in various ways, the existence of a collective mass on the face of the city. Articulating this relation between individuality and the collective, between the particular and the ordinary, and between the private and the public realm, would become one of the central roles of the balcony in postwar housing projects. The Mediterranean basin, a pivot between the new social democratic regimes of Europe and the decolonizing nations of North Africa, acted as a laboratory for these newfangled definitions.
1957 Casa Via Dezza, Milano, Gio Ponti
For a new apartment block at the Via Dezza in Milan, Gio Ponti brought back to Italy balcony styles of the Mediterranean basin, drawing on traditions of subtly screening the border between the house and the city in multiple layers, and modernizing the mashrabiyas, loggias, and oriel windows of the region.
Ponti designed the façade of the building as a series balconies which he called "inhabitable viewing frames" - a layered system of frames, screens, and surfaces offered a canvas on which various forms of appropriation - through everyday objects, plants, and art - could be played out. These thickened balconies offered the possibility of various means of screening but also of articulating and exposing the identity of the inhabitant. Most likely without fully realizing, Ponti started to address in his projects the micro-political dimension of the balcony - pointing to its capacity to offer the inhabitant an active role in the built environment through intervention at the border of the private and the public domain.
J7- Feo. Javier Sáenz de Oíza, "La historia de las torres Blancas,' Architektur & Wohnen, no. 14, 1972,121.
1964-1969 Torres Blancas, Madrid, Francisco lavier Saenz de Oiza
In Madrid, Francisco Javier Saenz de Oiza used the balcony to articulate his new typology for the modern skyscraper. Saenz de Oiza imagined a skyscraper that was not just about the repetition of floors, like the American skyscraper, but something that would reflect, rather than redefine, the intricate collectivity of Mediterranean Europe. "The client was very explicit on this point," Saenz de Oiza explained. The point "was not to make a proposal for a new form of social or family life. The Spanish market and consumer soc ety, ha^ with sufficient rigor, defined its requirement. The role of the ardnitelrt inwh s casByajpIbnly t^p propose a new vertical organization of those estat|;hed and supposed program requirements of 'dwelling.'"17
PAGE 116
BALCONY
1962 Collage of a balconized structure presented by Antonio Coderch at the Team 10 meeting in Royaumont, France. Coderch declares the balcony Instrumental In the "sharing of responsibilities, [a] habitat based on the participation of the future user."
1968-73 Coderch's balconies nested in the nooks and crooks of the Viviendas de las Cocheras de Sarria housing block, Barcelona.
1972 Gerard Grandval housing project Les Choux, in Creteil, near Paris: "there was ... a desire to break with the banality of large housing projects," Grandval states later. "I thought [the balconies] had to be protected from prying eyes, otherwise they would not be used."
BALCONY
PAGE 117
18 Sáenz, Torres Blancas project text, 3.
19.	Coderch, "We do not need geniuses right now," Domus, November, 1961, 45.
20.	"It Is not Geniuses We Need Right Now" (1960), sent to Team 10, published In Italian in Domus (November 1961) and in English in the Team 10 minutes: Smithson, Alison (ed.), Team 10 Primer, (London: Studio Vista, 1968), 37-38.
21. Renée Gailhoustet, Gérard Grandval, and Bruno Vayssière, Architectes Repères, Repères D'architectures: 1950-1975 (Paris: Éd. du Pavillon de l'Arsenal, 1998).
22. Interview with Gérard Grandval: www. Ieparisien.fr/creteil-94000/ces-tours-ont-marque-les-esprits-03-08-2009-597321 .php (accessed August 2, 2013): "A Créteil, il y avait au contraire a v°lonté de rompre avec la banalité des grands ensembles Malgré tout, les surfaces étaient, par exemple, très contingentées. Pour compenser,
J ai imaginé de grands balcons. De pensais qu'ils devaient être protégés des regards extérieurs, taute de quoi ils ne seraient pas utilisés. C'est comme cela que m'est venue l'idée de ces encorbellements en forme de pétale."
Sáenz de Oiza used the balcony in his Torres Blancas to mediate between two models of vertical living. The first was "a kind of vertical extension of the topography ... so that no man loses direct contact with the earth ... It is the 'castle-dwelling': a castle in principle is a way of imposing on a specific physical topography another topography that highlights or strengthens it." A second model of vertical living is the "capsule-dwelling," where the house is an individual unit that floats above the ground. "The collective relations of this model are very new, very different from the first model; they should be deeply investigated in technical, sociological and humanist terms."18
Somewhere between the extremes of castle (having a strong connection with the ground) and capsule (a dwelling disconnected from the ground), Sáenz de Oiza suggested a new typology that synthesized the connectivity and separation of private domains. The semicircular balconies of Torres Blancas softened the sharp angled Intersections of the primary volumes. They not only jog from side to side as they rise, creating an asymmetrical rhythm and shadow play, but also create relations - of proximity and distance - between different private domains of the tower.
1968-73 Viviendas de las Cocheras de Sarrià, Barcelona, Antonio Coderch
That the balcony could not only play a role in defining new collectivities, but also in establishing new relations between buildings and inhabitants was explored by another Spanish architect, Antonio Coderch. At the Team 10 meeting in Royaumont in 1962, Coderch presented a collage of a balconized structure, citing the balcony as the locus for a new definition of architecture as a "sharing of responsibilities, [a] habitat based on the participation of the future user."19 Coderch suggested a notion of architecture in which co-production played an important role, one that would trade "geniuses" and "doctrines" for "a living tradition."20
In his design for the Viviendas de las Cocheras de Sarrià in Barcelona, balconies would play an important role in concretely articulating this new co-productive definition of architecture. Coderch designed the perimeters of his dwelling blocks as frayed edges in which a variety of irregular balconies are nested. The positioning of the balconies in the nooks and crooks of the collective façade turned them into polyvalent spaces that alternately extended the private and public realms they bordered.
1972 Les Choux, Creteil, near Paris, Gerard Grandval
Rather than the involvement of inhabitants, dealing with "housing for the greatest number" was the point of departure for Gerard Grandval in his Les Choux housing - one of many projects initiated by the French governments of les trente glorieuses21 (the "glorious" 30 years after the war, 1945-1975) -consisting of 10 towers, each of 15 stories. The challenge in these type of projects was the simultaneous engagement with a new collectivity and avoiding a new sense of anonymity that emerged in mass housing.
Supported by the evolution of precast concrete in France, Grandval designed a system of petal shaped balconies - a new figure of 'screening' the border between the individual and the mass, allowing both a visual engagement with the public realm and a high degree of privacy: "At Créteil, there was ... a desire to break with the banality of large housing projects. Nevertheless, the surfaces were ... very constrained by the regulations. To compensate, I imagined large balconies. I thought they had to be protected from prying eyes, otherwise they would not be used. This is how I got the idea of _y¡jj||e cantilevered floors petal shape."22
PAGE 118
BALCONY
1970-1975 No windows, but balconies: Walden 7 in Barcelona, by Ricardo Boflll, who believes the balcony is one of the elemental archetypes, which "connects the individual to the common bases of its society."
BALCONY
PAGE 119
1970-75 Walden 7, Barcelona, Ricardo Bofill
In Franco's Spain, thinking about the relation between individual and mass was a heavily loaded subject. The Franco government invested very little in public housing; policies were directed at subsidizing private mortgages. Nevertheless, almost simultaneously with Grandval in France, the Spanish architect Bofill offered another take on the encounter between mass and individual in the housing project Walden 7 in Barcelona, where balconies played a mediating role between the monumental scale of mass housing and the scale of individual inhabitants. Bofill described thus the monumental form of Walden 7:
23 "Des cubes et des silos ... On voit bien ici, le principe de composition du Walden, dessiné comme une casbah dans l'espace: les cubes empilés les uns sur les autres composent un rocher de lignes obliques.... A l'intérieur, j'ai volontairement multiplié les à-pic vertigineux, les inversions brutales de perspective, le voulais que l'habitant ressente très fort l'espace," Ricardo Bofill Espaces d'une vie, 1985.
24. Ibid., 58.
The balconies at Walden played a paradoxical role. They appeared as elements that evoked a long Mediterranean tradition of outdoor rooms that complement interior dwelling spaces, but their smallness, and their confrontation with the monumentality of the housing blocks, suggested a different reading. These balconies were not places to linger - their limited size made this virtually impossible - but merely to make an appearance. They gave the inhabitant temporary visibility in the public realm - a cursory recognition of her individuality - but their overriding effect was to confirm that individual as one tiny part of the larger matrix of mass housing. The balconies of Walden 7 are simultaneously markers of individuality, and of the impossibility of that individuality within a mass society.
Balconies also played a crucial role in the spectacular open-air interior lobbies of Walden 7, where they vary in shape from small and circular to larger rectangles. These balconies are no longer connected to the apartments, but rather to the collective realm of the building. Part of a complex network of circulation - stairs, bridges, galleries - these balconies offered the inhabitants moments of individuation within the realm of collectivity.
"Cubes and silos ... Flere we see the principle of the Walden composition, designed as a casbah in space: cubes stacked on top of each other make up a rock face. ... Inside, I purposely increased the breathtakingly steep slopes, the brutal perspective inversions. I wanted the inhabitants to feel strongly about the space.''23
To this grandiose form, an element is added at a completely different scale: small semi-circular balconies that function as inverted niches. For Bofil, the balcony is an "archetype," which "is more than the simple whim of a designer, it belongs to the unconscious of an entire society: it connects the individual to the common bases of its society." Bofill adopted an attitude towards the elements of architecture that he described as surrealist: "the paradox of stairways that lead nowhere, the absurdity of elements suspended in the void, spaces both powerful and useless, whose strange proportions become magical through a sense of tension and disproportion."24
1975 Gilo Housing, Jerusalem, Arieh Sharon and Eldar Sharon
One of the most pervasive investigations of the micro-political role of the balcony was carried out by Israeli architect and Bauhaus graduate Arieh Sharon in his Gilo housing complex on a hill south of Jerusalem. In the charged geopolitical climate of 1970s Israel, Sharon based his projects on two principles evolving from perceived Mediterranean and Jerusalem building traditions. He designed the Gilo project, comprising 250 apartments of various sizes, on a repetitive modular grid of 4.5 meters, a module that he discovered in existing structures in the Old City and in the traditional Arab village. And Sharon staggered the buildings in cross-section as well as in plan.
Gilo's open spaces - courtyards, arcades, outsiie stepsPbH ;or®3 -iwpr“B considered as territory offered to the new families and citizB s orosraei Since the establishment of Israel in 1948, housing policies had looked
PAGE 120
BALCONY
1
1952 Carrieres Centrales Housing in Casablanca, shortly after completion: an attempt, after a study of the local conditions, to merge vernacular outdoor spaces with the European-style balcony, by Georges Candllis, Shadrach Woods, and Victor Bodiansky.
The result is secluded concrete courtyards as boxes framing the apartment block - rooms without ceilings.
1975 Non-private balconies at Jerusalem's Gilo Housing, where Inhabitants pass through each other's balconies to reach their front door. For architects Arieh Sharon and Eldar Sharon, the balcony is a crucial instrument in an ethos of settlement, appropriation, self-building, and the collective establishment of the nation.
J
BALCONY
PAGE 121
immigrants as pioneer citizens who should be provided housing based on the principle of self-governance, a core principle of Dewish nationalism. The options available to immigrants upon arrival in Israel included housing provided by the state, which often took the form of building materials (primarily timber and concrete blocks) for the individual construction of basic dwellings, which might later be expanded through the initiative of the immigrants themselves.
Echoing the principles of self-governance and self-building, Sharon conceived the balconies in the Gilo housing as free zones to be appropriated by Israel's new citizens in order to fashion a modern lifestyle of their own. But Sharon's most radical decision in the Gilo housing is that the normally private domains of the balconies were not separated or excluded from the collective realm. Access to balconies was by external stairs rising from ground-level to the roof, passing through one of the two balconies each apartment has, thus creating a direct encounter between private and collective domains. Sharon's vision of self-governance and self-building was not related to what elsewhere is called 'individualism' but rather to part of a bigger project carried out by the collective, first and foremost cooperative in nature.
25. Hassan Fathy, Architecture for the Poor (University of Chicago Press, 1973), 19.
26. Kapila Vatsyayan, Concepts of Space, Ancient and Modern (New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1991), 561.
27. M. Volait and D. Peycere, "Patrimoines partagés, architectes français au sud et à l'est de la Méditerranée," Colonnes, n° 21, February 2003, 98-99.
In the Gilo housing, the idea of self-building is defined as an extension to the initial plan. The future repurposing of an architectural element by the inhabitants does not replace a universalist conception with a kind of small-scale pragmatism; each response to the initial plan itself constitutes its own universalist claim.
II. THE POSTCOLONIAL BALCONY
After the Second World War, and in a period of decolonization, it is no coincidence that voices from the non-Western world were most prominent in denouncing the Western architectural idea of universality in favor of the cultural-specificity of architectural elements. The Egyptian architect Hassan Fathy claimed, in 1973: "Until the collapse of cultural frontiers in the last century, there were all over the world, distinctive local shapes and details in architecture, and the buildings of any locality were the beautiful children of a happy marriage between the imagination of the people and the demands of their countryside.''25 Talking about Indian architecture, Balkrishna Doshi later addressed in his essay "Between Notion and Reality" the cultural entanglement of architectural elements like the balcony: "At the domestic level, porches and balconies are the outward physical expression of the family and its contact with the community ... Being open to the sky, these spaces infuse in the individuals and the community the consciousness of the universe and nature."26
The Moroccan architect Dean-Francois Zevaco went one step further and pointed out how the balcony is by necessity forced to become particularized, in order to receive a specific cultural and climatic articulation. Zevaco explained how modern architectural fundamentals were imported to North Africa, and the subsequent process of acculturation and transformation: "While the architectural elements had advocated a fundamentally new attitude, layout, size and material, their submission to the solar law gave our proposals an indisputable relationship with Arab architecture.''27 Zevaco suggests an almost "natural" acculturation of modernist architectural elements to the laws of climate, making them modern members of the pedigree of Arab architecture.
The claims of Fathy, Doshi and Zevaco were a reaction against modernist universalist myths, but above all an attempt to recapture the programmatic, cultural, and social complexity of the balcony. Their writings epitomize a range of practices in the second half of the 20th century that readdress the semantic layered-ness and specificity of architectural elenpjs likeiMs bal^ftnfe
PAGE 122
BALCONY
Studies of possible balcony styles and configurations for Carrières Centrales Housing, with different degrees of openness to the outside.
2014	Total infill: the appropriation of the balconies, expected and encouraged by Candilis, Woods, and Bodiansky, massively exceeds their best intentions, to the point where the balconies are erased altogether: confronted with the option of modern indoor living, the inhabitants choose it, rather than a hybrid evocation of a vernacular courtyard.
BALCONY
PAGE 123
28 Pierre Planat, Encyclopédie De L'architecture Et De La Construction: Tables Du Texte Et Des Dessins (Paris: Aulanier et cie, 1892), 239-240.
29. Bruno-Henri Vayssière, Reconstruction, Déconstruction: Le Hard French, Ou, L'architecture Française Des Trente Glorieuses. (Paris: Picard, 1988).
30. Georges Candilis, "Habitations musulmans/ européennes/israélites," unpublished project text, in: Candilis/IFA, (318/7), 1953, 2. "La relation entre le domaine privé et collectif est aussi bien définie dans les pratiques quotidiennes."
1952 Carrières Centrales, Casablanca, Candilis-Woods-Bodiansky
A good example of the vicissitudes of the modern element of the balcony on the Non-Western side of the Mediterranean can be found in a housing project that three young France-based architects elaborated for Morocco in 1952.
While at the end of the 19th century the architectural historian Pierre Planat had claimed that "In not a single Musulman [Muslim] house in Asia or North-Africa we perceive a balcony. This would be completely contrary to the mores of these people in which strangers cannot penetrate the intimacy of life,''28 50 years later, Georges Candilis, Shadrach Woods, and Victor Bodiansky would nevertheless attempt to introduce the balcony to a context that traditionally had not welcomed it. Working for the Atelier des Bâtisseurs (ATBAT)-Afrique, they built a mass housing project for the periphery of Casablanca, in the French protectorate of Morocco. Urged by the uprisings for decolonization in the early 1950s, the urban planners and architects of the protectorate started to take into consideration cultural determinants in their new housing projects. While modern housing had until that moment been mainly reserved for European colonials, now the local population and its specific dwelling culture could be exposed to modernity. In order to achieve this goal, the ATBAT architects turned to the balcony as a mediating element between the private and the public realm.
ATBAT's focus on the intermediate realm was a critique of contemporary developments in European high-rise housing that they were now transplanting to North Africa. In French postwar building, less and less attention was paid to intermediate space between inside and outside.29 Under the guise of rationalization, architects and engineers increasingly erased this realm from their housing models. Especially in the design of dense high-rise housing developments, intermediate architectural elements such as outdoor terraces and galleries largely disappeared. The proliferation of the balcony was an attempt to compensate for this loss of the outdoor realm in architecture; collective spaces were eliminated and replaced by private projections.
Against this context of neglect in their homeland, the architects of ATBAT not only analyzed intermediate outdoor spaces (such as courtyards, terraces and entrance spaces) in traditional Moroccan rural dwelling patterns, but also how these re-emerged in the temporary typologies of the bidonvilles in the peripheries of cities. These analyses informed design proposals in which they distinguished between Muslim dwellings - with outdoor dwelling space in close connection to the private sphere and completely separated from the public realm - and Israeli and European dwellings, in which the relation between the public and private spheres is based on degrees of transparency. Taking these cultural practices as a point of departure, Candilis and Woods developed several typologies for different dwelling cultures, while acknowledging that architecture alone could not define the relation between public and private, which is rather "relentlessly defined in everyday practices."30
Following this approach, large housing projects were realized in the peripheries of several Moroccan cities, the most well known being the Carrieres Centrales housing outside Casablanca. In this housing project the balcony was relied upon as the architectural element par excellence that could turn the modern dwelling into a culturally situated entity. The balcony was believed to play a role similar to the open-air courtyard in vernacular housing: a base for the everyday practices of meeting, cooking, and eating.
The balconies were also conceived as loci of appropriation by the inhabitants. Candilis, Woods, and Bodiansky believed that this appropriation would take the form of temporary light structures that would be ojtted oadtte balcony a|ttH removed when needs changed. This was clearlylwl nde^! timalon of the micro-political charge and intensity of everyday dwelling prpticbs in Morocco. Already shortly after its completion in 1953 several I alconifBweifcDartiallv
PAGE 124
BALCONY
1948-53 Pouillon mixes balcony styles at the housing complex Ensemble de la Tourette, Marseille, with René Egger.
Mashrabiya, with widened openings and modern pivoting windows as new element of mass housing.
Balcony bordered by vernacular Moorish filigrane screen and punctuated by modern square windows.
1957 Three balcony types: mashrabiya, ceramics, Haussmanian ironwork. A cultural métissage for the Totem Tower at the Diar-es-Saâda housing complex, Algiers, by Fernand Pouillon.
BALCONY
PAGE 125
enclosed by their inhabitants, so that kitchens for instance were no longer open-air, but just as in any other modern apartment part of the interior. Today the balconies have been completely transformed into indoor spaces sometimes housing several floors, as well as various rooms. The acculturation of the balcony, even though somewhat pre-programmed by the architects, massively exceeded their good intentions. Rather than a balconized version of a vernacular courtyard, the inhabitants chose an even more modern form of concrete enclosure.
1957 Fernand Pouillon, Diar-es-Saáda housing, Algiers
That the balcony also can be the locus for the encounter, confrontation, or mediation between different cultural patterns was made clear by French architect Fernand Pouillon in his housing project for Diar-es-Saada, on the slopes of the bay in the city of Algiers. As in Morocco, in late 1950s Algiers, the French colonial presence was highly contested and forced new conceptions of mass housing that would take local cultures into consideration.31 Fernand Pouillon has attempted to widen this notion of local culture as the co-presence of two important cultures along the Mediterranean: Ottoman and Islamic. In his design for Diar-es-Saáda, the monumental quality of the walls referred to the Ottoman ramparts, whereas the interior squares, gardens, and patios echoed Islamic Seville and Granada with their porticos, fountains, and cascades. The technical inventiveness of the project though, Pouillon called French.
The balconies of the building mediated between these three cultures, becoming for Pouillon the locus of a cultural métissage. This miscegenation becomes blatant in the so-called Totem Tower, consisting of balconies designed with the sculptor Dean Amado, composed of parts that refer to the various dwelling and building cultures Pouillon discerned in Algiers. The wooden scaffold work in the lower parts of the balconies referred to Ottoman housing, while the higher balconies, with their screens of prefabricated terracotta, referred to modern building techniques; meanwhile the colorful sculptural elements referred to tribal patterns and vernacular decorations. Pouillon had used a similar understanding of Mediterranean culture as métissage in the balconies of his La Tourette housing project in Marseille in 1953.
This idea of combining architectural styles from various traditions was critical to Pouillon's approach to building. In his view, modern architecture was not about the imposition of a universal model, but rather about "an encounter between different building cultures, different atmospheres, that together form the reality of a contemporary condition."32 In his Totem Tower, Pouillon discovered that the articulation of this encounter required an involvement with artists, ceramists, and sculptors, along with craftsmen such as cabinetmakers, locksmiths, and stonecutters. The French architect underlined how the balcony represented a layered encounter between various cultures of dwelling, but also of artistic expression and of craft.
QUID UNIVERSALITY?
Looking at the balcony in postwar architectural culture reveals practices and discourses that attempt to recapture, after the appropriation by governments before the war, the particular cultural, social, and political charge of the balcony. Especially across the Mediterranean, from Spain, France, and Italy to Israel, Algeria, and Morocco, the balcony was the subject of constant revisions, assimilations, and mutations to specific conditions.
This acculturation of the balcony is not a matter of a theoretical shift or discursive turn, but seems to be related to the very character of the balcony, which constantly contradicts a universal perspective, antf enforces a more relational and culturally-embedded understanding, floroccij sociologist Françoise Navez-Bouchanine has qualified the balcony as t HlimiiKDjS spate
32. Fernand Pouillon, project text for Diar-es-Saada housing, Algiers, 1957, 2.
31. Zeynep Çelik, Urban Forms and Colonial Confrontations: Algiers Under French Rule (Berkeley: University of California Press), 1997.
PAGE 126
BALCONY
1957 Grand mashrabiya on another of Pouillon's buildings for the Diar el-Mahgoul; narrower balconies nested in the cavity behind the brise soleil.
BALCONY
PAGE 127
[that] is an 'intermediate space', a sort of lock between the inside and the outside, between the public and the private, these are 'places in-their-own-right.'"33 Navez-Bouchanine points out that these limitrophic spaces have the capacity "to create distance" and that their meaning is inextricably related to the specific transitions, shifts, and ruptures between inside and outside, between public and private space, opening and closure. Next to this mediating appeal, limitrophic spaces are also characterized by the simple fact that they are 'added to' other spaces. They have an auxiliary character and function as border zones.
This double character of the balcony offers the element a particular semantic load. On the one hand, the balcony seems to be a particularly charged element because of its in-between character. It can be a connector, a complement, or even an antipode; it appears as a threshold. On the other hand, the balcony's auxiliary character implies a certain neutrality or independence vis-à-vis the rest of the building, allowing it to accommodate a variety of spatial practices, available for a broad horizon of interpretations in various architectural discourses - from reformist to participatory. Out of this perspective the claim of 'the impossibility of a universal balcony' is not only a way to qualify the many attempts to recapture the cultural, social and political specificity in post-war architectural culture, but also a rappel a l'ordre for contemporary architectural practice and thinking.
Fernand Pouillon, in his projects on both sides of the Mediterranean in Algiers and Marseille, already pointed to the necessity of expanding our frames of reference to conceive of an architectural element like the balcony. With his simultaneous reference to Ottoman and Islamic cultures, Pouillon opened the path towards a more layered and less purified notion of culture that can inform the design of individual elements. Pouillon defines the cultural charge of the architectural element as a matter that reaches beyond simple distinctions between modern and vernacular, or new and traditional. He depicts the architectural element as a contact zone between various cultures of dwelling, of arts, and of crafts. Like many postwar European projects, his work is not only an invitation to engage with the balcony as an important threshold between private and public, between interior and exterior, between individual and collective realms, or as a site of macro- or micro-politics, but also a dense layering of cultures.
33. Françoise Navez-Bouchanine, "L'espace Limitrophe: Entre Le Privé Et Le Public, Un No Man's Land? La Pratique Urbaine Au Maroc," Espaces Et Sociétés: Revue Critique Internationale De L'aménagement, De L'architecture Et De L'urbanisation (1990), 135, 37-46.
PAGE 128
BALCONY
1952 Brise soleil meets balcony, at Marseille's Unite Id'Habitation, Le Corbusier creates a facade as a semi-lifted mask coming off the building, primarily as a method of screening the sun, but also allowing porousness; in the gap „behind the raised facade, indented balconies are forged, one for each family.
BALCONY
PAGE 129
lEvery apartment with a balcony.
PAGE 130	BALCONY
NEW YORK DISCOVERS THE SOCIAL BALCONY
When New York City launches its first public housing during the Depression, called the "First Houses," balconies, still a nascent phenomenon in European social housing, are not yet a part of the American scheme. A quarter-century later, high rises like Penn South, inspired by Le Corbusier's Unite d'Habitation, becomes the dominant typology. And as with Unite, these new projects come with balcony access.
In 1964, the opening of Penn South is cause enough for optimism that JFK makes it for the opening. Later, such massive towers will be considered a blight, dubbed slums in the sky.
1936 hirst Houses, in Manhattan's tast Village, designed by Frederick L. Ackerman. The first public housing project in the United States, begun as a slum clearance Initiative, but with only fire escapes as makeshift balconies.
1962 Penn South Houses, in Chelsea, Manhattan, a co-op sponsored by the International Ladies Garment Workers Union and designed by Herman lessor. Built under the spell of both Le Corbusier's balcony-clad "superblock" housing, Unité d'Habitation, and the co-operative housing movement.
May 19,1962 President John F. Kennedy inaugurates Penn South Houses with a rousing speech in defense of labor unions, public housing, and the role of the federal government:
"The unfinished business of our society still lies stretching before us. And this housing project demonstrates what labor, with good, effective, progressive leadership, and the city and the state and private groups and the federal government together in cooperation can do for this city and this country.... There are those of us who say our job is done. That the function of the federal government Is not to govern. That all the things that need to be done were done in the 30s and the 40s. And that now our task is merely to administer. I do not accept that task at all. Nor can any American who sees what we still have left to do. Though this is a great effort by you, this union deserves the heartiest commendation. I hope others will follow your example."
BALCONY
PAGE 131
PORTMAN'S INTERIOR BALCONIES
In the 1970s, as postmodernism sets in, another balcony mutation: the interior balcony attains new prominence in John Portman's empire of hotel ventures and their progeny. The stupendous atria and the balcony become co-dependent, relying on each other for dizzying views of a new indoor world. Portman brings the balcony vista into the interior, looking out over a privatized, curvaceous simulation of urban engagement - while the public provision of balconies in social housing passes out of fashion.
1976 Westin Bonaventure Hotel Los Angeles, by John Portman and Associates, with pod-like balconies, serving as cocktail seating booths, bulging over the atria, a key characterstic in plan and section.
"[W]hat one is still tempted to think of as the front entry, on Figueroa, admits you, baggage and all, onto the second story shopping balcony, from which you must take an escalator down to the main registration desk. What I first want to suggest about these curiously unmarked ways in is that they seem to have been imposed by some new category of closure governing the inner space of the hotel itself (and this over and above the material constraints under which Portman had to work). I believe that, with a certain number of other characteristic postmodern buildings, such as the Beaubourg in Paris or the Eaton Centre in Toronto, the Bonaventure aspires to being a total space, a complete world, a kind of miniature city..."
—Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism: Or the Cultural Logic of Late Capital (1991.)
1968 Hyatt Regency, Atlanta, John Portman and Associates.
PAGE 132
BALCONY
MODERNISM FALLS OFF THE BALCONY
In the 1970s, Paul Rudolph's brutalist public housing high rise Crawford Manor, in New Haven, Connecticut, is criticized in Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown's Learning from Las Vegas. Ironically, its balconies - even though they are curved, sensual, and alternating in their projections - are targeted for being devoid of ornament and merely a joyless expression of so-called honest structure. This postmodern balcony critique strangely echoes, but this time
as a positive, Quatrem integrity of the form - b isn't ornamental enoug
lere
out
jh.
e de Quin' for Ventu
"Those balcdnies in the Crawford Manor are an alternation of thrusts, one out from the building and one parallel to it, in order to emphasize the essential organization of the building. If all of the balconies thrust forward, then the result from a distant view would be a kind of shaft. But by making the thrusts of the balconies oppose each other, one senses the cubicle nature of th interior."
—Paul Rudolph, in Dohn Wesley
Cook, Conversations with
Architects (1973), 192.
"Adornments of representational
sculpture on he roof, or a prettily shaped window, or witiness or rhetoric of any kind are unthinkable
for Crawford Manor. Nor would it sport appliques of expensive material on a column or white stripes and wainscoting copied from Renaissance compositions.
For instance, Crawford Manor's cantilevered balconies are . 'structurally integrated'; they are parapeted with the overall structural I materiafand devoid of ornament."
I -Denise Scott Brown and Robert Venturi, Learning From Las Vegas,
r
1972| 92.
19th century notion of the balcony as an artificial add-on, disturbing the id Scott Brown, the ornamental association is to be embraced. Rudolph just
Typical plan of Crawford House, floors 3-14, with balconies in grey.
1966 Paul Rudolph s Crawford House, New Haven, Connecticut, featuring two balcony shapes: skinny and wide. The wide type	I
alternates by floor so it never overlaps directly with the one beneath or above it - but also to evoke the ridged texture akin to Rudolph's trademark corduroy concrete. Despite Venturi and Scott Brown's critique, the repressed ornament might just be returning.
BALCONY
PAGE 133
1969 Balconies of Rudolph's Tracey Towers, In the Bronx, have the same footprint from the ground floor to the top, blending into floorplates, becoming part of the overall plan rather than a legible, protruding element. Each balcony overlaps completely with the one above and below, diminishing visibility from one balcony to the another.
1969 Typical floor plan of Paul Rudolph's Tracey Towers.
I
PAGE 134
BALCONY
1969	Glass balustrades on the balconies contribute to the transparency of Mies van der Rohe apartment block on Ile-des-Soeurs (Nuns' Island), in the Saint Lawrence River in Montreal, which is owned by nuns until 13 years before completion of the development. Available only as rental units, the apartments play a part in the utopian beginnings of inhabitation of fle-des-Soeurs: "What began as a fully planned dream community in 1966 quickly earned itself a reputation as a paradise island for swinging singles." (Proment, "ile-des-Soeurs Premium Builder.")
PAGE 135
1972 Gentrification of the balcony: more than a century after it started to become popularized, the balcony reverts to Its former status as an accessory of wealth and display, now on the French Riviera at the Marina Baie des Anges in Villeneuve-Loubet, a development designed by Andre Minangoy consisting of four voluptuous buildings containing 1,300 apartments.
BALCONY FANTASIES
From IJuliet on, the balcony is figured as the element most associated with eroticism, voyeurism, romance, femininity. After the sober orthogonal balconies protruding from public housing blocks, it doesn't take a Freudian to see late 20th century high-design balconies as a near literal attempt to seduce buyers.
In the French Riviera, two balcony stories play out...

PAGE 136	BALCONY
BALCONY
PAGE 137
"It occurs in dreams that a person, now " , I now frightened, climbs down the f ts'of houses. Those with entirely smooth fr0" gre men; but those which are provided w®hSDrojections and balconies to which one rin hold on- are women."
Ilsigmund Freud, A General Introduction to Psychoanalysis. Part two: the dream,
1920, 156.

1990 Ad for Egoiste by Chanel, byDean-Paul Goude. A facade gridded with wrought iron balconies (meant to resemble the hotel Negresco in Nice). A woman bursts onto a balcony from shuttered doors. Then another, and another, crying out: "Oh rage!," "Oh despair!, "Oh my betrayed love!" as Prokofiev's Dance of the Knights swells. From the central balcony, a man's hand emerges from behind the balcony screen and places a bottle of cologne on the balcony railing. The doors pulse open and closed in unison, the woman crying out "Égoïste!"
The tagline: "Chanel:
For a Man."
Primal scene for Chanel's balcony ad: Hotel Negresco, opened In 1913.
PAGE 138
BALCONY
BALCONY AS SAVIOR
To the long list of benefits balconies offer for urban living, sustainability and economy can now be added, and France is the test bed. Typically, high-density, high rise social housing that falls into disrepair has been demolished rather than refurbished. But in an effort to improve thermal performance and declining reputation, Paris Habitat-OPH, owners of the Tour Bois-le-Pretre in Paris's 17th arrondissement, sponsors a competition to rejuvenate the entire tower by adding balconies to its facade. Architects Lacaton & Vassal's scheme saves the tower through the installation of winter gardens, or enclosable balconies. The balcony, porous in the summer, insulates in the winter - and its addition is a cheaper option than demolition by an estimated € 8.8 million, and a huge saver in energy bills.
BEFORE: The 1960s tower block, designed by Raymond Lopez, nicknamed "Alcatraz."
BALCONY
PAGE 139
AFTER: The tower is clad with a new facade of balconies, made from corrugated aluminum and steel. "In cold weather, they provide highly effective insulation, so much so that the architects expect heating bills to be cut by 50 percent. In the summer, they provide shade from the sun... and perhaps, most importantly, the winter gardens enhance the pleasure of living in these apartments, offering an unprogrammed space that can be used for all sorts of activities."
—Andrew Ayers, "Lacaton & Vassal's Revitalisation of a Parisian Tower Bloc," The Architectural Review, December 22, 2011.
The tower's original cladding is removed, new balconies attached.
PAGE 140
BALCONY
ART / MARKET BALCONY
Like de Quincy before him, artist Julien Berthier mocks the pretentions of the contemporary balcony. He equips Parisian apartments with an instant Haussmanian balcony, raised into position by a cherry-picker, enobling the apartment blocks not blessed with a balcony for all. Meanwhile in Germany, a property company performs a version of Berthier's gag in real life as a marketing stunt, and in London the addition of a balcony is the ultimate real estate amenity - better, according to real estate mavens, than having an extra bedroom.
2008 Balcon Additionnel, by artist Dullen Bertheir. "Service for installing a plastic Haussmannian-style balcony on all kinds of buildings."
THE VALUE OF A BALCONY
"IT SEEMS London is beginning to understand Paris' love affair with balconies. According to developers they're more popular than ever, and research by estate agent Chesterton Humberts suggests a London home with raised outdoor space can command up to 15 per cent more than similar properties without. The estate agent even suggests that a balcony can add more to the value of a property than having either an extra bedroom or a further 150 sq ft [14 square meters] of internal floor space. But not just any balcony will do as the direction it faces also plays an important part in determining the overall value of a property."
— "Outdoor space at a premium in London," City A.M., September 13,
2013.
2012 Immobilien Scout 24, a Berlin-based property agency, advertises the quality of its own balconied properties by offering unsuspecting apartment-dwellers a "sneak peek" at what they're missing.
SUKKAH BALCONIES OF BROOKLYN
»You shall dwell in Succot for seven days; every inhabitant of Israel shall dwell in Succot. In order that your generation shall know that I caused the Dews to dwell in Succot when | brought them out of Egypt. I am the Lord your G-d."
In private outdoor space-deprived cities like New York, observers of Sukkah can opt to build a temporary structure within their balcony. The torah requires that the structure be enclosed on three sides but left open to the sky (balconies are often built in a staggered pattern by developers targeting Orthodox tenants, so at least a portion of the sukkah remains open to the sky above). In this structure, Dews may eat, rest, and even sleep (though it is not required) for the seven days of Succot.
"This whole road and further down in deep Bed-Stuy and Clinton Hill is becoming hasidish," says Israel Kogen, a tour guide with Hasidic Williamsburg Tour. "Look at the balconies and the bars on the windows. It's typical haredi." (Dewish Telegraph Agency, February 15, 2013.)
PAGE 142
BALCONY
THE CONSUMED BALCONY
In the metropolis, the balcony faces pressure from a
polluted environment, and an interior where space is at a premium...
BEIJING'S DIRTY LAUNDRY
What to do with Beijing's unruly balconies? The City Planning Commission expresses frustration that citizens consistently flout acceptable balcony norms, and has even issued a report, "A Study on the Tendency to Enclose Balconies in China," which finds that their main use is for "laundry, planting and having pets, and storage." The causes of Beijingers' reluctant use of the balcony are numerous: the outside environment is not pleasant enough to merit an exterior space; traditional living habits advocating privacy; and overcrowded apartments making it difficult not to utilize the balcony in some way. In 2008 a new regulation is announced to tidy up messy balconies:
"No hangings on the windows and balconies on the sides of the streets; the plants on the balcony must be organized and aligned under the railing's height; all shabby awnings on balconies near streets must be cleared; no advertising or other things sticking onto windows are permitted; no flowerpot is permitted to extend beyond the balcony railing." (Beijing City Evironmental Management Department, 2008.)
HANOI'S TIGER CAGES
The balcony is still an architectural improvisation -referred to as a "tiger cage," boxed in by corrugated metal or mesh to enclose the space but still allow air flow - subject to overspill from increasingly prosperous lives and crammed living spaces.
SINGAPORE'S SUNROOM The deluxe box-in: Singaporean renovators Home Hub and Living offer easy to install glass doors to interiorize your balcony and create an air-conditioned sun room.
BALCONY
PAGE 143
BONUS ROOM + TAX BREAK: VANCOUVER'S ENCLOSED BALCONY craze
Municipal authorities, aware of the local trend of enclosing balconies, are attempting to incentivize the addition 0f these amenities. Developers are interested in minimizing their floor-space-ratio (FSR), which they are taxed on but at the same time maximizing their rentable floor area. The enclosed balcony is the magic ingredient that allows them to do both: it is excluded from the FSR but included in the calculation of rentable space - an extra indoor space, a huge lure for renters, all essentially for free (for the developer). Vancouver's Planning Office limits the loophole though: enclosed balconies cannot grow beyond four percent of the total building area, and they must have a distinct identity as a balcony within the floor plan - rather than used opportunistically as spare room or a den.
2012 Enclosed balconies in Vancouver.
WHAT IS AN ENCLOSED BALCONY?
To qualify for a tax break, an enclosed balcony must be: "Distinct but integrated ... enclosed balconies should have their own discrete identity from neighbouring façade elements and not intrude into the unit's living space layout."
—City of Vancouver Planning Commission, 2012.
Bayshore Outlook foal Harbour
Enclosed balcony: for use as dining room.
PLAN 07
1 BEDROOM WITH ENCLOSED BALCONY
710Sq Ft	
Living	10’6"xir9H
Dining	6'2"x 11'9"
Bedroom	10’0" X 11’5"
Vancouver real-estate agency Bluetree Homes markets apartments with enclosed balconies, like Bayshore Outlook:
"There are many benefits to having an enclosed
balcony:
-	The perfect size space for a bright and sunny home office.
-	Can be used as a flex space or in-suite storage.
-	With the glass windows and glass sliding door, it brings lots of light into the bedroom.
-	A great alternative if it's too chilly to be out on your open-air balcony.
-	Improves energy performance and moderates temperature control."
Enclosed balconies must be identifiable within the plan, similar to a conventional balcony.
NOT ACCEPTABLE
Balconies that do not result in a discrete identity, intrude into the living space, function as a den or bedroom, or are not readily convertible into an outdoor amenity are not elllgible for the tax exemption.
PAGE 144	BALCONY
MOSCOW: FILLED IN
Residents of Soviet housing complexes in Moscow often used their balconies, during the communist era, as outdoor fridge-freezers for their food. Since the end of the regime though, these balconies have been progressively filled in; exterior space is not as prized as an extended indoor domain. The resulting facades now appear mostly solid. In a few pockmarks, only a handful of balconies remain...
BALCONY
ODESSA: FILLED-OUT...
PAGE 145
Minimal
hanging
balconies expanded into entire rooms off the facade of social housing.
Illegal construction of stacked balconies / hanging rooms.
Wooden sun-room balconies, multiple types, all illegal, like a favela growing on the shell of social housing...
PAGE 146
BALCONY
DUBAI: OVERSTUFFED
In Dubai's working class quarters, a pattern of intensive balcony use prevails, rather than eradication. Appropriated as a reimagined courtyard, the balconies of Deira are considered by the authorities as an excessive and embarrassing display of the private and mundane minutiae of life. Clothes dry on lines, items are left out in 'storage,' and patio furniture, satellite dishes, and dryers clutter the small bonus space of the balcony. This hyperactive use of the balcony does not sit well with the government: new codes outline what is proper and improper on the balcony. Laundry: improper. Neat and tidy furniture: proper.
PAGE 148
BALCONY
LAUNDRY IN PUBLIC...
Wet clothes in the UAE hung from balconies drip onto the street... "there Is a chance of tourists passing by ... [w]hat would they think?"
UAE | Community Reports
Unused materials are a safety hazard
The presence of unused items in balconies concerns Gulf News reader By Deepak T. Gumani Gulf News reader
Published: 00:00 July 25, 2012	GULF «.NEWS
n» so 6
Image Credit: Deepak T Gumani
Deepak T. Gumani Eyesore and lurking danger 'It appeared as if the balconies were used to store items that were probably not required or were extra that the tenants did not want to part with,' says Gumani.
UAE | General
Campaign against laundry, satellite dishes on balconies
Sharjah authorities insist rules continue to be flouted despite penalties By Mariam M. Al Serkal, Staff Reporter
Published: 00:00 July 2, 2010	GULF r* NEWS
Q Reader comments (11)	13». SO 1
UAE | General
Residents complain about shirtless bachelors on balconies
Bachelors standing on their balcony partly dressed are making neighbours uneasy
By Sunita Menon, Staff Reporter
Published: 00:00 October6, 200«	GULF m NEWS
13 » i=iO 2
Image Credit: Tallb JarlwalaGulf News
Residents complain about shirtless bachelors on A bachelor on the balcony in a residential area in Deira, Dubai.
UAE | General
Sharjah renews drive to rid balconies of clothes
By Abdullah Arbab, Staff Reporter
Published: 00:00 August 20,2003	GULF - NEWS
13» SQ o
Sharjah Municipality will crack down on those hanging their laundry in full public view.
The municipality has launched a renewed drive reiterating it has banned the practice of allowing wet laundry to be hung on apartment balconies, and has pasted pamphlets at all residential buildings warning tenants.
"If people still continue to hang their laundry, the municipality will institute fines," says the warning. The pamphlets are in four languges: English. Arabic. Malayalam and Urdu.
The warning comes just days after Ajman instituted its own ban on hanging laundry from balconies.
A source at Sharjah Municipality said inspectors from the Public Health and Security sections will report anyone violating the rule and tenants will be fined. The fine amount was not disclosed.
BALCONY
PAGE 149
The eyesore of hanging laundry
Lifestyle of some Dubai residents has gotten worse as they resort to drying their personal washing on their balconies.
Text and Picture by U. Kataky, Gulf News Reader
Published: 22:53 August 14, 2009	GULF --c NEWS
Image Credit:
According to Gulf News reader U. Kataky, hanging laundry out on the balconies of high-rise buildings is creating an ugly sight. He said:"... a penalty on the offendingoccupants would solve this problem in the long run".
Lifestyle of some Dubai residents has gotten worse as they resort to drying
UAE | Genera!
Ajman bans hanging of laundry from balconies
In a bid to maintain the attractiveness of the emirate, Ajman Municipality has issued a decree to ban the hanging of laundry from balconies and windows.
By Bassma Al Jandaly, Staff Reporter
Published: 00:00 October 2, 2003	GULF NEWS
fl»	^83 Z3
In a bid to maintain the attractiveness of the emirate, Ajman Municipality has issued a decree to ban the hanging of laundry from balconies and windows.
The rule applies to residents living in buildings overlooking streets and also states that people should not store rubbish or discarded objects on balconies, as this will "disfigure the general outlook of the city".
The decision came into force yesterday and municipality inspectors have distributed details to residents. The decree says that penalties such as fines will be enforced against anyone breaking the rule.
However, the municipality has not yet set the amount of the fines, instead saying that it will depend on the seriousness and effect of the offence, as well as whether a person has already received a penalty for a similar incident.
UAE I General
Laundry drying on balconies irks developers
Discovery, Greens residents say people drying their washing in public gives their locality a downmarket look
By Nadeem Hanif, Staff reporter Published: 00:00 August 26, 2010
O Reader comments (7)

Image Credit: Xpress /Franco» Nel
Everything from clothes to towels and even underwear seen hanging out for the world to see at Discovery Gardens
UAE | General
Dubai campaign to curb misuse of balconies
By A Staff Reporter
Published: 00:00 January 2,2003	GULF - NEWS
n» .so o
The Dubai Development Board will launch a campaign today to educate tenants to avoid misusing buildings to help the emirate maintain a positive image, said a senior official.
"The campaign is meant to curb the misuse of balconies and other practices that inconvenience other tenants and the public, said Ahmed Thani Al Matrooshi, Director General of the Dubai Development Board.
"It will target tenants of 6,500 flats in 355 buildings. Circulars and posters will be distributed to the tenants urging them not to store things in balconies or misuse them in any other way that cause Visual pollution'," said Al Matrooshi.
PAGE 150
BALCONY
DUBAI'S HIGH END BALCONIES: SYMPTOM OF THINNING
Low intensity of use but not of substance in our cities - a thinning in terms of population and activity - is not just a sad proof of uselessness but simply the presence of a future usefulness. Infrastructure is an announcement of future inhabitation; landscape is already indicated but it's not inhabited. In many parts of the world, we have entirely finished cities that suggest an incredible density, but they don't achieve it and they're also not intended to ever achieve it. In Dubai, there is a significant gap between intention and reality. A huge amount of building goes on but we are incapable of inhabiting these conditions in a traditional way. Signs of inhabitation in finished buildings can be difficult to find; when they are absent, you can at least find signs of irregularity, things that aren't completely perfect anymore. The balcony is the giveaway.
BALCONY	PAGE 151
PAGE 152	BALCONY
THE MICROPOLITICAL BALCONY
After its bloated, bloviating role in the 20th century's political dramas, the 21st century balcony operates on a micropolitical level: the balcony is a platform on which individuals can try to change the world on a small scale, carving out a personal ecotopia...
BALCONY
PAGE 153
PET PROJECTS
In the gentrifying city, the balcony (along with the rooftop garden), is taking on a suburban coloring as a small territory in which individuals can try to act locally and think globally, installing high-design chicken coops and micro-farming arrays. Meanwhile animal sanctuaries have reported a surge in abandoned chickens due to fickle locavores (Jonel Aleccia, "Backyard chickens dumped at shelters when hipsters can't cope, critics say," NBC.com, July 7, 2013.)
"The cats, they like to sit out there." —Stefanie L. Russell, catio owner, to The New York Times
FARMING The balcony makes possible everything GREENERATOR Industrial designer Jonathan from container gardens to urban bee-keeping.	Globerson designs a balcony attachment that
collects solar and wind energy, transforming the balcony into an ecological asset.
THE CATIO The New York Times reports on the latest In urbanism: the urban catio. Pre-fab screens allow petowners to turn idle balconies into feline utopias. ''Catios have made inroads in the suburbs, where they range from small, practical structures - like a box made of wood and chicken wire - to all-out fantasy cat playgrounds, replete with tunnels and scratching posts."" (Jennifer A. Kingson, 'Catios' Bring Cats Outdoors, New York Times, June 16, 2010)
2014 Chicken coop made for balcony living,	2011 Chicken Co-op: Luxury Chicken Living,
by H0NS, Anker Bak.
2010 Nogg Chicken Coop, Matthew Hayward and Nadia Juren.
PAGE 154	BALCONY
ORIGINAL GREEN BALCONY
Between 1950 and 1970, Milanese architects BBPR (Gianluigi Banfi, Lodovico Barbiano di Belgiojoso, Enrico Peressutti, Ernesto Nathan Rogers), famous for the Torre Velasca, with its overhanging upper section, also create a series of projects across the city experimenting with edificio a gradoni (stepped or terraced buildings)
- all of them thick with vegetation. On Via Cavalieri di Santo Sepolcro in 1961, BBPR create a prototype of the cascading green balcony that will become popular in the 21st century...

BALCONY
PAGE 155
THE GREEN BALCONY, SUPERSIZED
Taking the "green balcony" to its logical climax: the forest-clad Bosco Verticale (Vertical Forest), designed by Stefano Boeri, also in Milan. The equivalent of 10,000 square meters of vegetation are hoisted into the sky, with climatic benefits for the tower's residents, on the micro level - within their apartments -and on a macro scale...
Renderings of the verdant balconies.
2016 Bosco Verticale, completed, its green balconies in their infancy.
RETURN OF THE POLITICAL BALCONY, POSTSCRIPT The absence of charismatic leaders, and of compelling political messages, has left a void in terms of the legitimate occupation of the political balcony. That void is increasingly filled by the "tree" - in all its manifestations a hopeful emblem, of the green future that each of us would like to ensure for later generations. Beyond ideology - or, perhaps, as the last ideology of sustainability - it is on the tree that we project our expectations...
•he would-be balcony forest.
PAGE 156
BALCONY

21st CENTURY: ANTI-SOCIAL AND EXHIBITIONIST BALCONIES
After a century of instrumentalization for the various good intentions of social housing, the most charged balconies in the 21st century are those of luxury residential buildings, which bring an entirely new semantics to the balcony as "fake appetizer" (de Quincey). For the architect of today's high-end residencies, the balcony is one of the few spaces left for formal expression, dovetailing with the developer's need for a shapely profile with which to tempt deep-pocketed buyers. Competing imperatives emerge: for utmost privacy while peering over the city, but also for a new form of exhibitionism, a facebook of the balcony, in which individuals self-consciously exhibit a selected identity in full view of the city. Cut loose from its lineage of meanings - regal, bourgeois, health-conscious, demagogic, democratic - the balcony is susceptible to any and every formal manipulation, from chiseled niche to transparent platform to undulating fin...
2012 Color wall: Simplon A, T2.a Architects, Budapest.
2012 Personal vitrines: Bernard Bühler Architects, Seguin, Bordeaux.
2007 Promontories: Iceberg Dwellings, IDS Architects, Aarhus, Denmark.
2013 Niches: RipollTizon Architects, Mallorca.
2010 Boats: 235 Van Buren, Perkins & Will, Chicago.
2010 Tubs: Baufeld 10, Love Architecture, Hamburg.
2013 Living box, The Cullen, Dackson Clements Burrows Architects, Prahran VIC, Australia.
2013 Boxes and platforms: 28 logements collectifs, Bernard Bühler Architects, Bayonne, France.
2011 Angled: 0restad care center, DJW Arckitekter, Copenhagen.
PAGE 158
BALCONY
2009	Undulating: Aqua Tower, Studio Gang, Chicago. Whereas modernist housing projects sought to publicly register the existence of a building's inhabitants on the facade through blatant, cellular balconies, one for every family, amorphous, slender, billowing balconies make their presence unpredictable, ambiguous - like the residents themselves...
...who, if on the balcony, would be almost undetectable from the street. Seemingly two-dimensional flat fins produce an rippling surface effect that appears more like a system for screening against solar gain and public view than a series of balconies to be occupied...
2010	Fins: Panorama, RAW Design, Toronto.

Balconies act as wind dampners for the building, allowing every floor up to the 82nd to have a balcony (normally the 60th floor is the limit). At that height, the vista and the function of the balcony change radically...
BALCONY
PAGE 159
2011 Terraced tubs: Hatert Housing,
24H Architecture, Nijmegen, Netherlands.
2012 Coiling: Absolute Towers, MAD Architects, Toronto.
I 2005 Partitioned I streets in the sky:
I Gemini Residence,
I MVRDV, Copenhagen.
PAGE 160
BALCONY
THE LOOKY-LOO* BALCONY
In the United States, postwar suburbanization hollows out the urban core on the one hand, and isolates families into domestic cells on the other. As the gradual recolonization of the cities begins, the deluxe urban balcony serves as a lure to bring the affluent back. Instead of a private castle in the country, the urban apartment promises a privileged overview of the glamor of the city. In a paradoxical twist, the new imagery of the balcony reimports suburban separation into the heart of the city. No longer actually in touch with the street, the dramatically elevated balcony is a viewing platform that transforms city into spectacle.
* "People who just come to look." (urbandictionary.com)
1967 "Fifty-two stories above Chicago, city noises fade and vistas expand for guests at a Marina City residence." National Geographic on Bertrand Goldberg's Marina City, Chicago.
1969 On Marina City's high density luxury balconies again, this time sipping bourbon.
2011	Developer ad for Frank Gehry's downtown tower at 8 Spruce Street, New York. High enough to remain unseen while seeing all, the balcony is now a place for intense, private wish fulfilment -to celebrate your success in life, you can wail on your guitar as if you were alone in your suburban bedroom, with the New York skyline as your imagined audience.
BALCONY
PAGE 161
Floors 52-75
Mow renting
212,»77,2220 Eight Spruce Street NewYorkbyGehry.com
: V'
PAGE 162
BALCONY
POOLS
Severed from the life of the street, the balcony mutates from being an opportunistic bit of open air space, to a private cell in the sky, complete with its own pool.
1977 Condominio Edificio Penthouse, Sao Paulo, is likely the first building in the world to have pool balconies. Designed and constructed when the area is a blank slate (left), before the Paralsopolis favela springs up in its shadow, the tower later becomes a readymade lesson on inequality, a symptom of the mental as well as physical distance separating the life of the balcony from the life of the street.
BALCONY
PAGE 163
2012 Plans for Aquaria Grande, Mumbai, by architects lames Law, Cybertecture. The two 37-story towers of this 200-apartment complex would cradle the form of a water droplet between them, in effect a massive billboard for its own signature amenity: pool balconies.
PAGE 164
BALCONY
BALCONY-ON-DEMAND
In 1941, Architectural Forum gives the ironic accolade "Design of the month" to a bedroom that might be opened to the elements like a filing cabinet drawer on the facade of an apartment building. Whereas a balcony is typically an extra space, rather small, whose program remains loosely defined, here it's an entire room. So great is the cantilever, so exposed is the platform, and so defined is the program, that the term balcony hardly fits... outdoor bedroom? The scheme re-emerges in a scaled down form in the 21st century with the Bloomframe, a window, rather than an entire room, "that morphs magically into a balcony at the touch of a button." The balcony-on-demand is now aimed more at maximising space than extreme exposure to the elements.
POSTWAR DESIGN OF THE MONTH
Dreamed up by an uninhibited visionary whose name is best wit held for personal security reasons, is this mobile bedroom that pulls out, like a dresser drawer, into the night Since its creator ignores a solution as simple as that of rolling back the roof, it must be assumed that the device is solely for the use of apartment dwellers. Whatever its purpose, the structural complications are appalling and the social implications, worse. The theme of organic community planning is certainly developed to its peak. Telephoning the tenants upstairs and asking him to kindly roll out his room might provide a few minutes' privacy, but imagine what morale will be when the town’s snappiest blonde will be on full view any clear morning complete with rejuvenating cream, chin strap and curlers.
August 1944 Architectural Forum's "Postwar Design of the Month," in which you might see the neighborhood's "snappiest blonde" applying makeup. "The structural implications are appalling and the social implications worse."
2007 The Bloomframe, designed by Hofman Dujardin Architecten and produced by Alcoa, would give users "the possibility to use the surface of an apartment to the maximum."
BALCONY
PAGE 165
MOBILE BALCONY
Roman Mistiuk takes the peculiar tensions that animate the contemporary balcony - the balcony as "distinct but integrated" space, as ever more flamboyant appendage, as remote access to the city - to a feverish extreme.
A plug-in all-glass balcony that is also an elevator, which races down the façade of the luxury super-towers of the future until it meets the street and becomes the Peugeot Metomorph, a high-speed car. Ironically, the (former) balcony reintegrates with the life of the street - or the driver may also simply race through the future city, taking the balcony's "distinct but integrated" identity with them like a shell.
m

PAGE 166	BALCONY
Engagement with the street: Kim Kardashian films the adoring crowd below the Fasano hotel and husband Kanye West snapping Will Smith on the balcony above, Sugarloaf mountain in the background.
February, 2013
Above: Will Smith
Below: Kanye West and Kim Kardashian
November, 2011
Britney Spears
February 2012
Dennifer Lopez
October, 2009
P. Diddy
March 2011
Gisele Bündchen and Tom Brady
BALCONY
PAGE 167
CELEBRITY BALCONY
Blogs refer to photos of celebrities on display at the Hotel Fasano in Rio de Janeiro as simply being on "that balcony" -famous in itself, though nameless. Rather than politics, today we associate the balcony appearance with fame. Celebrities are the only ones left who keep faith in the balcony as a means to engage with the city and its people, albeit in a mutant, Internet-age form. While the dweller of the luxury high rise treats the street as pure panorama, the celebrity balcony appearance reanimates it with an inspiring presence...
November 2012
Lady Gaga
September 2011
Katy Perry
June 2013
Fergie
June 2013
Shakira
February 2010
Beyoncé
September 2011
Rihanna
PAGE 168	BALCONY
GIFTS FROM ABOVE
2002 Michael Dackson, Adlon Hotel, Berlin. Dackson later explains his notorious near-calamity - he was overpowered by the emotion of the crowd outside his balcony. "I made a terrible mistake. I got caught up in the excitement of the moment. I would never intentionally endanger the lives of my children."
("lackson: Baby stunt was 'mistake,'" BBC, November 20, 2002.)
BALCONY
PAGE 169
2013 Austin Bieber leans over the railing of Toronto's Hazelton Hotel and lets a glob of spit towards his fans below. He claims he wasn't aiming for them, but an image of the street below posted on Instagram by Bieber moments earlier suggests the projectile probably landed on one of his jubilant female admirers below.
Inslag ram
While the Emperor was dining, Valuev, looking out of the window, said:
"The people are still hoping to see Your Majesty again."
The dinner was nearly over, and the Emperor, munching a biscuit, rose and went out onto the balcony. The people, with Petya among them, rushed toward the balcony.
"Angel! Dear one! Hurrah! Father!..." cried the crowd, and Petya with it, and again the women and men of weaker mold, Petya among them, wept with joy.
A largish piece of the biscuit the Emperor was holding in his hand broke off, fell on the balcony parapet, and then to the ground. A coachman in a jerkin, who stood nearest, sprang forward and snatched it up. Several people in the crowd rushed at the coachman. Seeing this the Emperor had a plateful of biscuits brought him and began throwing them down from the balcony. Petya's eyes grew bloodshot, and still more excited by the danger of being crushed, he rushed at the biscuits. He did not know why, but he had to have a biscuit from the Tsar's hand and he felt that he must not give way. He sprang forward and upset an old woman who was catching at a biscuit; the old woman did not consider herself defeated though she was lying on the ground - she grabbed at some biscuits but her hand did not reach them. Petya pushed her hand away with his knee, seized a biscuit, and as if fearing to be too late, again shouted "Hurrah!" with a voice already hoarse.
The Emperor went in, and after that the greater part of the crowd began to disperse.
—Leo Tolstoy, War and Peace, 1869.
PAGE 170
BALCONY
"WE ARE ALL OUTSIDE ON TEH BALCONY NOW" [SIC]
A manifesto for "Balconism" by Constant Dullaart, disseminated online and in print in ART PAPERS, describes a 21st century balcony condition of relentless, fearless, emancipatory, creative, subversive digital exposure, where every platform - online and otherwise - is in effect a balcony, with universal access and a permanent audience for the unfolding of our subjectivity. Everyone has a balcony, and "The balcony is connecting: you do not have to be afraid on the balcony, we are behind you, we are the masses, you can feel the warmth from the inside, breathing down your neck." One could even extrapolate: everyone is a balcony...
2005 Completed one year after the launch of Facebook, VM Homes, Copenhagen, by Bjarke Ingels (BIG), Dulien de Smedt QDS) and Plot, reinvents the balcony as a social network: each jaunty protrusion an identical, transparent platform on which to fabricate and broadcast individual identity, and overlook other, similar identities...
BALCONY
ART PAPERS
HOME FEATURE ARTICLES SPECIAL EVENTS RETROSPECTIVE
FEATURE ARTICLES
more from the Mar/Apr 2014 issue:
BALCONISM
How Are You Today?	Text / Constant Dullaart
AGNES interviewed by Hans Ulrich Obrist
A State for the Arts -Marker 2014: Gulf
A new "-ism" calls for sovereign expression in the 21st century, acronyms, typos, leetspeak, and kaomoji included.
We are all outside on teh balcony now. Standing on a platform made out of a tweet into corporate versions of public space. We are not stored in a cloud, opaque or translucent to whomever. We publish, we get read. ok. Private publishing does not exist, we now know we always get read (hi). To select what we want to have read, and by whom, is our greatest challenge riy. For now and teh future. If you tolerate this, your children will be normalized. Outside, on the street, status updates in the air, checking into another spatial analogy of information exchange. Sometimes hard to reach, through tutorials, encryptions and principles. It is generous to be outdoors, watched by a thousand eyes recording us for the future, our actions to be interpreted as an office job. We need a private veranda above ground, a place for a breath of fresh air, out of sight for the casual onlooker, but great for public announcements. The balcony is both public and private, online and offline.
It is a space and a movement at the same time. You can be seen or remain unnoticed, inside and outside. Slippers are ok on the balcony. Freedom through encryption, rather than openness. The most important thing is: you must choose to be seen. We are already seen and recorded on the streets and in trains, in emailz, chatz, supermarketz and restaurantz, without a choice. Remaining unseen, by making a clearer choice where to be seen. We are in the brave new now, get ready to choose your balcony, to escape the warm enclosure of the social web, to address, to talk to the people outside your algorithm bubble. U will not get arrested on the balcony, you and yours should have the right to anonymity on the balcony, although this might seem technically complicated. The balcony is a gallery, balustrade, porch and stoop. The balcony is part of the Ecuadorian embassy. Itz masturbating on the balcony when your local dictator passes by. AFK, IRL, BRB and TTYS. The balcony is the Piratebay memo announcing they will keep up their services by way of drones, or just Piratbyran completely. Publishing in a 403, publishing inside the referring link, and as error on a server. Balconism is IRC, TOR and OTR. Bal-Kony 2012. Balcony is Speedshows, online performances, Telecomix, Anonymous, Occupy and maybe even Google automated cars (def. not glass tho btw). Balconization, not Balkanization.
The balcony-scene creates community rather than commodity. Nothing is to be taken seriously. Every win fails eventually. Proud of web culture, and what was built with pun, fun, wires, solder, thoughts and visions of equality. Nothing is sacred on the b4lconi. It is lit by screens, fueled by open networks, and strengthened by retweetz. On the balcony the ambitions are high, identities can be copied, and reality manipulated. Flope is given and inspiration created, initiative promoted and development developed. Know your meme, and meme what you know. I can haz balcony. Balconism is a soapbox in the park. The balcony is connected: stand on a balcony and you will see others. The balcony is connecting: you do not have to be afraid on the balcony, we are behind you, we are the masses, you can feel the warmth from the inside, breathing down your neck. Where privacy ceases to feel private, try to make it private. ChOOse your audience, demand to know to whom you speak if not in public, or know when you are talking to an algorithm. When you can, stay anonymous out of principle, and fun. And when you are in public, understand in which context and at what time you will and could be seen. Speak out on the balcony, free from the storefront, free from the single white space, but leaning into people's offices, bedrooms and coffee tables, leaning into virtually everywhere. On the balcony, contemporary art reclaims its communicative sovereignty through constant reminders of a freedom once had on the internet. Orz to the open internet builders and warriors. Learn how to do, then challenge how it is done. Encrypt. Encrypt well and beautifully. Art with too much theory is called Auditorium, and kitsch is called Living Room. Inspired by home-brew technologies and open network c^Aiuniod^^ crea£fert|MH spirit of the internet, resisting territories, be it institutional^ cowwie^Bl aJWa rchi|^r or commercial information hierarchies. The internet is ever\Bediun^Pead,l|m®the information super highway to the balcony that is everywhere through *.	VP*.. Ill-
pool is always closed.	™	™
BALCONY
PAGE 173
2014 InterContinental, Davos: for the global elite, deeply Indented balconies carved out of a golden egg, offering as much privacy as possible; a 21st century update on the sanitarium.
BALCONY
PAGE 174
bibliography
Ahmand, Aziz. Studies in Islamic Culture in the Indian Environment. U.S.: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Aleccia, Joel. "Backyard chickens dumped at shelters when hipsters can't cope, critics say." NBC News, 7 Duly 2013. Web. 13 Dan.
2014.	<www.nbcnews.com/#/health/health-news/backyard-chickens-dumped-shelters-when-hipsters-cant-cope-critics-say-f6C10533508>.
Asher, Catherine B.. "Sub-Imperial Palaces: Power and Authority in Mughal India."
Ars Orientalis 23,1993. 287.
Ayers, Andrew . "Lacatón & Vassal's Revitalisation of a Parisian TowerBlock."
The Architectural Review, 22 Dec. 2011. Web. 7 May 2013. <www.architectural-review.com/buildings/lacaton-and-vassals-revitalisation-of-a-parisian-tower-block/8624097.article>.
BBC. "Dackson: Baby Stunt was Mistake'.'' BBC News. 20 Nov. 2002. (Web 18 Sept. 2013.) <http://news.bbc.co.Uk/2/hi/ entertainment.
Broué, Pierre, and Ian H. Birchall. The German Revolution, 1917-1923. Leiden:
Brill, 2005.
Colin, Silvio. "Técnicas Construtivas do Período Colonial." Coisas da Arquitetura Blog. (Web. 3 May 2014.) <http:// coisasdaarquitetura.wordpress. com/2010/09/06/tecnicas-construtivas-do-periodo-colonial-iii/>.
Cook, Dohn Wesley, Heinrich Klotz, and Philip Dohnson. "Paul Rudolph." Conversations With Architects: Philip Johnson, Kevin Roche, Paul Rudolph, Bertrand Goldberg, Morris Lapidus, Louis Kahn, Charles Moore, Robert Venturi & Denise Scott Brown. New York: Praeger, 1973. 90.
Lyden, Dacki. Couple's Custom Microphones Carry Colorful Past. NPR.
20 Apr. 2008. Radio.
Cowell, Alan. "Verona Dournal; DearDuliet: Let Me Tell You About My Problem." The New York Times, 15 Mar. 1993: The New York Times. Web. 8 Duly 2013.
Dickens, Charles, and George Cruikshank. Charles Dickens' Complete Works. People's ed. Boston: Estes and Lauriat, 1883.
Doordan, Dennis P. "The Political Content in Italian Architecture during the Fascist Era." Art Journal 43 (1983): Web. 5 Aug. 2013.
Dullaart, Constant. "Balconism." ART PAPERS. Web. 15 Apr. 2014. <www. artpapers.org>.
Duc, Eugène. Dictionnaire raisonné de l'architecture française du Xle au XVIe siècle. Paris: B. Bance, 1854.
Filho, Adolfo. O Rio de Janeiro Imperial.
2a. ed. Rio de Daneiro: Topbooks, 2000.
Filho, Dosé. Influencias Muçulmanas na Architectura Tradicional Brasileira. Rio de Daneiro: Ed. A Noite, 1943.
Freud, Sigmund, and Doan Riviere. A General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis: A Course of Twenty-eight Lectures Delivered at the University of Vienna. New York: Liveright Pub. Corp. 1935.
Heath, Allister. "Outdoor space at a premium in London." City A.M. London13 Sept. 2013: City A.M. (Web 12 Nov. 2013)
International residential code for one- and two-family dwellings 2012. Country Club Hills, IL: International Code Council, 2011.
Dameson, Fredric. Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism. Durham: Duke University Press, 1991.
Kenzari, Bechir, and Yasser Elsheshtawy. "The Ambiguous Veil." Journal of Architectural Education 56.4, 2003.17-25.
Kingson, Dennifer A. "'Catios' Bring Cats Outdoors." The New York Times, 6 Dune
2010.	(Web. 2 Dec.) 2013.
Koepnick, Lutz P. Framing Attention Windows on Modern German Culture. Baltimore: Dohns Hopkins University Press, 2007.
León Pinelo, Antonio de. Velos antiguos i modernos en los rostros de las mugeres sus conueniençias i daños: ilustración de la Real Prematica de las tapadas. Madrid, 1641.
Levin, Alex. "Putting Trees on Skyscrapers: An Interview with Lloyd Alter." ArchDaily,
25 Dune 2013. (Web. 2 May 2014.) www.archdaily.com/?p=393347.
Loyer, François. Paris XIXe Siècle: L'immeuble et la Rue. Paris: Hazan, 1987.
Mann, Thomas. The Magic Mountain. Limited ed. Franklin Center, Pa.: Franklin Library, 1979.
McCarthy, O.R. "The Key to the Sanatoria " Journal of The Royal Society of Medicine 94.84 (2001): US National Library of Medicine. (Web. 12 Sept. 2013.).
Menon, Sunita. "Residents Complain About Shirtless Bachelors on Balconies " Gulf News [UAE] 6-Oct. 2006 (Web.
8	Sept. 2012.).
Pan, Dingfa. "The Interpretation of Diaojiaolou in Qianhu Miao Village at Xijiang," Shanxlang Wenxue 5, 2011.
Scully, Vincent Doseph, and Neil Levine. "Frank Lloyd Wright and the Stuff of Dreams." Modern Architecture and Other Essays. Princeton University Press, 2003 8-28.
Shirer, William L. Berlin Diary: The Journal of a Foreign Correspondent, 1934-1941. New York: A.A. Knopf, 1941.
Smith, William, William Wayte, and G. E. Marindin. A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities. 3d ed. London: D. Murray,
1890 91.
Stevens Curl, Dames. A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture. 2nd ed. Oxford University Press, 2006.
Tolstoy, Leo, Louise Shanks Maude, and Aylmer Maude. War and Peace. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1942.
Trotsky, Leon. The History of the Russian Revolution. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 19571932.
"Urban Dictionary." Urban Dictionary.
N.p., n.d. Web. 3 Mar. 2013. <www. urbandictionary.com/>.
Venturi, Robert, Denise Brown, and Steven Izenour. Learning from Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form. Rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977.
Walker, Dane H. "The Progress Of The Sanatorium Treatment Of Consumption In England." The British Medical Journal 2 (1900): 902-904. DStor. (Web. 2 Oct. 2013.)
BALCONY
PAGE 175
Welch, Katherine E. The Roman Amphitheater: From Its Origins to the Colosseum. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Zeeshan, Mohammad. "Building Image Spoiled With Overfilled Balconies."
Gulf News [UAE] 24 Sept. 2013: (Web.
11 Sept. 2013.)
Zhenzhen, Dan. "The Railing Metaphor in Poems of Song Dynasty." Journal of Puyang Vocational and Technical College 26 (2013): 96-97.
"paris, 19th century: la mode des balcons" tom avermante
Dictionnaire Historique d'Architecture.
Paris: Librairie d'Adrien le Clere, 1832.
Planat, Paul Amedee. Encyclopédie De L'architecture Et De La Construction: Tables Du Texte Et Des Dessins. Paris: Aulanier et cie, 1892.
Quatremère de Quincy, Dictionairre Historique de L'architecture, Contenant Dans son Plan les Notions Historiques, Descriptives, Archéologiques.
Biographiques, Théoriques, Didactiques et Pratiques de Cet Art, 2 vols. Paris: Libra rie d'Adrien Le Clere, 1832.
"balconies of the mediterranean basin: socialist and postcolonial mutations of a universal element" tom avermaete
Bell, Daniel. "The Theory of Mass Society:
A Critique," Commentary, 22 Duly, 1956. 75.
Bofill, Ricardo. Espaces d'une Vie. Paris: O. Jacob, 1989.
Candilis, Georges. "Habitations Musulmans/ Européennes/lsraélites," in: Candilis/IFA, 318/7, 1953. 2.
Çelik, Zeynep. Urban Forms and Colonial Confrontations: Algiers Under French Rule. Berkeley: University of California Press,
1997.
Coderch, José Antonio. "We Do Not Need Geniuses Right Now," Domus, November, 1961, 45.
Fathy, Hassan. Architecture for the Poor. University of Chicago Press, 1973. 19.
Gailhoustet, Renée, Gérard Grandval, and Bruno Vayssière. Architectes Repères, Repères D'architectures: 1950-1975. Paris: Éd. du Pavillon de l'Arsenal, 1998.
Giedion, Sigfried. Befreites Wohnen.
Zürich: O. Füssli, 1929.
Giedion, Sigfried. Bauen in Frankreich,
Eisen, Eisenbeton. Klinkhardt und Biermann. 1928. The Getty Centre for the Study of Art and the Humanities, 1995.
Overy, Paul. Light, Air & Openness: Modern Architecture between the Wars. London: Thames & Hudson, 2007.
Navez-Bouchanine, Françoise. "L'espace Limitrophe: Entre Le Privé Et Le Public,
Un No Man's Land? La Pratique Urbaine Au Maroc," Espaces Et Sociétés: Revue Critique Internationale De L'aménagement, De L'architecture Et De L'urbanisation, 135, 1990. 37-46.
Pevsner, Nikolaus. Pioneers of Modem Design: From William Morris to Walter Gropius. London: Penguin Books, 1960.
116.
Planat, Pierre. Encyclopédie De L'architecture Et De La Construction: Tables Du Texte Et Des Dessins. Paris: Aulanier et Cie, 1892. 239-240.
Taut,Bruno. "Für die neue Volkswohnung. Für die neue Baukunst Berlins!" in Die Wohnungswirtschaft 2,1925. 4.
Vatsyayan, Kapila. Concepts of Space, Ancient and Modern. New Delhi: Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts, 1991. 561.
Vayssière, Bruno-Henri. Reconstruction, Déconstruction: Le Hard French, Ou, L'architecture Française Des Trente Glorieuses. Paris: Picard, 1988.
Volait, M. et Peycere D."Patrimoines Partagés, Architectes Français au Sud et à L'Est de la Méditerranée," Colonnes, n. 21, February, 2003. 98-99.
Woods, Shadrach. Whaf U can Do.
Houston, Rice University, Dept, of Architecture, no. 27.
Worpole, Ken. Here Comes the Sun: Architecture and Public Space in Twentieth-Century European Culture. London: Reaktion, 2000.
1247
PAGE 176
BALCONY
BALCONY
PAGE 177
image sources and courtesy
P2 Frederic Chaubin / © TASCHEN.
P10 © MuseumStock.
P11 ©2014 THOMSON REUTERS.
P12 Mark Mulligan.
P13 Copyright © 1999 George Eastman House, Rochester, NY.
P'14 Joe Szilagyi / All contents © Index Newspapers, LLC.
P15 Copyright © 2014 Global Times.
All Rights Reserved.
P16 Tom Arnold / Skerryvore Ratepayers Association; © Commonwealth of Australia 2006; © 2005-2013 Kendall Media, Inc.; © lugaresmon 2013; Guglielmo Sebastianutti / Fratelli Alinari Museum Collections,
Florence; © Murray Muraskin. All Rights Reserved.
P17 "Main chapel of Convent of St. Anthony of Padua, Izamal" by Joel Abroad is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0;
"Loggia dei Lanzi" by Wknight94 is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0; "The Grand Trianon" by Chris Waits is licensed under CC BY 2.0; AUS Pasini Ranieri (design, construction documents and supervision) / Roberto Pasini, Davide Canali, Andrea Ranieri (preliminary design); BBC © 2014; "Streets in the Sky" by Steve Cadman on Flickr is licensed under CC BY-SA 2.0; by Raphael Azevedo Franca/2006.
P18 © REX/Action Press; © TravelPod.com; "TOP OF SALZBURG"/ Courtesy of Kitzsteinhorn / Copyright © 2013 Gletscherbahnen Kaprun AG; © All Rights Reserved by Ce.Ro.; photo by punch © 2000 - 2014 www.SAGEN.at; "Grand Canyon West - Skywalk" by Jackl 1 Poland is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
P19 By arieljena © All Rights Reserved / www.flickr.com/photos/20655812@ N07/6202518932/; "Willis Tower Sky Deck" by lain Croll is licensed under CC BY-NC-ND 2.0; © Copyright 2013 Skydeck Chicago. All Rights Reserved; "Chicago Skydeck,Sears Tower" by Ron Zack is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0.
P20 Photo: S. S. Kumar / Copyright © 2014, The Hindu Archives.
P21 Photo: Bogdan Stamatin /
© Associated Press.
p22 Copyright © 2014 Bryn Mawr College.
p23 "Arengario in Monza" by Remulazz is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
p27 Photo by Arnaud Bresson.
P28 R oyal Collection Trust/© Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II 2014.
P29 Copyright © 1999-2014 The President and Fellows of Harvard College; Photo by Martin Harvey / Getty Images; ©PILGRIMS BOOK HOUSE.
P30 ©The British Library Board.
P31 Photo by Popperfoto / Getty Images.
P32 Macnabb Collection / Copyright ©The British Library Board.
P33 Wolfgang Tillmans / ©TASCHEN.
P34 "La Candelaria - Centro histórico de Bogotá" by Colombia Travel is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0 / © Proexport Colombia; "2011-11-08 (06) Tenerife.San Cristóbal de La Laguna.Convento de Santa Catalina" by steynard on Flickr is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0; "Balcon cerrado de cajón" by Melissa Thereliz on Flickr is licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 2.0; photo by Majority World / UIG via Getty Images; photo by Evans / Getty Images; Willem Proos / © W2C Multimedia - Travel Pictures - Stock Photography 2014. All rights reserved.
P35 Photononstop / SuperStock; © Tsilla Nahari (tnahari) / Copyright © 2014 TrekLens; Copyright © 2004-2008 Aramco Services Company. All Rights Reserved; © 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College; © Eric Lafforgue; Eric Lafforgue / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images.
P36 © 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College; Courtesy of Juan José Cabrero Nieves.
P37 © Google Art Project / MALI, Museo de Arte de Lima; Photo Courret Hermanos 1860 /© 1998-2014 by Laurent Brocard -Bits of Our Past Ltd - www.past-to-present. com; Photo COURRET HERMANOS / ©
Paul Frecker 2014.
P38 Drawing by Fatima Rodrigues; Brasiliana Electrónica / Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro;
P4o ga, sits, m. $Hwsti tt#
*Ntaii»#f[M]. : m
2006 and US. Itf
Æ.WSS, 2007 (1): 54-63; photo by Saipangxie / http://saipangxie.blog.163. com/blog/static/5631689020104121032823; From book "Wuyouru Huabao" (M&ÍHBS $), Published by Shanghai Bookstore Press
(±»iJ£m*Stt).
P41 Guiqun Han / Guangzhou Photographer Association CTR'Ê / www.gdphoto.cn/hanshouView. asp?id=MNYGHVGHVIJW/; Used by Shuyong Liu / © 2000-2012	/
http://vision.xitek.com/ f a mous/201010/19-52983„2. htm I.
P43 Photo by Universal History Archive/ Getty Images; Photo by Hulton Archive/ Getty Images; © 2014 PARAMOUNT PICTURES. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED; © 2014 Twentieth Century Fox Film Corporation.
All rights reserved.
P44 The York Project: 10.000 Meisterwerke der Malerei. DVD-ROM, 2002. Distributed by DIRECTMEDIA Publishing GmbH; From The Journal of Seventeenth Century Music, reproduced with the kind permission of the Museo Corner, Venice. Inv. M.42883/2 / Copyright © 2002 by the Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois. All rights reserved.
P45 Copyright© Archivio di Stato di Bologna 2013 / Copyright © 2014 Institute for Advanced Study; "Auditorium, La Fenice Theatre, Venice, Italy" by Andreas Praefcke is licensed under CC BY 3.0.
P46 Le Château Royal de Blois: la Statue équestre de Louis XII by Philippe_28 (maintenant sur ipernity) © All Rights Reserved / www.flickr.com/photos/biron-philippe/3987046311/.
P48 © Google Art Project / Van Gogh Museum.
P49 Copyright © 2007-2014 Trinixy.ru.
P53 Copyright © 2014 DECORATIVE IRON OF NC INC. All Rights Reserved
P 54 Dr. Brehmer's Sanatory, Sokofowsko (Görbersdorf), Lower Silesia, Poland (formerly: Prussia); On the terrace of Villa Pravenda, ca. 1900/ Image: Documentation library Davos.
P55 © Copyright of Telegraph Media Group Limited 2014; © 2014 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.
P56 Richterich & Partner AG; © 2014 Thomas-Mann-Archiv.
PAGE 178
BALCONY
P 57 Notes on Looking © Copyright 20141 All Rights Reserved; Photo Archive Balair / © The State Archives of Basel-Stadt / © 2014 Kanton Basel-Stadt; Holland House / hollandhouse.ch.
P58 Photo by Louis Charles McClure / Copyright © 2006 HelloMetro, L.L.C.
P60 © 2014 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd; Babies in cribs on balcony Elsie Inglis Maternity Hospital, 7930/Photo: LMA archive / © The Living Memory Association Edinburgh 2002-2014.
P62-63 © Lauren Soth; Copyright © 2014 I The Architect's Newspaper, LLC licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 US.
P66 Tutti i diritti riservati © Istituto Luce -Cinecittä s.r.l.; Copyright 2013 The Studium Urbis. All Rights Reserved; © 2009 President and Fellows of Harvard College; © 2014 The MIT Press.
P67 Photo by Pool / Getty Images; Copyright © 2014 Fratelli Alinari; © 2014 The MIT Press.
P68 © 2012 Sovfoto/Eastfoto. All Rights Reserved; Mansion Kshesinskaya. San Petersburgo by Antonio on Flickr / All Rights Reserved / www.flickr.com/photos/ cafmarx/8029894144/; photo by Central Press / Getty Images; © 2014 RIA Novosti.
P69 Photo by Goldshtein G.
P70 Photo by Erich Greifer; heimat-sammlung.de - heimatsammlung.ch.
P71 © Bildarchiv Preußischer Kulturbesitz; Photo by Adam Carr; "Bundesarchiv Bild 183-C1001-0001-002, Berlin, Staatsratsgebäude" by Quaschinsky, Hans-Günter is licensed under Bundesarchiv, Bild 183-C1001 -0001-002 / CC-BY-SA DE.
P72 Copyright www.genovacards.com/; BRESCIA: PIAZZA DELLA VITTORIA-ARENGARIO millecartoline / www.ebay.it/ itm/BRESCIA-PIAZZA-DELLA-VITTORIA-ARENGARIO-/140614104280.
P73 © Archivio Terragni e Comocomera.it Copyright 2012-2014; © Libya Herald;
The Museum of Fascist Uniforms; ©
All Rights Reserved I David Thompson; www.skibbereeneagle.ie/; www.libya-al-mostakbal.org/.
P74 Zevi, Bruno. Giuseppe Terragni/ a cura di Bruno Zevi. Zanichelli, 1980; Ghirardo, Diane. "Politics of a Masterpiece: The Vicenda of the Decoration of the Facade of the Casa del Fascio, Como, 1936-39." Art Bulletin, Vol. 62 Issue 3, September 80; http://comocomera.it/.
P75 Germer, Stefan and Achim Preiß. Giuseppe Terragni 1904-1943.: Moderne und Faschismus in Italien. Klinkhardt + Biermann,1991.
P76-77 Getty Images.
P80-81 Getty Images.
P82 Videostill, "Triumph des Willens" directed by Leni Riefenstahl, 1935; Photo Austrian Archives / Scala Florence.
P83 Das Bundesarchiv; Gottfried Semper, Carl Hasenauer.
P84 Photo by Imagno / Getty Images.
P85 Photo by Fred Ramage /
Getty Images.
P86-87 "Basta con i balconi" by PFC Michael Manzari, US Army, 1946.
P87 Gerry D. / www.flickr.com/photos/ italiangerry/484880829/in/photolist-.
P88 Photo by Daily Herald Archive / SSPL / Getty Images; photo by Fox Photos / Getty Images; photo by Mondadori Portfolio via Getty Images; photo by Lee Lockwood // Time Life Pictures / Getty Image; photo by Keystone / Getty Images; photo by Robert W. Kelley // Time Life Pictures / Getty Images; photo by REPORTERS ASSOCIES / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; Photo by Keystone / Getty Images; AFP / Getty Images; Keystone / Getty Images; photo by Gilbert UZAN / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images.
P89 STR/AFP / Getty Images; photo by Pool JEAN-PAUL II AUX USA / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; photo by David Hume Kennedy / Getty Images; Photo by Alex Bowie / Getty Images; photo by Raphael GAILLARDE / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; photo by Anibal Solimano/ Newsmakers; LUBOMIR KOTEK / AFP / Getty Images; photo by Kaveh Kazemi / Getty Images; photo by Dirck Halstead // Time Life Pictures / Getty Images; photo by Patrick PIEL / Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; photo by David Rubinger // Time Life Pictures / Getty Images; photo credit should read MARK PHILLIPS/AFP/Getty Images.
P90 Photo by Sankei Archive via Getty Images; © Bettmann / CORBIS.
P91 ASSOCIATED PRESS; Fairfax Media via Getty Images; Time & Life Pictures.
P92-93 Videostills, "Videograms of a Revolution" directed by Harun Farocki and Andrei Ujica, produced by Bremer Institut Film & Fernsehen, Harun Farocki Filmproduktion.
P94 Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images; photo by Stefan Tyszko / Getty Images; photo by Peter Charlesworth / LightRocket via Getty Image; photo By Barry Staver / The Denver Post via Getty Images.
P95 MARCO ANTONIO/AFP/Getty Images; RAFA RIVAS / AFP / Getty Images-NICHOLAS KAMM / AFP / Getty Images; ’ SAID KHATIB / AFP / Getty Images; photo by Justin Sullivan / Getty Images; photo by Mario Tama / Getty Images; epocajibera / www.demotix.com/; ASSOCIATED PRESS.
P96 ERNESTO BENAVIDES / AFP /
Getty Images.
P97 Photo by Chip Somodevilla /
Getty Images.
P98 Scott Lynch / www.flickr.com/photos/ scottlynchnyc/6157048085/; Videostills "The Struggle #500 Including Exclusive Interview with Medea Benjamin about Her Life" licensed under CC BY-NC 3.0.
P99 "Assange speech at Ecuador embassy" by Poiesia is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
P100 Photo by Doris Antony; © 2005 Hans Andersen.
P101 Photo by Courtest Waschsalon.
P102 Boesiger, Willy. Le Corbusier - Oeuvre Complete:: Le Corbusier - Oeuvre complète. Birkhauser Architecture, 1995.
P102-103 © FLC / ADAGP.
P103 © Fondation Le Corbusier.
P104 Copyright © 2013 Invisible Paris.
P105 Habitation à Bon marché, Paris, architect Henri Sauvage, 1909-1922.1 Promotional leaflet published by direction de la jeunesse et des sports, France; courtesy of Canal Architecture.
BALCONY
PAGE 179
P106 Patent US 1448235 A.
P107 Fischer, Louis. The Health-care of the baby- Funk & Wagnalls Company, 1920;
Reg Speller / Fox Photos / Getty Images.
P108-109 Walter Gropius. High-Rise Steel prame Apartment Building, 1929-30: Model, c 1929—30. Harvard Art Museums.
P110 Bildindex der Kunst und Architektur.
P114 Gio Ponti Archives; "Madrid Torres Blancas close view" by Xauxa Hakan Svensson is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0; Publicado en TORRE EN MADRID.
P116 © 2002 Roger Sherwood. All Rights Reserved; Kristo / www.flickr.com/photos/ kristo/478636942/in/set-72 157594506148310/.
P118 Ricardo Bofill Taller de Arquitectura.
P120 © 2011 - Mutual Heritage.
P124-126 Les Pierres Sauvages de Belcastel.
P130 "Penn South on Ninth Avenue" by Beyond My Ken is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0; Copyright 2014 The City of New York; Mutual Redevelopment Houses, Inc.
P131 Gene Spesard / www.flickr.com/ photos/9968045@N03/3872523692/in/ photolist-6UcGnS-6UcGGf-6UPErt; John Portman & Associates, Inc.; photo by Alan Band / Fox Photos / Getty Images.
P132 Image from the Archives of the Paul Rudolph Foundation; Larry Speck / http:// larryspeck.com/2011 /05/10/crawford-manor/.
P133 Kelvin Dickinson / www.flickr.com/ photos/73172555@N00/2704886423/in/ photostream/.
P134-135 cityNnature / www.flickr.com/ photos/jlscha/7668131212/in/pool-miesvanderrohe.
P136 Maviesurmars / www.flickr.com/ photos/36226393@N08/3340772361 /; © Tourisme Office Villeneuve-Loubet 2014.
8137 Videostills "Rue Faubourg: Famous Chanel Egoist" directed by ]ean-Paul Goude; "Le Negresco hotel beneath a cloudy sky at sunrise" by Anna M.
Stevenson is licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0.
P138 Druot, Lacaton & Vassal.
P138—139 Photo by Philippe Ruault; photo by Lacaton & Vassal and Frédéric Druot.
P139 Courtesy of Druot and Lacaton & Vassal.
P140 Photo by Julien Berthier; Immobilien Scout Real Estate Online Portal: Pop-Up Balcony by Leo Burnett, Frankfurt, Germany.
P141 Photo by Gil Shefler; photo by Lydia Ross; Sukkah Depot TM; Sukkahs Schach For Sukkot.
P142 China Photo Press / Barcroft Media; Home Hub And Living; photo by Michael Cerrone.
P143 City of Vancouver Planning - By-law Administration Bulletins, January 2012.
P145 Photo by Ilya Varlamov.
P146-147 Edmund Yeo / www.flickr.com/ photos/edmundyeo/3129750575/.
P148 Photo by Talib Jariwala / Gulf News; photo by Deepak T. Gumani / Gulf News; Gulf News Archive.
P149 Photo by Xpress / François Nel;
Gulf News Archive.
P150-151 Photos Rem Koolhaas
P152 Frank van der Most / www.flickr.com/ photos/42212091 @N00/1459232836/; Marlisl / www.flickr.com/photos/ marialuisa/2127291256/in/ gallery-73075452@N00-72157622676827574/; Julie Frances Photography / www.flickr.com/photos/julie_ frances/3753377417/; Fernando Fernandez del Castillo / www.flickr.com/photos/ delcasmx/6229361517/; Bad Alley / www. flickr.com/photos/badalley/4862844749/in/ photostream/.
P153 Mitchell, Alex. The Edible Balcony. Rodale Books, 2012; © All rights reserved by Jonathan Globerson; Tony Cenicola/The New York limes; Matthew Hayward / Nadia Turan 2010; The Chicken Co-Op by James Ramsey, Raad Studio (www.raadstudio. com); Anker Dak Chicken Coop.
P154 © 2014. TheThreeF.com.
P155 © Boeri Studio.
P156 © Zsolt Batar; © Vincent Monthiers; Mariane Thomsens Gade, Aarhus, Denmark 8000; photo by José Hevia.
P157 asli aydin / www.flickr.com/ photos/49412437@N07/9928417376;
O Palsson / www.flickr.com/photos/ opalsson/3646744477/; © LOVE architecture and urbanism; photo by John Gollings.
P158 Ir. Drager / www.flickr.com/photos/ irdrager/7259640928/; Steve Hall / HEDRICH BLESSING Photographers; Page and Steel association with Ouadrangle Architects.
P159 "Absolute World, Mississauga" byjasonzed; "Gemini Residence, Islands Brygge, Copenhagen" by Bob Collowän is licensed CC-BY-SA-3.0; 24 H Architecture.
P160 Photo by James L. Stanfield, National Geographic via Getty Images; Buffalo Trace Distiller; Joyce Baumgarten Geto & de Milly, Inc.
P162 Photo by Tuca Vieira.
p.163© 2011 James Law Cybertecture International Ltd. All right reserved.
P164 Architectural Forum 81, August 1944; Bloomframe®.
P165 Roman Mistiuk via Autoblog.com.
P166 Photo by Wallace Barbosa / AG News; AKM-GSI; © Splash; PacificCoastNews. com; Fame Pictures, Inc.
P167 Splash News Online; AKM-GSI; POPSUGAR Celebrity; PacificCoastNews. com; photo by PRISCILA REIS, www.voali. com, Photo Rio News / Splash News / Corbis.
P168 www.rexfeatures.com/.
P169 © Sean O'Neill, PacificCoastNews, ©Justin Bieber.
P170—171 BIG Bjarke Ingels GrouP.
P172-173 © 2013 IHG. All rights reserved. P176 Collage by Annie Wang.

wolfgang
tillmans

over the past ten years, i have photographed buildings in ordinary and extraordinary contexts on every continent, displaying the complexity, and the irrationality, sometimes madness, and at other times beauty of architecture - these pictures in their totality seem to me a little daunting, but have always been taken with a kind eye. i'm aware that architecture is an expression of desires, hopes and ambitions, but that there are also myriad practical needs, and various limitations which shape a structure's design, even though those involved in each individual building would assert that logic was their prime guide, seen en masse and the world over, i am fascinated by the infinite number of formal and structural solutions found for similar problems.
book for architects is not a book design but a video installation, originally presented as a looped projection of still images on two walls, my interest is not a typological approach, but to show a sequence and arrangement of images that echo what examples of the built environment look and feel like to me. i don't use wide-angle or shift lenses, but a standard lens that most closely approximates the perspective of the human eye. the various elements of architecture appear here at times clearly and cleanly, and at other times in a layered and convoluted way. as such, the photographs represent the impurity and randomness as well as the beauty and imperfection that characterizes built reality, both past and present.
Wolfgang tillmans, book for architects, 2014
book for architects
■
ATKAZq
Î7(- STRII a TI
: AT RAZO]
fiKsTRU*
PöTÄfiS
NIL SI HuAU
I

...ceasar, buddha, ganjgshj ancestors... all have saktis, attei
"Whilst, o Caesar, your god-like mind and gandharvai arc genius were engaged in acquiring the do- of apsaras minion of the world, your enemies having Blessed Or been all subdued by your unconquerable less joy anc
"Whilst, o Caesar, your god-like mind and genius were engaged in acquiring the do-minion of the world, your enemies having been all subdued by your unconquerable valour; whilst the citizens were extolling your victories, and the conquered nations were awaiting your nod; whilst the Roman senate and people, freed from alarm, were enjoying the benefit of your opinions and counsel for their governance; I did not presume, at so unfit a period, to trouble you, thus engaged, with my writings on Architecture, lest I should have incurred your displeasure. 15 BC Vitruvius, De architectura.
"Surrounded as he was by the bodhistattvas possessed of the ten saktis, attended by the chiefs of sura and asuras, garucjas, yaksas gandharvas, pannagas, siddhas, vidyadharas, devas, kinnaras, hosts of apsarases and in Narada and other divine sages, Buddha, the Blessed One, Teacher, Lord of the World, who abounds in boundless joy and is holy and the purest, was in their midst when ManjusrT who was happily seated among them, knower of the proper time for the exposition of the Doctrine, approached Him and asked Him with folded hands: 'Pray, how is the birth of the vastusastra [the science of habitation] and the procedure with regard to the other allied sciences, the various rules and their application?'"
5th-7th century AD Vastuvidyasastra ascribed to ManjusrT.
"I offer obeisance to Ganesa, to the supreme energy begotten from Adigauri and to Sambhu so as to accomplish the object of the successful completion of writing this treatise without any hindrance." 12th century Prasada Mandana of Sutradhara Mandana.
"The emperor ordered me to write a manual about architecture, and deliver it to be reviewed. Though I have finished writing this manual, I feel that I have failed to live up to his expectation, wasting a lot of time and making little contribution. The emperor is frugal, benevolent, and born wise. Under his reign, the country is tranquil and the people are settled, and everything is kept in order. The offices have capable people, and the regulations are set. The bad climate of Duke Lu Zhuang's time exists no more, and the good climate like Da Yu's time has revived. The emperor has decreed about construction, and consulted someone who has little knowledge like me. I looked into the old regulations, and gathered many people's wisdom. I set three grades of Gong (work), according to its level of craft need. Amount of labor is calculated according to the differing lengths of days of different seasons. Even the softness of timber is categorized. I have calculated the earthwork according to the distance, so the labor can be easier to manage. Each issue is listed by category, and set with regulations. Though I studied hard and thought deeply, the text may not be enough. So I made drawings according to the regulations, and hope it will help in the future."
1103 Lie Die, Yingzhao Fashi.
"This work is dedicated to the authority. Plans are not politics. Plans are the rational and poetic monument set up in the midst of contingencies. Contingencies are the environment: places, peoples, cultures, topographies, climates. They are, furthermore, the resources liberated by modern techniques. The latter are universal. Contingencies should only be judged as they relate to the entity -'man' - and in connection with man, in relation to us, to ourselves: a biology a psychology."
1933 Le Corbusier, The Radiant City.
"Our Ancestors have left us many and various Arts tending to the Pleasure and Conveniency of Life, acquired with the greatest Industry and Diligence: Which Arts, though they all pretend, with a Kind of Emulation, to have in View the great End of being serviceable to Mankind; yet we know that each of them in particular has something in it that seems to promise a distinct and separate Fruit: Some Arts we follow for Necessity, some we approve for their Usefulness, and some we esteem because they lead us to the Knowledge of Things that are delightful. What these Arts are, it is not necessary for me to enumerate; for they are obvious. But if you take a View of the whole Circle of Arts, you shall hardly find one but what, despising all others, regards and seeks only its own particular Ends: Or if you do meet with any of such a Nature that you can in no wise do without it, and which yet brings along with it Profit at the same Time, conjoined with Pleasure and Honour, you will, I believe, be convinced, that Architecture is not to be excluded from that Number. For it is certain, if you examine the Matter carefully, it is inexpressibly delightful, and of the greatest Convenience to Mankind in all Respects, both publick and private; and in Dignity not inferior to the most excellent. But before I proceed further, it will not be improper to explain what he is that I allow to be an Architect: For it is not a Carpenter or a Joiner that I thus rank with the greatest Masters in other Sciences; the manual Operator being no more than an Instrument to the Architect. Him I call an Architect, who, by sure and wonderful Art and Method, is able, both with Thought and Invention, to devise, and, with Execution, to compleat all those Works, which, by means of the Movement of great Weights, and the Conjunction and Amassment of Bodies, can, with the greatest Beauty, be adapted to the Uses of Mankind: And to be able to do this, he must have a thorough Insight into the noblest and most curious Sciences. Such must be the Architect."
1452 Leon Batista Alberti, De Re Aedificatoria.
"Guided by a natural inclination, I gave myself up in my most early years to the study of architecture: and as it was always my opinion that the ancient Romans, as in many other things, so in building well, vastly excelled all those who have been since their time, I proposed to myself VITRUVIUS for my master and guide, who is the only ancient writer of this art, and set myself to search into the relics of all the ancient edifices, that, in spite of time and the cruelty of the Barbarians, yet remain; and finding them much more worthy of observation, than at first I had imagined, I began very minutely with the utmost diligence to measure every one of their parts; of which I grew at last so solicitous an examiner (not finding anything which was not done with reason and beautiful proportion), that I have frequently not only travelled in different parts of Italy, but also out of it, that I might entirely, from them, comprehend what the whole had been, and reduce it into design. 1570 Andrea Palladio, The Four Books on Architecture.
"Sire, Architecture, which has been raised by the dominating nations of the world to a sublime degree of glory, has felt in the course of time the rage and the ignorance of the barbarians who have been trying to fully extinguish her memory by overthrowing her most famous monuments. She would still be there, buried in the ruins, if the generous liberality of Francois I, 'father of science and arts', wouldn't have saved her. This great Prince had decided to restore her, but his death, and the domestic wars which followed, prevented the effect of such a noble project. The architecture didn't have time to be cleaned, so to speak, from the rust she had contracted underground. Unfortunately she fell into the hands of ignorant workers who have made her unrecognizable by covering her with ridiculous and capricious ornaments."
1683 Francois Blondel, Cours d'architecture.
"I Shall not neede (like the most part of Writers) to celebrate the Subject which I deliver. In that point I am at ease. For Architecture can want no commendation, where there are Noble Men, or Noble minds; I will therefore spend this Preface, rather about those, from whom I have gathered my knowledge; For I am but a gatherer and disposer of other mens stuffe, at my best value. Our principal Master is Vitruvius and so I shall often call him; who had this felicitie, that he wrote when the Roman Empire was neere the pitch; Or at least, when Augustus (who favoured his endeavours) had some meaning (if he were not mistaken) to bound the Monar-chie: This I say was his good happe; For in growing and enlarging times, Artes are commonly drowned in Action."
1624 Henry Wotton, Elements of Architecture.
"The book attempts a comprehensive discourse analysis of the discipline. Its analysis combines with an effort towards theoretical systematization. The aim is an extensive theoretical system that offers itself to contemporary architecture as its self-description. The premise here is that architecture has constituted itself self-referentially, via its own autonomous, disciplinary discourse. The great theoretical treatises of architecture - starting with Alberti's De Re Aedifica-toria of 1452 - can be regarded as self-descriptions in the sense aimed at here. Self-descriptions offer a reflective overview of the discipline's premises, values and methods in relation to its societal tasks. They have been a constitutive part of architecture since its inception as a self-conscious discipline with the advent of the Italian Renaissance. The concept of autopoiesis refers to the overall discursive self-making of architecture. This is a continuous historical process and, to remain effective, it continues to require new theoretical efforts at each stage of its ongoing evolution. It is my conviction that the successful continuation of architecture's autopoiesis, now more than ever, requires an all-encompassing theoretical systemization that is able to clarify architecture's historical challenges, capacities and choices within contemporary society."
2011 Patrik Schumacher, The Autopoiesis of Architecture, vol. 1:
A New Framework for Architecture.
"Mankind shapes its surroundings. Moving as physical objects in bodily form. The surroundings must therefore be matched to body size. The ideal would be to match humans with surroundings that correspond to their anatomical proportions. The ideal is, due to several factors, in general, not realizable. In various rooms, humans of varying shapes move in a variety of patterns. Transportation modes, assembly
rooms, restaurants, apartments and furniture require that one must assess dimensions and requirements according to the necessary characteristics."
1936 Ernst Neufert, Bauentwurfslehre.

■ wr	^	:
:i 11 '¡&b JJnTfi soSMfuT/i
elements
Without my parents' balcony I would not be here. They lived on the 5th floor of a brand-new social democratic walk-up on the edge of the bombed-out center. Born in the last months of the war, a cold but very sunny winter, when everything that could burn had been burned, I was exposed to the sun on their balcony, naked, every possible second, to capture its heat, like a mini solar panel. In the next house two families shared the apartment - four adults and four children; the other family occupied the room with the balcony. From the balcony, you could see the old town, framed on either side by a naked man and a naked woman carved from stone who helped to carry the weight of the roof their backs turned to the apartment... They dominated the façade. They made me feel protected; why did that not have the slightest consequence in my life as an architect? I remember my first escalator - five diagonals climbing up one side of a huge, day-lit atrium dominated by a colossal clock, mounted on patterned glass: probably the first sense of the metropolitan, even if the top floor was dedicated to inert and intimidating marital beds... the wall of my small bedroom, when it started to shudder and then cracked in two parts, my bed jumping off the floor... much later friends took me to a kampong - a hut full of intrigue, made of woven palm leaves, immune to any earthquakes. Weaves don't crack. The octagonal opening high in the attic, the first window' I understood as a perforation, strong and white, with clouds passing at surprising speeds in the day, shafts of moonlight at night... no electricity, the only light coming through gaps in the floorboards... you could see straw and then, through cracks in the stucco of the ceiling, others busy in their rooms... The monumental door of the
*   "... with concave basis and convex covering with protruded cornice and frieze"
    (description of building when cited for preservation status). **   a type of lift that consists of a continuous chain of cabins... the lift does not stop    on individual floors, passengers enter and exit while it is moving
mansion that my mother had squatted after the war. a first experience of class... First you had to climb an imposing stone stair: then you stepped into the hall, surrounded by a second, sweeping stairway that ended somehow at our attic... Then we lived inside a Mansard roof* - it looked like a Gehry sculpture supported by two Doric columns - the only ones in our city... our floor would bounce and vibrate under my negligible weight. The intricacy and variety of the parquet was probably the first evidence of complexity... Not only the patterns, but all floors were frayed: wood had been burned when there was no more coal... then the floor would suddenly be restored to perfection. (Ah, to have been a child when nothing was childish...) The short distance from the war made us appreciative of the utilitarian - what worked was endowed with aura for that reason
alone... It seemed deep as a well, a distant hole,
through which waste simply disappeared, the toilet still unburdened by any intent or design... You could walk straight into the huge fireplace at my grand-
father's house... made from brick, glazed the color of fire - above it a huge painting of ahorse stumbling over a felled tree trunk... clearly a message. To get there you passed through a short corridor that ab-sorbed all sound, as if you barely existed... First experience of an "elevator, the day my grandfather Showed me his building, shoved me in a paternoster** from which I did not dare to escape, once I was in... the ramp that ended my childhood when I boarded the ship to the other end of the world...
Architecture is a profession trained to put things together, not to take them apart. No architect in their right mind would dare to write today an 'Elements of Architecture' that intended to describe both what the components of architecture are and how they should be combined.
That impulse has been weakening consistently over the last few centuries and is now extinct. After thousands of years in which the confident authors of architectural treatises offered grandiose dedications to their gods, rulers, emperors, popes, and princes. Le Corbusier's dedication 'à l'autorité' in his La Ville Radieuse (1935) was perhaps the final example, and saddled him with the lifelong accusation of authoritarianism.
Architects have substituted Vitruvius with Neufert*, dropped proportion in favor of dimension, replaced inspiration with information. More and more conventions, regulations, and prescriptions are embedded, often surreptitiously, in our digital tools...
elements
Architecture is a strange mixture of persistence and flux, a collage of some elements that have been unchanged for over 5,000 years and others that were (re)-invented yesterday. Each architectural element carries long strings of dysfunctional DNA from time immemorial, that interfere with our contemporary judgment...
A surprising percentage of everything architects assemble in a so-called building is defined by a limited number of ancient categories: wall, floor, ceiling - to name the elements with which three-dimensionality is constructed. Elements of Architecture looks at the fundamentals of our buildings, used by any architect, anywhere, anytime: the floor, the wall, the ceiling, the roof, the door, the window,
*ln 1937, Ernst Neufert published his Bauentwurfslehre in Nazi Germany, a pedantic compendium of 'correct' dimensions that became a global standard for the dissemination of standards...
the façade, the balcony, the corridor, the fireplace, the toilet, the stair, the escalator, the elevator, the ramp...
Even in a period of drastic change, the number of these elements remains stubbornly stable. The fact that elements themselves mutate independently of each other, according to different cycles and economies, and for different reasons, turns any building into a temporal assemblage - a mix of the middle ages and futurism. We examine architecture by looming in on the micro-narratives embedded in the fragment.
We do not uncover a single, unified history of architecture, but a proliferation of histories, origins, contaminations, similarities and differentiations. We trace how elements evolved into their current versions through technological advances, political priorities, and digital protocols. At the point where the 21st century is beginning to reveal some of its likely essences, EoA reconstructs how our current repertoire evolved, where and when the EoA collided with modernity and national aesthetics disappeared,
and how elements are recruited and reprogrammed in the digital age...
- From the age man discovered fire, primitive forms of habitat emerged over millennia - partly found, partly constructed - that were codified into a limited number pi elements...
- From 5000-3000 BC, the way these elements were put together in new and deliberate ways that were original, beautiful, meaningful, and useful, marks the birth of a new art - architecture.
- In antiquity - not only in Greece and Rome, but also in Asia, South America, and Africa - this art developed
to heights unequaled since, creating cities and civilizations where the identity of each building, and the way they cohered, was logical, beautiful and unquestioned.
•	After a long interval in which these societies were brought down by “barbarians" or “decadence," the Renaissance resurrected these qualities - each element was identified, modernized, reinvented. Architects were part of a consensus, but also expected to challenge the rules. Hierarchies emerged, individual originality became an ambition.
•	The proclaimed rationality of the Enlightenment revolutionized architecture... Function became the new Beauty. Many elements were “improved" through simplification and by adding technical, empirical, and regulatory dimensions. New construction materials and methods enabled a lightness that, in turn, redefined each element.
•	The steel frame and the elevator abruptly ended these traditional episodes - the ones we still dwell on - and triggered a second modernity, stripped of symbolism and claims of permanence. The new provisional, standardized architecture had massive repercussions for each element, driving some to the point of extinction - fireplace - and investing others with exaggerated importance - the ceiling/ floor, no longer a symbolic plane but now a deep volume. Air conditioning began to erode the legitimacy of specific elements (window, the ceiling, even the door) in favor of undifferentiated continuity.
A groundswell of technical inventions revolutionized the nature and the performance of the EoA, which were previously defined by gradual and mostly aesthetic evolution. Many architectural elements partly turned into machines, introducing a constantly expanding family of hybrids.
The toilet was no longer a collection of waste that was then
removed manually; the fireplace no longer a place where Lou simply burnt wood, but a more calibrated device where you could begin to control the heat; the performance of the window became more precise; the staircase became an escalator, the pavement a moving belt; in 1851, the elevator enabled, in the air and underground, new territories that went far beyond the reach of the mere staircase.
- Onto this still largely unexplored and undigested chapter is now grafted a digital period, whose regimes offer drastically improved levels of control and precision to feed an obsessive need for perfection, but we have not even begun to confront the constantly expanding vastness of the data we ourselves generate through their application and their potential abuse. Architectural theory has not developed in tandem... stuck in a never-ending preoccupation with shape.
  At most, these radical transformations have registered In the technical half of the architectural brain, but barely in the profound core of architecture. The discipline is suffering from schizophrenia, flitting between architecture is an art and building as a tool of modernization. This schizophrenia implies that our role as so-called form-givers is increasingly precarious and hollow, since there is no challenge to create a 'mastery' over the mechanical side Equal to our supposed control over the aesthetic side, Architects' reputations and expectations are largely based in their supposed uniqueness, but we actually assemble elements that have largely been defined by others, mass produced in series, offered in catalogues on the internet,
  accessible to anyone and put together by increasingly indifferent  labor... We may posture as geniuses, but we play ur assigned role in the überscript of modernization...
If this is true for the visible parts of the building, it is even truer for its systems, developed in distant laboratories,
and eventually applied, if affordable, in our structures...more and more regulated automatically, sensor based, technical originality has become unthinkable for the architect...
To the point where entire sections of each building de-facto have become the domain of others, inaccessible to the architect themselves...
In the late 1980s, in the waning of the Soviet era, an unusually lumpen building was under construction in Moscow. The t structure was striking: a cube, of intermediate height, 10 or 12 stories tall, built from an indeterminate substance, the color of dirty snow. Its shape was naïve, curiously childish, like the towers erected to train firefighters, or the simplified airplanes that litter international runways to train security forces... a cube of seemingly identical cells, composed only of wall, ceiling, floor, and window. The building was intended as an extension of the American embassy, but was never completed: it was riddled with listening devices in such absurd quantities, embedded in every plane, that it could not be 'debugged'; whoever owned it, it would always be possessed by the Russians.
The digital became ubiquitous, like a brushfire, in the late 1990s. Working in Seattle offers an entry to the epicenter of this world: a visit to Bill Gates' already legendary house, in his absence. A wooden, quasi-Scandinavian mansion on a lake, an interior of dark wood, carpets, bouquets, flat-screens, ubiquitous control panels flush with the wainscoting. The deep American baritone of our tour guide explains how basically from every point of the house, every other point can be controlled - temperature and humidity of course, light, movies, music, the images on the screens: art, patterns, images, even books... The comprehensive digital mastery is staggering. But the walls of this house are exceptionally thick. A touching commitment to the old
architecture? Offering a sense of protection? Intimacy? Beauty? Then I discover a hidden door in the thickness of a wall, and open it... I suddenly enter an overheated plant room - fluorescents ablaze, roaring racks of servers multiplied in silver-foil walls. An anxious maintenance crew on permanent high alert, fixing problems by hand with an oil-can... Later, Microsoft presents the intelligent house... its first device is the intelligent fridge. Huge, divided in many compartments, it records any change in its contents and alerts users to imminent shortage, orders missing supplies, for the moment delivered by human labor, but soon by robotic device.
Early in 2014, Ford motors announces that it will stop an ongoing project in which the car is no longer a vehicle of individual freedom, the silent witness to its driver's behaviors, a convenient tool, but a recording apparatus that registers time, place, speed, occupancy, maintenance, transgressions, and maybe even intent. The car is now a Spy, a machine potentially as revealing as an MRI-scan.
We have surrendered to the benefits of the digital, at the very moment that constant, and escalating revelations Simultaneously demonstrate their monstrous potential for betrayal. Where initially we wanted to reveal the history of each element's evolution and speculate about their 'future,' we began to realize half way that we were documenting an invisible revolution. Elements have been mute for thousands of years. That made them trustworthy. Now an Increasing number of them collect information. Floors detect illness by measuring gait and temperature, alert distant control rooms of a fall and presumably dispatch [medics; the fireplace has been superseded by commu-[nicating thermostats that can reveal entire lifetimes of presence and absence; the door has become an extension 'of the smartphone, each opening and closure recorded; elevators determine the destination of the visitor or try to
predict his intentions by listening to your conversations and following your daily routines; smoke detectors talk to you; toilets record health and diagnose illness with each drop... the elements assume consciousness, and gather intricate memories... Very soon, your house will betray you, or at least demand early bedtime in the name of sustain-ability (unless you pay more, of course...)
The intelligent building, the smart house, have been unmasked as intelligence agents... Every time you hear these words, you should reach for the barrel of your mouse Architects have welcomed the digital as a benign reinforcement, their engagement initially based on the facilitation of process. As a design tool, the digital's ability to mass-produce endless variation would counteract the sterilization of the architect's imagination. Architecture has been oblivious to its new role as a provider of critical data.
The digital is essentially beyond exhaustion: there is no limit to quantity, duration, multiplication, connection, cross-referencing... it will not be defeated. One half of the world has embraced out of free will the very regime that keeps freedom in check for the other half. The digital is the enabler of a new political trinity. For the French revolution's liberté, égalité, fraternité, it has ushered in a new universal trinity: comfort, security, sustainability. This new trinity is about to impose an inescapable and irreversible diktat on every domain, and architecture has embraced it with masochistic enthusiasm. We are only beginning to see how it will reshape and redefine our elements, our architecture and our cities.
Instead of Sartre's "hell is other people," we will live in a perpetual "we are Big Brother..."
Venice, 2014
»2015 Luna Smart Mattress Cover, presented ■V Luna co-founder Matteo Franceschetti.
irnim
architecture is a holistic cultural technique, aiming towards the engineering of an enclosure, yet architecture, which traditionally targets containment and even hermeticism - some already talk of a closed architectural system - can be opened up by an alternative approach to architecture, this approach, which amounts to a type of reverse engineering, selectively puts into focus not the "whole" of architecture, but its component parts: the elements of architecture, they are interrelated with other specific elements, but via reverse engineering are considered in isolation rather than as components of the "whole," which, at least since modernity, has become a critical and unattainable value.
but first things first: what, throughout the history of architecture and its theory, was ever discussed under the heading of "elements of architecture"? are there any contemporary approaches to elements of architecture? what are the introductory questions underlying elements of architecture as a research project? and to what extent could the results contribute to a better understanding of architecture, perhaps even to a better understanding of designing architecture?
elements 

of architecture 














an introduction
I.	Elementary thinking throughout architectural theory
Even though Vitruvius, writing around 30-20 BC, named general principles of architecture, which are considered partly valid to this day, including his trias of firmitas-utilitas-venustas (solidity, usefulness, beauty), one can hardly find any testimonies to 'elementary' thinking. Vitruvius's commentary, for the most part, remains a compilation of esoteric terminologies. His remarks on column decoration - he uses the term genera - are lacking in terms of thinking in orders of columns, the designations which later spread throughout Europe in the Renaissance.
The earliest evidence of systematic 'elementary' thinking can be found in China. From 1103 AD, an official construction manual of the Song dynasty called the Yingzao Fashi (State building standards) established comprehensive and detailed rules for timber construction. From the traditional Chinese roof down to the curtain rod, the Yingzao Fashi sought to encompass every component of a building within a modular system consisting of a standard unit - called cai. The rules would apply to every public building. Their goal was to codify dimensional and aesthetic hierarchy, from a palace down to a humble merchant's home, and to introduce a standardized accounting model for architecture that would ensure efficiency and eliminate cheating.
1091 Roof components in the Yingzao Fashi (State building standards), China.
Attempts to consider elements of architecture in Europe can only be found later, and in much less systematic form, in medieval books on hut building such as the Lodge Book of Villard de Honnecourt from 1235 - the only manuscript of the High Middle Ages exclusively devoted to architecture.3 The 33 sheets preserved today contain drawings collated over many years while de Honnecourt travelled through France, Germany, and Hungary, depicting plans and elevations of choir halls and towers, details of windows and rose windows, the art of carpentry (such as different construction methods for roof trusses) and sculpture (cathedral door sculptures, church lecterns, choir stalls). Even though the construction manuals of European-medieval provenance played an important role in the codifi-
"Architecture (together with the other design disciplines) is a separate autopoietic function system within functionally differentiated society, with its own universal and exclusive domain of competency set against the universal and exclusive domain of competency of the other autopoietic function systems,"
Patrik Schumacher, The Autopoiesis of Architecture Vol. I. A New Framework for Architecture (Chichester: Wiley, 2011), 26.
Cf. Hanno-Walter Kruft, A History of Architectural Theory from Vitruvius to the Present (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1994 [1985]),
24.
Ibid., 36.
Fritz Neumeyer: "Was ist eine Fassade? - Lernen von Leon Battista Alberti," Christoph Mäckler (ed.) Stadtbaukunst: Die Fassade (Dortmund: Institut für Stadtbaukunst der TU Dortmund, 2011), 92. (Author's translation.)
Cf. Kruft, 45.
Henry Wotton, The Elements of Architecture (London, 1893 [1624]),
7.
Cf. Mario Carpo, Architecture in the Age of Printing: Orality, Writing, Typography, and Printed Images in the History of Architectural Theory (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2001).
ca. 1235 Villard de Honnecourt's Lodge Book, the only manuscript of the High Middle Ages devoted to architecture.
dell'architettura (Seven Books of Architecture), "we see the rise of a new, image-based architectural method. ... The image was the essential tool in Serlio's program of diffusing technical information - a program that for the first time systematically integrated printing from movable types, xylography, and the use of modern languages." Serlio's most popular contribution to elementary thinking was his visual codification of the five orders of columns, which he published in 1537 in his first of the seven books, confusingly called the Fourth Book. Serlio, writes Carpo, "transformed an inheritance of diverse structural and decorative elements into a highly formalized language subject to the same rules (grammatical, syntactical, rhetorical, semantic) as linguistic discourse." The Serlian architect chooses and matches predesigned elements: "The very idea that architectural composition can be reduced to the reassembling of a limited number of elementary parts recalls the combinatory function of alphabetic language." Serlio, in 1551, applied this thinking to another architectural element with his Extraordinary Book of Doors. After Gutenberg, elements of architecture were something that could be arranged like standardized metal letters of printers - with deep consequences for (not only Western) architecture in the 16th,
17th, 18th, 19th and the 20th century.
While a 'thinking in systems' was tentatively introduced with Alberti and extended by Serlio and his fellows from the Gutenberg Galaxy, it reaches its early heyday in the taxonomies of Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand and Gottfried Semper. Durand, with his Précis des leçons d'architectures données à l'École Polytechnique (Summary of Lectures on Architecture Given at the École Polytechnique, 1802-1805), founded a rationalist theory of architecture and a systematized design teaching. His Précis was probably the most influential architectural treatise of the first half of the 19th century, also and above all because of a grid-and-combination system. By suggesting an unlimited number of combinations for architectural elements, Durand "reached the theoretical point of standardization enabling prefabricated construction," according to architectural historian Hanno-Walter Kruft. Gottfried Semper meanwhile, who saw in Durand little more than a "checkerboard chancellor for those
1802-1805 Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand's grid and combination system for the elements in Précis des leçons d'architectures données à l'École Polytechnique.
lacking in ideas," employed his own taxonomy of architecture, manifested in the teaching of the ]/;er Elemente der Baukunst (Four Elements of Architecture, 1851), which was used less for the generation of designs, and more to shed light on the origins of architecture. Among Semper's four elements - hearth, enclosure, roof and mound -the first two became emphasized. While an enclosure (or wall), made of textile rather than earth, is for Semper the key architectural element in delineating space, the hearth is figured as the first and moral architectural element. Semper saw his four elements emerging from four primal materials and four primal techniques: the hearth ¡s the result of earthenware and its related art of pottery, the enclosure is derived from textiles and the art of weaving, the roof from timber and carpentry, the mound (or floor) from stone and the art of stone cutting.
While Durand pursued a prospective taxonomy and Semper a retrospective one, in the first half of the 20th century, a new tone established itself: the manifesto, realized in exemplary fashion by Le Corbusier and his Five Points of Architecture (1928). An important transitional figure towards there was Dulien Guadet, who, in Eléments et théorie de l'architecture (1902) offered a programmatic revision of Durand's methods of 1805, combining types of architectural forms in a rational manner.12 Guadet called for a normative approach to building composition based on the most modern technical elements which should be as far as possible rooted in the tradition of axiality. Through Guadet's teaching at the École des Beaux-Arts, the principles of classical "elementary" composition "were handed down to the pioneers of the 20th century," Kenneth Frampton once argued. Le Corbusier would turn out to be the most radical inheritor of Guadet's thoughts. His "Five points" - piloti, roof garden, free plan, long window and free façade - present, according to Werner Oechslin, "the only self-contained set of rules" in the literary work of the Swiss architect, "which satisfies in its orientation the classical functions of architectural theory, both on practical issues of architectural design, as well as in its conscious intention of establishing a theoretical foundation and codification." The Five Points, established just a year after the Stuttgart WeiBenhofsiedlung - the famous showcase of functionalist architecture built in 1927 under the direction of Mies van der Rohe - represent new architectural possibilities as a logical consequence of new
roof
enclosure (wall)
hearth
mound (floor)
1851 Gottfried Semper's four elements of architecture (from Hanno-Walter Kruft): hearth, mound, enclosure, roof.
8	Ibid., 46.
9	Ibid., 49.
10	Ibid., 54.
11	Kruft, 274.
12	Cf. Kenneth Frampton, Modem Architecture: A Critical History (Thames & Hudson, 1992 [1980]), 19.
13	Ibid.
14	Werner Oechslin, "Le Corbusier/ Pierre Jeanneret - Les Cinq Points d'une Architecture Nouvelle," Moderne entwerfen: Architektur und Kulturgeschichte (Köln 1999), 207.
conditions of construction. The most important of which, according to Adolf Max Vogt, is the piloti, which he considers the engine for Le Corbusier's new architecture. This is also illustrated by the four black-and-white drawings which Le Corbusier added to his Five Points: the house, lifted off-ground, leaves merely a "seed of points" or "Punktsaat" (Paul Klee). The walls may freely form around this seed of points, and the ground floor becomes non-existent.
ln the second half of the 20th century, probably the most influential system of spatial elements was established by Christopher Alexander in A Pattern Language, which he wrote together with Sara Ishikawa and Murray Silverstein, was published in 1977. It contains a collection of 253 design motifs, each of which describes a clearly defined aspect of architecture and proposes strategies for action, arranged from large to small. As summarized by Christian Kühn, objects, spatial situations, activities and abstract terms are all "treated as equal architectural facts." "Even the subtitle of Towns, Buildings, Construction already indicates that this book will consider the 'whole': the range of topics covers anything from town planning to the design of a construction detail." For combined "patterns" -such as living/kitchen or thick walls - the authors claim universal truth. It is no coincidence that Pattern Language is physically reminiscent of the bible in dimensions, paper and binding.16 It demands our acknowledgment, not only as "a collection of precedents, but as a frontal attack on the 'professionalised' mode of architectural production." It aimed to retrieve the design method of "making buildings" for the users in order for them to regain power over the design of their environment. In this case, Pattern Language reaches well beyond commonly accepted notions of "participation." According to Kühn, it should "ideally have produced a good result without the involvement of the design professional." 18
II.	Elements of Architecture - On the observation matrix of this research project
1928 Le Corbusier, Five Points of Architecture: pilotis, free façade, open plan, long window, roof garden.
The 'thinking in elements' provided by tractatists and theorists like Alberti, Durand, Semper, Guadet, Le Corbusier or Alexander were and are important reflections from architects for architecture. But there were also other and maybe much more important forces, which, under conditions of modernity, shaped and are shaping
(the elements of) architecture: rules of crafts- Adolf Max Vogt, Le Corbusier,
.viançhiD municipal or State regulations, industrial der edle Wilde: Zur Archäologie man&'i'K/	.	'	der Moderne (Braunschweig /
product innovations, economic constraints, Wiesbaden 1996), 17.
historical references, stylistic preferences. All 16 Cf. Christian Kühn: "Christopher these phenomena represent an elementary
thinking outside the discipline Of architecture — Raster, Typus, Pattern, Script,
and were of particular importance for this Algorithmus, Ornament," October
research project on elements of architecture. To	^8'27j
summarize its result, the human-made physical is ibid.
environment has many stakeholders - public, Cf- Christian Norberg-Schulz,
d*vl	Intentionq in	ire*
private, governmental, coporate and individual - (Cambridge, Mass.: mit Press),
and all of them are acting on the basis of their 1963.
own conceptions of elements of architecture. 20 Sigfried Giedion Mechanization owi i ^ r	Takes Command (New York:
Oxford University Press, 1948), 10.
|f the distinctive character of an architectural 2 Gledlon, Mechanization Takes
element was historically ensured by its framing 22 cf°Stephanraby, Geschichte des and ornament - as mentioned by Christian Korridors (Karlsruhe, Hochschule Norberg-Schulz - then over time its distinc- für Gestaltung, 2011 ), 8. tiveness was increasingly created (or dictated) Begriffsgeschichten (Frankfurt by the product and its producibility: balconies, am Main: Suhrkamp, 2006), 11. ceilings, doors, elevators, escalator, façades, fireplaces, floors, ramps, stairs, toilets, roofs, walls and windows can all be bought and sold.
Sigfried Giedion is the pre-eminent historian and storyteller of this massive shift. In Mechanisation Takes Command (1948), he describes the changes in the everyday environment and in human behavior produced by mechanization -such as in the areas of the kitchen or bathroom.
Giedion is "interested in following the growth of phenomena, or if one will, in reading their line of fate, over wide spans of time."20 His focus on things easily underestimated in the everyday became the motive for this elements project.
Giedion writes that "For the historian, there are no banal things," his aphorism "the sun is mirrored even in a coffee spoon," for which Hans Magnus Enzensberger once wished greater prominence, became a research motto for this Elements of Architecture.
But what do we actually mean when we talk about balconies, windows, and so on? The attention paid to the elements of Western and non-Western construction implies also a level of awareness of Western and non-Western languages as well as their etymologies. It used to be a common epistemological assumption that unspecific words should turn into exact terms, in order to use them as tools for thought. Along with this came a belief in the semantic stability of terms over time. These delusions became obsolete with the systematic investigation of basic historiographical terms in the 1930s, led by Otto Brunner, which in the 50s resulted in the spread
of a "Conceptual History" or Begriffsgeschichte. Returning to Hegel's conception of the "labor of a term" (Arbeit des Begriffs), language is considered not as an ineffective product of a said reality, but more as a powerful central authority, without which we would not be able to understand any experience or science of the world and society: "For Conceptual History, language is, on one hand, an indication of a found 'reality,' and on the other hand, the factor for finding this reality."25 Even the word "façade" - to give one example - is not covered by the canopy of an extra-historical concept. If semantic drifts leave traces of other, more consequential drifts, then the terms themselves may act as detectives, which may shed light on an open question. In this case, any presumptions as to the central meaning of a term, fixed in time, must be abandoned. The fact that the terms for the elements have no solidity or certainty reflects how the elements themselves are deeply unstable - a window or a corridor is an entirely different entity in different languages and periods, with only a bare minimum of agreement in what we are talking about, looking at, building, designing, or using. Accordingly, the terms portrayed here as architectural elements will insist more than they exist The terms themselves have no being, more a becoming.
The matrix of observation for this book includes, among others, the question of how far public and state players have been involved in the establishment of what can be considered architectural elements by means of controlling legislation and taxes. Prior to the development of sophisticated enforcement methods, taxation was gauged mainly by counting building components.
The most well-known of these building-related taxes is the window tax, collected, among other places, in England (1696-1851), France (1798-1926), and the Netherlands (1821-1898), among other places, as part of personal tax. To escape this tax burden, windows were often bricked up, depriving a growing number of citizens of daylight. Even older than the window tax was the medieval hearth tax (Herdsteuer), in German also called Feuergeld (fire money), Herdstattpfennig (hearth penny) or Rauchzins (smoke interest). In many European
1830 Historic trace of the circumvention of England's Window Tax, in Portland Street, Southampton, England.
24 Cf. Koselleck, Begriffsgeschichtl
Koselleck, Begriffsgeschichten, 99 ?( Cf. Stephan Trüby, Exit-Architecture: Design between War and Peace (Wien/New York-Springer, 2008), 27-28.
Cf. Edward Mitchell, "Fear Factors," in Perspecta 35: Building Codes (Cambridge, Mass.:	a
MIT Press, 2004), 144.
; Cf. Klaus Dan Philipp,
"Normierung, avant la lettre. Eine Blutenlese," Walter Prigge (ed.), Ernst Neufert - Normierte Baukultur (Frankfurt am Main: Campus, 1999), 300.
Burg Glanegg in Carinthia, Austria: allowed to fall to ruin In order to avoid the roof tax.
countries, such a tax was dependent on the number of hearths, but also the number of chimneys per household. Even older than the hearth tax is the roof tax, which was known already in Ancient Rome. In Austria, this tax was repeatedly re-introduced, for example at the end of the 18th century by the Emperor Joseph II. Its cost was calculated based on the roof's surface area. Therefore, many castles and other less intensely used buildings in Austria were de-roofed and abandoned in order to save money. Tax avoidance was the cause of the castle ruins of Rauenstein near Baden bei Wien, Glanegg in Carinthia, and Altschielleiten. In Amsterdam especially, but across the Netherlands, stairs were built notoriously steep as a result of the intersection of two taxes. A façade width tax forced narrow and tall houses. A concurrent stair tax based on number of steps compounded the pressure on stairs in most houses to be extraordinarily steep. In the homes of rich merchants, long entrance stairs with an easier gradient were therefore status symbols. Nowadays these building component taxes have become obsolete, and generally taxes, such as land tax, relate to the building as a whole. Today, there are tax exemptions for energy efficiency -a faint echo the tradition of building component taxing.
1871 The Great Chicago Fire: catalyst for the development of new building codes.
Not only did the state respond to the elements of architecture, it also formed them through legislation, building codes and building standards. Two types of architectural codification can be distinguished: building codes in the North American region define construction guidelines; design codes define guidelines for design. Design codes attempt to minimize risk through the design process, unbeknown to an assumed general public (it regulates façades, for example); building codes assure the accessibility and durability of a building, as well as the survival of its users (they regulate, for example, the fire rating of partition walls, lengths and widths of corridors, minimum dimensions for escape staircases, and ramp inclinations). Design codes preceded building codes: they can already be found in Ancient Rome and their influence on building construction was carried on for centuries. The Emperor Domitian passed a "Law for Building Escape," which was handed down through Dustinian Legislation up until the Middle Ages. The municipal legislation for Strasbourg still includes codification from the 12th century.
In times of a risk-averse modernity, with the
insurance and litigation industries established as key players, design codes played a subdued part, and building codes far outweighed them in importance. Cities in the US began to introduce building guidelines at the beginning of the 19th century, and the first law prescribing the inspection of public places and buildings was passed in 1865 in New Orleans. Later, a state-directed promise to ensure the future safety of buildings is, naturally, born out of disaster. The Great Chicago Fire of 1871 catalyzed the development of new building codes that proved to be instrumental in the innovation of the fireproof partition wall, which in turn allowed a massive increase in the size of contiguous buildings over the 20th century.
Aside from the state, another matrix of observation for this elements research is the market economy (including the activities of enterprises in public or state ownership), with its achievements in innovation and patenting. First and foremost was prefabricated construction. The first houses using prefab reinforced concrete slabs were constructed in 1910 in the Garden City project of Forest Hills Gardens in Queens, New York. The architect and engineer Grosvenor Atterbury had, for this purpose, developed a method with which 170 standardized, large-scale concrete elements, at times room-height-sized, were industrially prefabricated and assembled into houses, after arrival on site, with the help of cranes. In the early 1920s, the "System Atterbury" was one of several pre-fab and efficient building systems exploited for a project named Betondorp in the Amsterdam district of Oost / Watergraafsmeer. In 1927, Martin Wagner's Splanemann-Siedlung in Berlin-Lichtenberg, influenced by Atterbury, was the first industrially constructed housing development in Germany. Ernst May's Plattenbau (concrete panel construction) also drew from Atterbury for the construction of the New Frankfurt social housing program (1926-1930). Préfabrication intensified in the late 1960s and early 70s: in 1970, large-scale concrete panel systems constituted 60 percent of all residential construction in the former GDR, and in the 80s, 50 percent of the entire residential construction in Finland, and a remarkable 75 percent in the former Soviet Union. Frame construction using concrete prefab panels experienced wide-spread popularity, and practically all buildings were, at a minimum, fitted with prefabricated stairs, balconies and utility units. After a period of damnation, in the wake
concrete slabs: Grosvenor Atterbury's Garden City project Forest Hills Gardens In Queens, New York.
1920s Betondorp, a pilot project for prefab building systems In Oost / Watergraafsmeer, Amsterdam.
Cf Ulrich Knaack, Sharon Chung-Klatte, Reinhard Hasselbach, prefabricated Systems: Principles of Construction (Basel: Birkhäuser), 2012.
1927 Martin Wagner's Splanemann-Siedlung in Berlin-Lichtenberg, the first industrially built domestic settlement.
of a postmodern revision of Modernity, préfabrication could slowly be rehabilitated again: today mass production of standard building modules flourishes once more, and in some types of housing and the provision of entire prefab buildings, has undergone a type of renaissance.
III.	What Is To Be Done With It?
Elements of Architecture focuses not only on the history, but also on the present and future of architectural elements. It aims to be distinct from two directions of elementary movements in contemporary architectural thinking. Firstly, from the notions (such as Peter Eisenman's) of a vocabulary of meaningless architectonic elements, which may be used as self-referential symbols in an autonomous game of forms in architecture. And secondly, from the parametricisms (such as Patrik Schumacher's) which teach that - even if our construction techniques still dictate that different components (elements) are put together on a construction site - a level of seamlessness is the ideal, whereby an undifferentiated whole is theoretically generated by a single (stretchable and transformable) element that solves virtually every architectural problem (and could become a wall, a roof, a door...). Paradoxically, this last movement - a movement which represents both an anti-elementary and super-elementary thinking (it tries to discredit the differences between, e.g., floors, walls and ceilings while aiming for the one universal element) - is on the one hand almost synonymous with computer-aided design and on the other hand hardly ever speaks about the fact that elements - as templates - have definitively entered the world of (architecture) software.
30	Cf. Knaack et al., Prefabricated Systems.
31	Cf. Peter Eisenman, "Aspects of Modernism: Maison Dom-ino and the Self-Referential Sign," Oppositions 15/16, 1979, 119-128.
32	Cf. Niklas Maak, "Angriff aufs Auto. Der gläserne Fahrer," Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, February 1, 2014.
33	Dulius Posener, quoted after Nikolaus Kuhnert, Anh-Linh Ngo, "Anmerkungen zur Neuausgabe," ARCH+ 210: Dulius Posener-Vorlesungen zur Geschichte der Neuen Architektur, Dune 2013, 3.
34	Egon Friedeil, quoted after Oswald Mathias Ungers, Wochenaufgabe Nr. 1 - Formbindung, Veröffentlichungen zur Architektur, issue 1 (Berlin: Lehrstuhl für Entwerfen und Gebäudelehre der TU Berlin, 1965), unpaginated.
35	Ibid.
2017 Student work posted on the facebook page of the Architectural Association's Design Research Laboratory - crucible of a would-be architecture without elements.
As the research process for this book unfolded, new technological and political relevance for the elements started to become clear. While Giedion took a glance back to the First and Second wave of industrialization in his book on mechanization, this book also looks ahead to an uncertain future, in which objects and data may engage in a misalliance of betrayal. Now, with the imploding of the Gutenberg galaxy, architectural elements as hybrids of matter and software / radiation
enter the architecture world - not through elements-free parametric design but through products like the Nest thermostat or the smart Qesso carpet and other internet-connected devices. Niklas Maak, for example, has written 0n the data collection capabilities of current car designs, alerts us to the "transparent driver" and warns of the "attack on the car," raising the question of "who owns the data that are being collected on us?" A parallel risk assessment could be made in the context of elements. Nest, which was acquired in January 2014 by Google for $3.2 billion, specializes in autodidact thermostats and smoke detectors. Again: who owns that data that is being collected, how is it used, and what does it do to us?
Looking at Holkham Hall in Norfolk, England, an exemplary 18th century Neo-Palladian country seat, Julius Posener constructed a nexus between civil liberty and freely arranged architectural elements: "Not only do the building parts ... become independent, but so do their individual components; finally, each and every window becomes independent.
Common decency preserves an overall symmetry, but the baroque continuity of the building is falling apart. This indeed leads the way to the bourgeois, namely the independence of singular parts in face of a communal unity."3:	Under enlightenment and
bourgeois capitalism, Posener says, elements became more and more discrete, and architecture as a unified "whole" becomes disparate. Nowadays, the socio-political backdrop to Posener's empathetic gaze on the isolated building would be the field of the digital and big data. Where bourgeois capitalism made elements - like citizens? - more individualistic, reflexive technology will make the elements of architecture pre-emptive, managerial, ever more vigilant in ensuring the climatic comfort and security of those within.
Now, what could one do with the disassembled assortment of elements of architecture anatomized in this book? After the reverse engineering, what could always follow is a reverse reverse engineering - the re-assembly of the disassembled. But that would be beside the point. In the same way that design research is not justified from the point of a design imperative,
but only from the point of curiosity, so the primary hope of this research does not necessarily rest on the knowledge of how to improve design, but above all, based on increased knowledge, on a better estimation of one's own position as a protagonist within the force-field of architecture. In this way, it might be possible that the perspective of this book could lead to productivity, indeed, to design - a deconstructing and simultaneously exaggerated look at which components constitute a building, and which of these makes it particularly striking? Oswald Mathias Ungers campaigned for this kind of sensibility when, after quoting Egon Friedell's dictum "The elephant is a huge grabbing and groping trunk, the tiger: a tearing bite, the cow: a chewing and digestive stomach, the dog: a scenting nose on four legs," he wrote in the first issue of his Veröffentlichungen zur Architektur (1965): "Each creation is hypertrophied matter."
What this book might trigger - apart from the discovery of countless stories and histories - is a heightened sensibility towards sometimes strange, sometimes oddly familiar artefacts: houses that are mostly balconies; buildings that are mostly suspended ceilings; buildings that are mostly corridors, doors, elevators, escalators, façades, fireplaces, floors, ramps, roofs, stairs, toilets, walls, windows...
18th century Holkham Hall, Norfolk, England, by William Kent, aided by the architect and aristocrat Lord Burlington. Cited for the independence of its singular parts, with the "baroque continuity of the building ... falling apart." (Julius Posener, ARCH+, June 2013.)
editorial note tr
"a major modification of the human organism, namely its ability to pay attention, occurred when a major cultural innovation, domestication, was adopted. ... the house ... should be viewed as a technical and cognitive instrument, a tool for thought as well as a technology of shelter."
— Peter 1 Wilson, The Domestication of the Human Species (Yale, 1988).
When our species domesticated itself - started living in permanent dwellings rather than temporary encampments - architecture remade our sensory world in a revolution never seen before or since. In Peter 1 Wilson's study of what we did to ourselves, he argues that domestication cut off our visual horizon, shifting our focus to small, bounded spaces in which we had to "pay attention" to each other and to tasks in new ways, triggering new social burdens as well as possibilities for "creating and expanding." And thanks to the opportunity for secrets, transgression and accumulation afforded by our closed miniature realms, the dual notions of privacy and hospitality emerged. Architecture was a deeply mysterious, all-consuming pursuit, Wilson says, which completely reconfigured our species and society "[without people necessarily knowing what has happened."
What this book investigates is how the key functional components of the house - elements of architecture - accrue outsize psychic and symbolic clout while constantly evolving aesthetically, culturally, and technologically, as a solution to the bedeviling problems that come along with living in enclosed worlds. Since the first domestication, elements has always been tasked with mediating or repelling an aspect of the outside world. The four classical elements of nature conceived by Empedocles (5th century BC) pitted against the four "original" elements of architecture assumed by Gottfried Semper (1851):
Empedocles		Semper
earth	VS.	mound (floor)
wind	vs.	enclosure (wall)
water	vs.	roof
fire	vs.	hearth (fireplace)
index
21 Club 601, 697
3D printing 114, 159, 1449 noo-t 9/11 676, 685, 844, 918-919,.1382, 1387; 1760-1761, 2130
Aalto, Alvar 639, 762, 772-773,859 aboriginal 1058, 1430	lavnot
Abraj Al-Bait tower, Mecca 703, 786 absolutism 900-901 gnied ere te Abu Dhabi 125, 480, 537. 1947,5.430^ 1551, 2288
Acconci, Vito 59, 63 Ackerman, lames 898, 2553^ Ya * acoustics 150, 203, 223, 260d26t;)r>bibi 264-265, 267-269, 272, 274,'279;,3Q4, 348, 352, 360, 380, 485, 825, 1150 Acropolis 900
acrylic 813, 842, 949, 1016, 1394 Adam, Robert 932, 1442 Addis Ababa 524-525, 1145,.	, -
1540-1541,1550,1555 ,	.	,<c
Adorno, Theodor 545, 629, 694, 1309 Agra Fort 1079
Afghanistan 632, 654, 983, 2075 agriculture 140, 401, 405, 1402, 1421, 1714
Agrippa 1567
AGV (Automatic Guided Vehicles)
3, 9, 75-76, 78 Ahmedabad, India 2075 Air Wash Seat 1682-1683 air conditioning 210, 261, 271, 290,
294;. 322, 325-326, 336,-369, 371, 381, 334, 785, 814, 825, 827, 832, 834, 858, 865, 918, 924, 945, 950, 1002, 1056, 1223, 1.487, 1492, 1497, 1499, 1502 5.07. 1513 1514 1532-1535 airlock 672 airpocalypse 1485 airport 76, 1)6, 188, 343, 362-363,,;371, 377, 380, 509, 534,537, 545, 547, 641,
. 654, 676-678, 681, 683, 685-690, 692, 694-695, 795, 942, 1163, 1254, 1§80,
! 485, 1693, 2110, 2117, 2(30, 2'.84, 2202, 2204 . airtightness 812, 953 akaname (filth licker) 1571 Akron Plan 156
Al Bahar Towers, Abu Dhabi 1047, Alberti, Leon Battista 122,123,'202)380, 456, 538, 707, 896, 898- 900:903, 905. 1066, 1427, 1550, 1729, 11732, 1764,084© Alcobaça monastery 1450 Alcoa Building, Pittsburgh 978 alcohol 346, 1027, 1126, 1542, 2086 Alexander the Great 477,491,743,2253 Alexander, Christopher 1289 Algeria 138, 767, 1104, 1197,1424 . Alhambra mosque, Granada 243, 380, 1021
Allah 125, 1570, 1789, 1988 Allied Bank Tower, Dallas 92^
Alsop, Will 871
Altenberg, Peter 2186, 2187 iov aluminum 636, 639, 672, 716, 720, 763, 773-796, 797, 799-800, 802-803, 808-809, 815, 818, 832-833, 850, 852-854, 856, 873, 916, 918, 921-924, 926, 932, 945, 947, 955, 959, 961, 963, 965, 978-979, 990, 993, 1048-1049 1054, 1211, 1645
amber 832, .102$-, .	,
American Dream 753~	,
American Institute of Architec (AlA) 106, 150, 695; 816; 858,
2159,2277	'	•	'
American Restroom Associate .	641..695,,1646 ,
American Society of Heating "Refrigeration and Air Condition . Engineers' 814p82ii?!8589( - to a American Society of Mecha ^.r,Engjnf.efs^90, 3ep?- 2C^,1, Ame^an Standard 785, 1601,'ie, A,16'73, 167£16f)d, 2279,
1 AmericanStandards AssoCiafio1' American's with Disabilities Act, •op,1990.1648,-1721, 1764,,.	5 8j6}-
Ammannati, Bartolomeo 1936.J' amphitheater i094, 1166, 1247,213 2138—21391 °[ 0t> 11 S9Db Amsterdam 362, 483, 539, 601, 687,
,>il 735/ 750. S69;l971, iTfSI.) i/aj.pfil"
Hter
Amsterdam School 483	.,	'
Angkor Wat 1784 Anglo-Saxon 15oi, 1303,1403?*?!
'.	.1.495; 1.5597 15741 U67Tb'
Angola 475-, 524, ,525 ¡ur • annunciation 172, 571 anorectal angle 1680 Anschluss 1153, 1155 ; aritrt&rm 1014, tO-fS’Ooed Antioch 389,477/oneoeb antiquity 82 83, 105,112, 122, 123, *
. 638, 89^:9081429,, 1.448, 156^. 157 1936, 1995	,7?	,
Antwerp 742,c-22§3	,jn ' *
aperture 667,705.962. 1428 ;oogr Apollo 1352, 1426, 1566, 1700 app 316, 342, 1443, 1526,. 1055, 1.74Q 171 1, 2109, 2235
Apple 524, 525, 847, 870, 917/919, 995)4051;''1497, 1759 -apse221 •mrr.pj: :>;b r, etw Aqua Tower, Chicago 1079, 1230 aquarium 823, 1394, 1396 Aquinas, Thomas 1444 Arakawa and Gin 32, 82, 83 Aramco 784
arcade 3.12, 1260, 1313,1314 . . arch 106, 116, 124, 222, 307, 444, 451,. 456? 51'3, 516, 552, 578, 582,632, 77Q, 902, 915? 978, 1051, 1355, 1484, 1504; iornig^254	‘Vitqi4H
Arch of Khousra 578o	. ’ onno®
archaeology 392,1720, 1721^11853,,0 2117, 2250, 2333 Archigram 299 Architectural Aluminum 5 -Manufacturers Association965-Archizoom 44-45, 1621 1719 3si arengario 1075, 1095, 1144-,1147 Aristotle 628, 1427 Ark of the Covenant 9 Armstrong Ceiling 296) 348, 352,
- ri 383, 384
Art Basqy^;oa ff,
"Art Deco 715, 932, 1609, 1654 Art Nouveau 725 artillery 251, 585, 591, 1777 Arts & Craft (movement) 164, 1447 Arup 368, 509, 511, 908, 1017, 1039, 1060, 1062, 2261
basement 231, 309, 326-327, 377, 593, 636, 1283, 1403, 1405, 1432, 1460-1461, 1476, 1483, 1498, 1510, 1533, 2128-2129, 2149, 2196, basilica 6, 123, 458, 460, 464, 481, 871, 1094, 1150, 1567, 2255, 2289 Basilica Palladiana, Vicenza 871 Basilica of Sant'andrea, Mantua, Italy 123
Bath Abbey, England 221 Bathroom Tower 1576-1577 baths of Caracalla, Rome 1560,1572, 1936
Baudelaire, Charles 2186 Bauer, Nick 1525
Bauhaus, Dessau 164, 352, 490, 501, 504, 639, 768-769, 823, 922, 1045, 1048, 1079, 1085, 1172, 1180-1181, 1191 Baustatik, Sommer 844 Bauwelt (magazine) 488, 490-491, 538 bay window 603, 702, 718-719,
724-725, 772, 783, 858, 1183 Bazalgette, Joseph 1594, 1598 Beaufort toilet 1561, 1600-1604, 1703 Beaux Arts 138, 455, 867, 884-885,
2044, 2271
bedroom 50, 54, 59, 89, 91, 146, 315,
495, 772, 778, 827, 833, 842, 1212, 1215, 1232, 1236, 1282, 1305, 1307, 1309-1310, 1342, 1353, 1355, 1423, 1578, 1591, 1658-1659, 1662, 2166 bee 1225
Beeby, Thomas 2044 Behaviorology 720 Beijing, China 129, 219, 365, 455, 518-521, 524-525, 535, 536, 608, 611, 616, 694-695, 779, 788, 844, 905, 1017, 1018, 1160, 1214, 1254, 1270, 1278, 1433, 1644-1645, 1650, 1675, 1719, 1980-1981, 2229
Belgium 483, 526, 740-741, 742-743,
782, 794-796, 798, 941, 986, 1299, 1481, 1775, 1785, 1793, 2005, 2094-2095, 2270 Bell Labs building, Holmdel 926 Belluschi, Pietro 762, 913, 923, 941,
947, 980, 1048, 1050 Belphegor1571
belvedere 226, 1953, 1961, 1963 Bemis, Albert Farwell 182 Benjamin, Walter 567, 750, 858, 1050, 1291, 1507, 2186 Benoy Architects 537 Bentham, Jeremy 51, 1297 Berber 1424, 1767, 1972-1973 Bergdoll, Barry 82, 84, 170, 1048 Berlage, Hendrik Petrus 486, 538 Berlin 7, 103-104, 170, 202-203, 233, 278, 300, 491, 492, 498, 500, 502-503, 508, 511, 581-582, 636, 639, 680-681, 840, 842, 844, 862, 918-919, 985, 998, 1018, 1023,1026,1034,1142,1154, 1156-1157, 1172, 1246, 1254, 1299, 1392, 1429, 1587, 1775, 1777, 1783, 1831, 1833, 1835, 1881, 1960, 2005, 2170-2171, 2186-2188, 2239, 2328 Berlin Tegel (airport) 680 Berlin Wall 103-104, 202-203, 918-919 Bernard, Andreas 2156, 2186, 2238 Bessemer Converter 921 Bessemer, Henry 740, 986 Beyonce 1239 Bhutan 1614
Bible 9, 13, 53, 604-605, 1578, 1721
(In the case of fire, the challenge was to exploit it domestically while preventing it from consuming the house, and now from con-suming/destabilizing our world, entirely...)
With this primal connection to the biggest ever shift in our species and our relationship to the world, it should have been no surprise to us that such an overwhelming amount of material could be mined from the human experience with architecture's component parts. This book is an effort to construct architecture's full range of "options," unpacking the intelligence, histories, and wonder embedded in its seemingly banal parts. As Sigfried Giedion puts it in one of our touchstones, Mechanization Takes Command (1948): "The sun is mirrored even in a coffee spoon."
Whereas the house today is hell-bent on taking data from its inhabitants, we look at architecture as a vast repository of data emanating centuries of knowledge. Like running a record player needle over tree rings, what happens when you "play" the information stored in elements of architecture...
The book started with Koolhaas's realization that two architectural historians and theorists were, independently, focusing their entire study on specific elements: the corridor (Stephan Trilby) and the ceiling (Manfredo di Robilant). Their approach immediately felt like an incredibly exciting and fresh way of looking at architecture: obsessively focused and "small" but at the same time limitless across history and geography. Truby then introduced us to the work of Friedrich Mielke, who has spent 60 years cataloguing staircases. With three elements in sight, it seemed only logical to expand. Why not 12? Why not 15?
As a first foray, in the fall of 2012, OMA's Rotterdam office hosted a Harvard GSD studio on the elements, with 12 students sifting mountains of data, histories, and anecdotes for key turning points in a kind of sub-architectural history. It was intense document-based research, but also became a form of simply paying attention: every indoor environment could yield fresh instances of innovative or generic exploitation of elements. Students were hands-on too, "assisting" the demolition of a nearby building, ripping toilets from the floor (and gagging), stripping off layers of partition
Krup, Ove 509, 511, 2261 ^Kestos 63, 94, 152, 312, 313, 421, 741, ¡¡Ki6 918, 926, 973, 974, 975, 1050 ^Blter, Michael 167 Kfsplund, Gunnar762, 1023, 1480 Bssange, Julian 1150, 1171 Assyria 474, 495, 877, 2252 ■astrophysics 457 Hsylum 1171, 1281, 1282, 1284, 1286 ^He|ier BowWow 720 ^Hthens, Greece 21, 83, 843, 1200,
¡¡¡■•I 427, 1428, 1429, 1565, 1720, 2124, ■2136, 2141
Hrium 772, 784, 1185, 1299, 1348, 1410, JB:1411, 2192, 2193, 2264, 2329 HpC 109, 220, 263, 266, 267, 464, 478, §■192, 493, 499, 500, 552, 973, 1476, 1781, §Ms1783, 1843, 1867 Bu Bon Marche 1729, 1742, 1743 Blschwitz 1610, 1720 ^■stralia 117, 956, 1088, 1229, 1254, §»365, 1380, 1430, 1675, 1749, 2083,
Austria 15, 307, 376, 460, 526, 536, 932, §■(022, 1055, 1090, 1153, 1777, 1778, IB 1929, 2030, 2141 AutoCAD 816, 1434 Automatic door-closer 628, 629 Automobile 545, 583, 845, 919, 926, 945, |A85, 1016, 1519, 1521, 1854, 2262 Bvant garde 489, 913, 1001, 1023-1024, Bl83, 1303 ^His mundi 1270 ■BMW 2328
Babel, Tower of 1585, 2245, 2252-2253, |*fe258, 2288, 2333 B|aby balcony (baby cage) 1178, B(179
■baby boom 1680 Bibylon 581, 743, 1034, 1845, 1979, »2252
Aachelard, Gaston 380, 381, 1424,
§■1507, 1550-1551
Bkteria 74, 82-83, 835, 952, 1462
Blagan Temples 117
Baldachin 472, 477
Balloon frame 135, 202, 226, 252, 965,
■	403, 1476
Balustrade 493, 1058, 1078, 1088, 1110, |Hf1112, 1119, 1155, 1206, 1747, 1749, JBl767, 1773, 1783-1784, 1792-1793, JB795, 1816, 1862, 1865-1869, 1881, |B|909-1913, 1948, 1990-2013 Bbmboo 421, 424-425, 560, 1113, 1692 Bangladesh 51, 62, 116, 1686 Bpnham, Rayner 56, 83, 152, 271, 290, 1B371, 380-381, 917, 1014, 1048-1051, |B|403, 1511-1514, 1516-1517, gBl 532-1533, 1551 Bank of England, London 144,
■	¡460-1461
Baptistery 241, 485, 545, 554 ^Barbican Center, London 1034 Barcelona 56, 509, 623, 967, 1045, 1084, IB 188-1191, 1664, 2328 ^Krcelona Pavilion 56, 623, 967 Hparkow Leibinger 376, 929 Baroque 248, 528, 638, 1108, 1767, 1793, |B|829, 1833, 1862, 1868, 1881, 1909, 1B928-1929, 1948, 1999, 2005, 2130 Barry, Charles 258, 260-271 Basel, Switzerland 485, 537, 820-821, ■1017
walls, carefully dismantling and reconstructing false ceiling "sandwiches" to study their qualities IRL. It was a form of three-dimensional archaeology, figuring out what architecture was actually made of, since it has to be made of something.
The GSD students tried to identify (and lionize) unknown historic innovators, but also track down archives and surviving experts who'd devoted their entire lives to individual elements of architecture and been forgotten or ignored by the architectural establishment. Along with Friedrich Mielke, there was Tim Nugent (ramp) and Charles Brooking (window); there were historians devoted to door handles, museums dedicated to the toilet, to the elevator, to the roof...
A design template for the book, provided by Irma Boom, helped tame the material at a point when it was threatening to run riot, introducing a narrative system of captions, quotations,
'mini essays,' and essays. Images became black and white, with worthy exceptions, avoiding a cacophony of color palettes. But the main impact of the design template was to radically open up the book-making process: using the template, chapters could be built and refined simultaneously in real time by a host of contributors and editors, like a wiki. An iterative process ad infinitum...
Koolhaas's commission to curate the Venice Architecture Biennale upped the ante and provided a target. The idea grew to make the main exhibition in the Central Pavilion a reflection and extrapolation of the still-growing book (ca. 2,000 pages at this mid-point and counting). A second Harvard studio pulled focus on the material - without reducing it - as we started to corral dozens of collaborating writers, editors, historians, archivists, scientists, and bemused building industry insiders into he project...
Deuteronomy 1570 Genesis 82, 998, 1520, 1522, 2252 Matthew Proverbs 53, 558,1082 Solomon 9-10, 13-14, 22, 53, 112 bicycle 607, 870,1066,1707,1779,1781, 2230 bidet 1586, 1624, 1631, 1675, 1682-1683 Bidet, Mr. 1682 Bieber, Justin 1241 Big Ben 483 Bilbao 914, 962, 1167 biometrics 546, 652-654, 688, 694 birdcage 2179 bitumen 492, 1565 Blade Runner (film) 1028-1029 Blaisse, Petra 820-821 Blanc, Patrick 1036,1038, 1051 bleachers 464, 2312-2313 blinds 173, 702, 709, 770, 775, 815,
832, 1008, 1041, 1045, 2178, 2291 Blohm, Gustav 1930 Blokhin, Boris 938 Blondel, Francois 202, 392, 901, 1730-1731, 1764, 1824, 1862,
1892-1893, 1974
Bloomberg, Michael 1763, 2080, 2117 Bluetooth 653, 1710, 2234 Bluout, Abel 134 blue foam 397, 402, 418, 448 Bo, Zhang 518-520 boarding school 2275 Bock, Christian 2187 Bodiansky, Victor 1192,1194-1195 Boeri, Stefano 1039,1227 Bofill, Ricardo 942, 1190-1191, 1247 Bogota, Colombia 1106 Boijmans van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam 736 Bolivia 1106,1168 Bollerey, Franziska 1736, 1764 Bolomor cave 1413-1416 Bonatz, Paul 500, 892-893 Borchardt, Ludwig 2248 border 105, 203, 582, 687, 1126, 1187, 1189, 1199, 1783
Bosch, Hieronymus 1395, 1396 Bosco Verticale, Milan 1227 Boston Public Library 222 Boswell Reid, David 258, 260, 269,
271, 1462
botanical garden 999,1037 botany 396, 999, 1036 Botta, Mario 914-915, 942 Boucher, François 1587 Boulée, Etienne-Louis 168, 272, 866 bourdaloue 1587
bourgeois 775, 1080, 1121, 1123, 1172, 1228, 1291, 1303, 1590, 1605, 1662, 1734, 1812, 1858, 1868, 1878, 1971, 1971 Bracciolini, Poggio 2254 Bracq, Paul 845 Bramah, Joseph 1600 Bramante, Donato 485, 1959, 1961 Brand, Stewart 1642,1719 Brandenburg (gate) 580, 582 Brandenburg Willy Brandt (airport) 681 Brazil 195, 367, 1059, 1090, 1110-1111, 1167, 1254, 1675, 1686, 2106, 2266, 2330-2331
Brasilia 1745, 2266, 2330-2331 Breteche 1080, 1098-1099, 1574, 1576 Breuer, Marcel 52, 934, 941, 947,1049 Breughel, Pieter, the elder
1582-1583, 2253
brise soleil 768, 785, 935-936, 966 1003,1198,1200
brick 33,60, 91, 95, 110, 116-119,
134-136, 145, 148, 149, 246, 307, 421 474, 492-493, 495, 616, 728, 768^ 780 886, 914-915, 921, 943, 960, 965^ 967' 1054,1439,1453,1458-1459,1470-147l’ I 1478-1479, 1504,1564-1565, 1622,	®
1643, 1909, 2252, 2293 British Council for Offices 191 bronze 170, 173, 467, 470, 554, 598, 63 639, 707, 925, 1143, 1255, 1257, 1444 1602,1899,2030,2136,2140-2141,
2181, 2270, 2285 Bronze Age 2030, 2140 Brooklyn Museum 167 brothel 773
Brunelleschi, Filippo 246, 899, 1351 brutalist 919,1034,1036,1074-1075,1204 Buber, Martin 1185 Buckingham Palace, London
261, 1600-1601
Buddhism 30, 441, 447, 570, 1570 Buenos Aires, Argentina 1150 Building Information Modeling (BIM) 211, 371-375, 818-819, 2219 bunker 2293-2295, 2298-2299, 2333 ; Bunshaft, Gordon 333, 924-925, 941, ; 1026
Burg Hochosterwitz 546, 584-591	;
Burj Khalifa, Dubai 1347,1670-1671, <:
2125, 2183
Burnham, Daniel H. 137-138,140, 2159:1 Burov, Andrei 938 buttress 465-466, 469-470, 516, 571 Butz, Albert 1498 Buzard, James 665 Baumler, Werner 1744,1791,
1892-1893 béton brut 915 Cairo 125, 742, 1107, 1273 Caixa Forum, Madrid 1038 Calatrava, Santiago 1046 California 106, 153, 186, 234, 236, 28 303, 347, 479, 534, 651, 754, 847, 934, 942, 945, 970-971, 988, 992, 1026, 104 1043, 1086, 1134, 1380, 1514, 1705 calligraphy 396, 401, 441 Calvin, John 1301 Cambridge, Mass. 635, 772, 776, 872 Camouflage 267, 602, 695, 1110, 1586 Campin, Robert 1445 Camus, Albert 735 Candela, Felix 505,509-510,513,516, i Candilis, Georges 1185, 1192, 1194-1195, 1247
canopy 18, 239, 285, 507, 509, 1474,
1477
Canterbury Cathedral 485, 1560, 1568 cantilever 400-401, 413, 416-417, 424-425, 428-429, 436, 440-441, 773, 776, 880, 1075, 1078, 1088, 1090-1091, 1119,1141,1171,1175,1189,1204,
1236, 1387
capitalism 91, 401, 626, 765, 772, 848, 858, 978, 1026, 1142) 1246, 1301, 2037 ; Capitol Building, Washington DC 300, 478-479, 538-539, 549, 1299 Capitoline hill, Rome 1429, 2254-2255, 898-899, 1941
capsule 299, 950, 979, 1186, 1189, 1577, 1617, 1720, 2125, 2131 Capsule Declaration 1617,1720
chariot latrine 1572 Charles Brooking Collection 712 Chateau 54, 461,1118-1119, 1451, 1575-1576, 1587, 1784, 1835, 1910, 1936, 1942, 1950, 1952, 1960-1961 de Pierrefonds 1587 de Tonquedec, Brittany 1575 Gaillard 1576
Chaucer, Geoffrey 7, 56, 82-83 Cheers (TV show) 565 Cherry Hill 1281, 1297-1299 chess 24, 1041,2225,2235 Chicago 40, 49, 82, 91, 134-141, 146,
148, 170, 202-203, 208, 236, 253-255, 271, 278, 308, 312, 330, 332, 353, 484, 639, 662, 664, 703, 708, 747, 759, 761, 869, 956-957, 1022-1023, 1045, 1051, 1066, 1079, 1091, 1229-1230, 1232, 1347, 1480, 2038, 2044, 2076, 2117, 2159, 2256, 2262
Chicago Daily Tribune 136, 138, 140, 148, 253, 312, 353, 380, 761 chicken 318, 1225, 1246, 1311, 1496 Chile 306, 358, 797, 939, 2125, 2130-2131 chimney 149, 478, 485, 490-491, 495, 499, 959, 1288, 1404, 1408-1411, 1424-1425, 1428, 1430, 1434, 1437-1439, 1450, 1452-1459,
1466-1467, 1469-1473, 1475-1477,
1481, 1489, 1494, 1504-1506, 1511, 1513, 1526, 1539, 1549, 1550, 1585 chimney sweeps 1466 China 82-83, 91, 102, 111, 115, 117, 121, 128-129, 164, 195, 203, 306-307, 309, 389, 393, 396, 405, 417, 451, 455,
457-	458, 460, 478, 481, 483-485, 487, 492, 519-521, 523-524, 527, 536-537, 549, 560, 573-574, 576, 611, 615, 618-619, 743, 778-779, 788, 792, 794, 858, 864, 873, 878, 918-919, 949, 1029, 1038, 1066, 1112-1114, 1259, 1268, 1270, 1278, 1380, 1413, 1422, 1433,
1485, 1551,1561,1571,1614,1644-1645, 1686-1687, 1719, 1785, 1789, 1923, 2002, 2006, 2037, 2048-2049, 2070, 2073, 2075, 2092, 2114, 2130, 2229, 2235, 2279, 2281, 2285, 2289
Ching, Francis D.K. 553, 694, 887,
1066, 1764
Chipperfield, David 639 choir 124,465-466,469^170,1275,1795,1832 cholera 1561,1590,1592,15%, 1687,1703 Christ, Jesus 19, 477, 480, 558, 570-571, 1444-1445, 1911, 1929, 1940, 2093 Christianity 19, 481, 570, 1425, 1444, 1580
Christmas 797, 1139, 1525-1526, 1740, 1777
Christo and Jeanne Claude 1018-1019 Chrysler Building 664,923, %2,1259,1347 Chuin, Tung 485, 538 church 14,16-17,19 21, 24, 48, 63, 65,
168, 211, 221, 223, 239, 259, 322, 354,
458-	465, 468-469, 472, 474, 477, 480-481, 556, 567, 597, 706, 763, 871, 898, 935, 955, 1031, 1136, 1275, 1293, 1295, 1460, 1568, 1580, 1767, 1787, 1789, 1840, 1863, 1870, 1887-1888,
1925, 1927, 1940-1941, 2271, 2277, 2295, 2299
Church of the Holy Sepulchre 477
Churchill, Winston 1160
chute 1345,1574-1575,1588,1729,1752,2256
To survive this book, a brief reading note from the editors:
larger-sized texts, in color, are annotations by Rem Koolhaas and Irma Boom, extrapolating and personalizing key historic moments; together with occasional color images and regular translucent overlays, they offer an alternative, faster route through the book...
this book is something between an incomplete encyclopedia - a seemingly objective depository of found material - and an paranoiac's scrapbook decoding the motivations and rules hidden everywhere in our built environment. We try to drag everything into the light, while ultimately exposing how little we can know...
it's not "The" elements of architecture, just elements of architecture. Historical architectural treatises, which typically used the elements as the means of grasping architecture as a harmonious whole, each claimed a definitive list. This book makes no such claim. There could even be a sequel...
we tended towards elements that might be considered scenography rather than structure, suggesting architecture as a (flimsy) stage-set, rather than a serene unified entity and order (so, no column).
the book encompasses elements from their most desultory to most exultant manifestations. We look at "firsts" (Giedion) and "mosts" (Banham), groundbreaking innovation and common practices when it comes to the development of elements.
most chapters are highly selective chronologies, from the first Paleolithic innovation to the latest digital manifestation...
of particular interest to us are roads not taken during this timescale: innovations that failed or were actively suppressed (the multi-directional elevator), regional intelligence that barely survived the homogenization wrought by modernity (the mashrabiya)... elemental practices that could have created a radically different "normal."
LXXII
»1038-1039, 1687 ^BfCarlo, Arnold 753
^Ket 12, 18-19, 22, 25, 29, 33-34, ¡^»59, 61, 64, 72-74, 82-83, 235, 239, ijKgg 1255, 1289, 1351-1352, 1354, 1393, HfgOg 2075, 2303, 2305 ^Krrier, Willis 325, 380-381, 1492, ||H^3, 1532-1533 ^Hfroil, Lewis 566, 694 ^Erson, Rachel 1035 ^Ktles (castle) 54-55, 447, 464-465, §■467-468, 470, 491, 498, 545-546, 585, ¡■EgO, 592-593, 596-598, 724, 728, §B|o88-1089, 1256, 1276, 1302, 1305, |M§391, 1403, 1434-1435, 1440, 1446, §*448' 1451, 1560, 1566, 1573-1577, 1*580, 1600, 1720, 1771, 1773, 1*778-1779, 1781, 1784, 1833, 1840, |Hg43, 1925, 1959, 1971 IKAkita, Japan 1573 i^Kydon, Scotland 574 HEhirk, Wales 574 IKConisbrough Castle, England fe&Kl 403,1434
^E Kwidzyn, Poland 1560, 1576 IBkangley, England 1575 IBMiramare, Italy 1088 fplijo, Japan 1276 IBPapiol, Spain 1088 IHjortchester, England 1575 IHiVest Wickham, England 1577 ^Htesian 1, 302,1716 Cartography 457 Hfairyatides 1119 ^Ksa Mila 1084
^H$a de la Marina, Barcelona 1045 ^Bsa del Fascio, Como 967, 1043,
Kl 145-1146 ^Bfoah 767, 1191 ^element window 712-713, 715 ^Hino 347, 981, 1024, 1949, 2100, 2229 ^Hpello d'Albertis, Genova 251 I Cat 1225 ^Htal Hüyük 78
Hltholic 23, 83, 260, 715, 1293, 1295, *1301, 1571, 1580, 1908, 1912, 1929, H&77, 2293, 2295 Blip 438, 701, 1366, 2254, 2256 §Caucasus 1075
^Hrendish-Scott-Bentinck, William ^■5th Duke of Portland) 1311, 1313 HTV 300, 346, 547, 654 ^Bular 107, 146, 221, 376, 972, 979, 981, ■k)50, 1081, 1230, 1255, 1281 Hlnent 95, 110-111, 148. 224, 252, 307, |H65, 468, 474, 492-495, 501, 509, 511, ■P4, 624, 891, 926, 931, 971, 1338, 1432, I 1708, 2156
^Bptrai Park, New York City 750, 858,
Hr4,1652
^Biral heating 146, 271, 381, 488, ^*4-497, 499, 1299, 1432, 1440, 1480, ^»96-1497, 1510, 1514 ^Kntre Georges Pompidou 366, »1027, 1050, 1514, 2069, 2272 ■psariano, Cesare 64,112, 203,392,394 ^■spoo! 1714, 1571, 1584, 1590
IC'zanne 492
^Kmber pot 1574, 1586-1587 ¡^■Phambray, Roland Freart 897 ^Hpmberlin, Powell & Bon 1034 ■Ran, Jackie 528
the book maintains an almost autistic focus on the elements as isolated components. Meeting points between them - assemblages, overlaps, compositions - are generally not considered (with the exception of façade, arguably a composite element consisting of wall, window, door, balcony, roof).
we embrace the fact that, unlike in the treatises of old, no unifying theory emerges. The reader "must be calm and must read without haste; he must not be ever interposing his own personality and his own special 'culture'; and he must not expect as the ultimate results of his study of these pages that he will be presented with a set of new formulae." (Nietzsche, "On the Future of Our Educational Institutions," 1872).
• For us, this book reveals how architecture stubbornly remains an open system, subject to an infinity of cultural variations, utterly dependent on accumulations of shared knowledge and shared delivery systems; iterative, a mess, a collage of compromises, corrections on corrections, stimulated and curtailed by institutes, laws, and corporations which can only ever scramble to ascertain it, let alone control it...
Maybe this book is the growing realization of a secret: that architecture's parts are worth more than their sum.
— james westcott & Stephan petermann
CIAM (Congrès Internationaux d'Architecture Moderne) 82, 84, 1181, 1183, 1200
circulation 33, 41, 246-247, 265-267, 766-768, 778, 1000, 1008, 1088-1089, 1097, 1191, 1256, 1276, 1282-1283,
1285, 1288, 1291, 1293, 1307, 1362-1363, 1368, 1386, 1441, 1456,
1462, 1496, 2112, 2159, 2202, 2302, 2316, 2318-2319, 2323 circus 132, 307, 309, 1024, 1027, 1041, 1094, 2166, 2261 Circus Maximus 1094 cistern 1477 Cité Industrielle 762 Cité de Refuge, Paris 1003 Citroen Marbeuf Garage, Paris 985 city hall 234, 296, 479, 481, 485, 1099, 1144-1145, 1254, 1744, 1850,m2328 city gates 545, 580-581, 583, 616, 1269 City of Vertical Green, Singapore 1039
cnc machine 803
CNN 105, 2069 clam 638
classical orders 124, 763 Corinthian 390, 896-898, 902, 1030-1032, 1051 Doric 896-898, 902-903 Ionic 109, 896-898, 902 Claudius, John 985 Claustrophobia 845, 2181 clay 54, 61, 111, 152, 456, 493, 740, 1413, 1427, 1564-1565, 2250 climate 110, 117, 148, 262, 325, 371-374, 421, 465, 469, 494, 500, 503, 534, 606, 706, 720, 752, 795, 798, 821, 825-827, 830, 947, 951, 953, 985, 996-997, 999, 1001, 1003, 1006, 1008, 1038, 1191,
1193, 1403, 1424, 1440,1444,1486-1487, 1492, 1496, 1498-1499, 1502, 1507,
1516, 1518-1519, 1526, 1533, 1547, 1550 Clivus Capitolinus 2254 Cloaca Maxima 259, 1567, 1580, 1598 coal 140, 728, 914, 1215, 1403, 1407, 1409, 1411, 1417, 1458-1459, 1468-1469,
1471, 1474, 1477, 1484, 1498, 1509-1510, 1521, 1538, 1610, 1687 Coderch, Antonio 1045,1188-1189,1247 Cold War 914, 926, 928, 940, 944, 950, 1336-1337, 1389
Cologne, Germany 221, 702, 747, 764, 987, 1828, 2187 Colombia 2111
colonial 63, 695, 758, 767, 858, 956,
963, 1102, 1108-1110, 1145, 1197, 1246-1247
Colorado 507, 650, 1090, 1131, 1166, 1354, 1515, 1707, 2256 Colosseum, Rome 897-899, 1094,
1147, 1247, 1936, 2138 communal 78, 186, 189, 1075, 1095,
1147, 1259, 1282, 1284, 1288, 1342,
1345, 1349, 1424, 1428-1429, 1438,
1558, 1560, 1566, 1570, 1572,
1577-1578, 1610, 1664, 1679 communism 772, 774, 777, 1080, 1143, 1164, 2245, 2258
community toilets 1688-1691, 1693 compost 1614, 1674-1675, 1687, 1704 concertina wire 104, 157, 557 concrete 17, 35, 38, 62, 94, 103, 107,
146, 158, 171, 182, 190, 211, 20, 223,
224-229, 282, 307, 308-309, 336-33 369, 396, 490-495, 504, 508-517 7“ 913-917, 922, 930, 934-943, 966 10 1183, 1189, 1338, 1390-1391, 1693 1708, 1738-1739, 1760, 1934, 2098" 2257, 2261, 2264, 2296 Coney Island 2037, 2051, 2166 Confucius 461 Congo 794-796, 1686 consciousness 236, 765, 950, 967 1 1004, 1007, 1030, 1193, 1350,’1396 1509,2040,2318-2319 Constantine 238, 477, 2136 constructivist 1003, 2259, 2261 consultant 170, 261, 267, 819, 1624 2103, 2256, 2293,
Cook, Peter 536
Coop Himmelb(i)au 536-537, 2328 Cooper Union, New York 970-971
2125,2153,2158 Cooper, Peter 2153, 2158 Copacabana 2237 Copenhagen, Denmark 774, 870, 5
1079,1172,1229,1231,1242 copper 140, 628, 773, 819, 871, 918 !
971, 1049, 1521, 2124-2125, 2131, 2 Cordonata 1941, 2255 Cornell University 685, 967, 1624 cornice 241, 306, 490, 492-495, 877,^ 1104,1419
Corning Glass 913, 946, 948, 975, coronation 612, 1140 corridore 1255-1256, 1271, 1360-136 1363, 1411
Corrosion 307, 636, 916, 950, 955,
1017
Costa, Lucio 2266 Cottage 146, 494, 956 cotton 230, 620, 726, 973, 1011 Court 104, 202, 243, 479, 490, 667, 714 1110, 1305, 1307-1309, 1440, 1442, 1460, 1467, 1586, 1600, 1835, 1861, 1866, 1910, 1960, 2061, 2250 courtyard 121, 124, 129, 524, 578, 614, 770, 784, 887, 1044, 1101, 1185, 1194-1195, 1197, 1218, 1266, 1278, 1280, 1283, 1291, 1297, 1305, 1307-1308, 1410-1411, 1427, 1644, 1798, 1682, 1868, 1870, 1901, 1961 Covent Garden 273 COW 10, 701, 1411 Cranach, Lucas 12 Crapper, Thomas 1601, 1604 Cret, Paul Philippe 455, 885 Croon, Louis 2248 Cross-ventilation 827 cross-and-bible door 604 cruciform 481, 1271 Crusades 477, 1514, 1795, 1927 Crystal Palace, London 702, 728, 74 746, 782, 867, 921, 986-987, 999, 1048, 1050, 1313, 1508
cubicle 91, 93, 170, 184-188, 190-192, 330, 1204, 1562, 1590, 1650 cubism 846
Culverhouse, lohn 1449 Cummings, Alexander 1561,1590, j
1600, 1703
cupola 13, 472-473, 477-478, 842, 1738 curtain wall 170, 173, 516, 702-703, 7
762, 767, 779, 785-786, 815, 818, 822, 826, 828, 841, 844, 865, 913, 915-917, 918, 920-929, 947, 952; 965, 977-978,
Dome of the Rock, Jerusalem 477 Donggwol-do 1267 Doolittle, Justus 560, 694 door handle 636-640 dormitory 772 dotcom boom 188 Double Envelope House 919, 1005 Doulton 1607
Downtown Athletic Club, New York
2166
drain 492-495, 499, 503, 770, 818, 1565, 1567, 1580, 1589-1593, 1597 Drexler, Arthur 1478 Dreyfuss, Henry 1498, 1550 drone 1547
Dubai 535, 654, 1081, 1218, 1222, 1347, 1668, 1670-1671, 2125 Dublin 189, 843, 956 duct 265, 327, 359, 368, 945, 1458, 1513 Duke of Portland, 5th 1291,1310—
1311, 1313, 1316, 1396-1397 Duke of Portland, 6th 1447 Duke of Roxburghe 728 Duomo 472
Durand, Jean-Nicolas-Louis 1185,1292 Durand apartments 936, 1033 Düsseldorf 741, 986, 1007, 2187, 2239 Dymaxion House 959, 1512, 1561, 1616 dystopia 2252, 45, 1028, 1337, 1547, 2253 Dürer, Albrecht 1909, 1924 ETH Zurich 508-509, 2232, 2235-2236 Eames, Charles and Ray 236 earth closet 1562
earthquake 255, 340, 358-359, 573, 831, 858, 2235
Easter 931, 1139, 1169
Easter Island 931
Eastern State Penitentiary 1258,
1297, 1299, 1397 Eco, Umberto 202, 2187 The Economist 191, 344, 380,1515,1703 ecosystem 344,1516 Eddystone Lighthouse 931,1048 Eden Project 1017 Edmier, Keith 166 Edward VII, Prince of Wales 1596 Edwardian England 718 egress 311, 662, 664-665, 672, 983, 1255-1256, 1260, 1263, 1334, 1360, 1362-1363, 1365, 1368, 1370, 1372, 1374-1376, 1382, 1384, 1396, 1753, 2102 Ehn, Karl 1172-1173,1183 Ehrlich, Paul 1035 Eichler Homes 754-755 Eichstätt 1734-1735, 1767, 1788-1789, 1802, 1858-1873, 1908, 1948-1949,
1951, 2010-2011, 2031 Eiffel Tower 2125, 2168-2169 Eiffel, Gustave 1742, 2168-2169 Eindhoven, Technical University of, Robotics 2210 Einstein, Albert 183 Eisenman, Peter 637, 639, 917, 980, 1037, 1386-1387, 1479 El Lissitzky 1141, 1150 Elbphilharmonie, Hamburg 536, 703, 826, 828-829
electro-chromatic shading 815 elephant 513, 598, 1101,1122, 1259, 1449 elephant defence 598 elevated-risk passenger 690-691 elevator safety break 2123, 2136, 2152, 2155-2156
contents
floor
Trajectory	2
negotiating between gravity	4
and the upright body by keller easterling
wall
Introduction	91
Trajectory	92
Walls under the microscope	94
Archetypes	96
Defensive walls	102
Prison walls	106
Woven walls: Gottfried Semper	108
Mud walls	110
Stonewalls	112
Wood walls	114
Brick walls	116
Wall plans: curvilinear to orthogonal	120
Columns and/as walls	122
Lost in the mosque	124
Ja//of Mughal architecture	126
Chinese walls: partitions and spirit walls 128 Japanese screen	130
Rome and the double wall	132
Chicago: birth of the american partition 134 by nicholas potts
Language of the wall	142
Bank of England and Central Pavilion, Venice 144 Opening up	146
Gutting the White House	148
Sound	150
Heat	152
Toilet stall and the wet wall	154
Sacred partitions: the synagogue	156
Transparent concrete	158
Printed partitions	159
Ultimate flexibility	162
Wallpaper	164
Artist's walls / Gallery walls	166
Fourth wall	168
Mies and the wall	170
Seagram: Metabolism of a Monument	171
Offices without walls	180
Le Corbusier and the American module 182 Dignity of the cubicle	184
Cubicle: from celebration to ridicule	186
Resurrection of the open plan	188
White-collar factor	190
992-995 1000-1001, 102> M^^Bl048-1051, 1054. 1513 RML 170, 183, 273, 622, 671, 702, ^^H^6-727,
ii bf rnetic 186
^^^Kski, Bohlin 995, 1759
^Ks 112,
^■!j|xpress Building 922
665, 842, 859, 870, 1066,
Bhamascus 1160
l^Kjj, Salma Samar 110 iLjance floor 33,73,76 n'r e 1470
Handasah 475, 703, 786 K Mike 912, 1048, 1066 ^^Eiick-Haus, Berlin 840
Gilles 764- 765, 858, >01 ¡397 lf|^Hp49, 966, 1102-1103, 1193, 1247, |^^K411, 1695, 2085 ^^Kus New York (book) 40, 2156,
^^HKglio, Domenico 585, 591 I Delon, Alain 845
I dementia 1348
^^^Karized Zone (DMZ) I04
^^Kjtion 137, 865, 940, 1094, 1210, f 13 14,0718, 1741 1395, 1571
^^Kp05, 110-111, 255, 785, 1185, 1^^*1507, 1714, 2131, 2318
164, 490, 501, 504, 768-769, 922, |^Hyi079, 1085, 1172, 1779 ^^^Bation control 2218, 2233 182, 184, 957, 1001, |^Km049, 1471, 2257, 2262 ^^Hfecher Werkbund 747, 987 ^Hjtex Machina 1044. 2123, 2136,
^HEnzi, Mario 774-777, 859 ^^Hpmaya (escalator watcher)
^Bravi, Mumbai 1561, 1688-1690,
^^Hiargio, Martini 1936 ^^Kand 221, 713, 741, 873, 1356, 1640, ^^H)2130, 2215, 2238
^^Kns, Charles 987, 1050, 1094, |^^Hsf594, 1719
^Hpt, Denis 142, 168, 744, 847, 859,
^^*35, 49, 72-73, 82-83, 193, 203, ;-.'7^^p47, 387, 389, 647, 650 (.51, 653, ¡^^■687, 692, 694, 796, 837, 969, 1018, |^Bj028, 1073, 1242, 1391, 1405, R^^Bl654, 1710, 2108-2109, 2123 ^^H&cofidio + Renfro 829 > Diocletian 389, 477, 1563 ^^^H*us Theater, Athens 2136 Hrama 526
^^Hse 282, 313, 847, 974, 1126, 1128, )|Mh91, 1313, 1316, 1397, 1402, 1419 ;ii^^^P462-1463, 1542-1543,1594, ^^^P-1613, 1678, 1703, 1981, 2080 Comedy 378, 1981 11 Yourself) 159, 353, 486, 919, *5952, 1039, 1642, 1483
D »cumenta 1015
718, 917, 1469, 1574 i^BpW99, 1116, 1794, 2289 granary 487
Facebook and the apotheosis of	192
the open plan
Fireproof future	194
Plasterboard	195
Typical walls	196
f* OISI n (Tí	yíi¥'Sfsf¿ w¿>u
vv i i N i
Introduction	210
Aspects of the ceiling	212
1.	underside	218
Dome	220
Vault	221
Gaustavino's self-supporting ceilings	222
Hennebique's revolutionary construction 224 system
Spread of the slab	226
Place for machinery	230
Urban underside	232
Konrad Wachsmann and the space frame 234 Exposed ceiling	236
2.	sealing	238
Scuole Grande, Venice	240
Islamic sealing	242
Brunaleschi's dome	246
Palatial "false" sealing	248
Nostalgia for the tent	250
Domestic sealing	252
3.	sandwich	254
west meets east: wright, schindler, neutra and the japanese path to the false ceiling by arthur liu
comfort descends from above:	264
the ceilings of london's palace of Westminster by manfredo di robilant
Theatrical ceilings	272
Palais Gamier	274
Chicago Theater & Sydney Opera House	278
Disappearing bed	280
Hospital ceilings	282
Century of inflation	286
Walkable office ceiling	290
Salk Institute	288
Banham and the false ceiling	290
Factory ceiling	292
Thickening ceilings	294
perspectives on the false ceiling	296
by manfredo di robilant Reflected ceiling plan	300
School ceilings	301
Functions of the false ceiling	304
1.	Fire prevention: sprinklers, asbestos,	306
smoke alarm
2.	Heating: chicks, radiant ceiling, punkah	318
Elizabeth, Queen 58,1288, 1584, 1745 Elizabethan 259, 1441 elliptical behavior 2097 email 55, 83-84, 186, 336, 832, 848, 1949 embassy 843-844, 941, 966, 1150, 1171 emergency 217, 308, 315, 503, 1263, 1334, 1347-1348, 1361-1362, 1367, 1370, 1375, 1377, 1378-1379, 1382, 1385, 1396, 1594, 1654, 1687, 1710, 1753, 2086, 2131, 2177, 2184 Emergency Act 1858 1594 Emperor Tiberius 997, 2136 Empire State Building 1347, 2125, 2177, 2184
Empty step phenomenon 2096 Energy Policy Act 1992 1661 enfilade 1260, 1269, 1293, 1301, 1368 enhanced screening 691 Enlightenment 113, 570, 651, 891, 900, 997, 1293, 1309, 1403, 2134, 2253 entablature 124
ergonomics 550-551, 637, 639, 773, 1469, 1624, 1680, 1748, 1764, 1963 Erwin Hauer Studios 160 Escher, Maurits Cornelius 33, 1351, 1930
Esprit Nouveau 494 Ethiopia 13, 706, 1145, 1540, 1550, 1686 ethnopark 526 eToilet 1697 Etruscan 112, 1442, 1448 etymology 704, 1255-1257, 1271, 1396, 1403, 1854, 1982 European Commission 524, 2094-2095, 2117
European Union 525, 806, 974, 1051, 1264-1265, 1499, 2065, 2094, 2117 evacuation 1263, 1347, 1360, 1362-1363, 1368-1370, 1378-1381, 1385-1386, 1396, 1419, 1559, 1562, 1575, 1596, 1619, 1627, 1682, 1688, 1705, 1711, 2235 Evan, Walker 1475 Evans, Robin 134, 202, 1256, 1279,
1303, 1396-1397
Evans, Arthur 1308-1309, 1311, 1397, 2250
Evelyn, John 997 Evita 1075
External Insulation Finish System (EIFS) 867, 916-917, 918, 980-981, 1050 FAR (Floor Area Ratio) 3, 42-43, 1356 FSB 636-637, 639
fa?adism 865, 867, 869,1056, 1059,1066 Facebook 93, 165, 192-193, 202, 344, 535, 654, 847-848, 1228, 1242 facsimile 1913, 2156 Fadell, Tony 315, 380, 1497 Fagus Factory 913, 922-923, 1048 Fahrkunst 2144, 2146 Fallows, James 186 false ceiling (drop ceiling) 27, 47, 155, 210-211,236, 241, 248, 254, 265, 269,270, 271, 282, 283,288-290,294, 296, 300-305, 314, 318-319, 321, 330-331, 336, 340, 354-356, 358-365, 372, 375-376, 380, 493, 1502, 1536 false floor 1, 3, 27, 47, 63, 155, 340, 585, 587, 589, 591, 595 Faraday, Michael 134 farmer 114, 318, 481, 524, 864, 1612, 1775, 1971
Farnsworth House 48, 237
Farr, William 1592 Fascism 629, 774, 777, 1023, 1075, !
1138, 1140, 1152-1154, 1167 Fathy, Hassan 1193, 1247 faux fireplace 1528 favela 963, 1217, 1234, 2237 feminism 1305
feng shui 866, 878, 1348, 1358-1359 1422, 2117
Fernandez-Galiano, Luis 1448,
1516-1517, 1550-1551 Ferriss, Hugh 1022-1023, 1026 ferro cement 508-511 Festival of Britain 741, 986, 989 Fiat 229
fiberglass 70, 618, 918, 973, 1016 fig leaf 91 Filarete 390-392 Finland 762, 772, 774, 1055, 1254 fire blanket 137
fire escape 306,1171, 1202, 1362,1 1396, 1752-1753, 1767 fire exit 166 fire tax 491
firebox 1448, 1452, 1458-1459, 1465 fireproof 91, 93, 134-141, 171, 194, 2* 306-309, 313, 372, 377, 492, 1362, 145 First World War (World War I) 256,
508, 741, 945, 986, 1075, 1129, 1142,’ 1255, 1315-1316, 1334-1335, 1338, 2257, 2262
fish 19, 701, 1430, 1450, 1674 Flagg, Ernest 224 Flanders 456, 1781, 2253 flat roof 388, 484, 488-504, 524, 534-“ 539, 1922
Flaubert, Gustave 1767 Fleming, Ian 55, 82-83 float glass 739-741, 751, 913, 915, 918-919, 921, 986, 990-991, 995, 1050 flood 46, 48, 390 Floor Space Ratio (FSR) 1215 floor plan 6, 29, 44-45, 50, 91, 147, 155, 169, 188, 192, 405, 493, 827, 1205, 12 1277-1279, 1291, 1293, 1305, 1307, 1368, 1391,1591, 1653, 1658, 1870-1871, 1903, 1948, 1949, 2158, 2166, 2169-2172
Florence, Italy 46, 215, 246, 460, 508, 549, 554, 650, 780-781, 898, 1254, 127 1271, 1283, 1303, 1962-1963	i
Fluxus 421
flying buttress 465-466, 469, 1840 foam 73, 151-152, 397, 402, 410, 418, 448, 630, 800-801, 951, 981, 983, 2305 Fondazione Giorgio Cini 1448 Forbidden City 608-613,695, 1784, 17 Foreign Office Architects (FOA) 37 928
Fortochka 716
Foster, Norman 535, 847, 979, 1514 Foucault, Michel 626, 651, 694, 1281,
1293, 1301, 1396-1397, 1627 fourth wall 168 Frampton, Adam 2112-2113 France 41, 111, 113, 224, 263, 271, 307-308, 393, 473, 508, 536, 740, 742, 744, 795, 816, 913, 935, 938, 942-943, 967, 985-986, 1021, 1055, 1099, 1124, 1136-1137, 1183, 1188-1189, 1191, 1195, 1197, 1210, 1229, 1299, 1305, 1334, 1338, 1432, 1450-1451, 1509, 1551, 1561, 1586, 1674, 1721, 1740,
1275, 1297, 1381, 1389, 1428, 1450,
1499, 1541, 1580, 1681, 1775, 1779,
1781, 1785, 1793, 1824, 1829, 1840,
1847, 1860, 1862, 1934, 1936, 1971, 2006, 2008-2009, 2013, 2094, 2125,
2128, 2131, 2134, 2142, 2144, 2146, 2150, 2186-2187, 2224, 2229, 2249,
2270, 2272, 2275, 2281, 2285, 2288,
2328
gestalt 1185, 1187 Ghiberti, Lorenzo 545, 554 Giedion, Sigfried 202, 271, 380, 508-509, 646, 694, 750, 858, 917, 922, 1042, 1182-1183, 1247, 1468,
1510-1513, 1550-1551, 1606, 1719 Gilbert, Cass 479 Gild 249, 467, 470, 477, 524, 2136 Ginza, Tokyo 917, 1024-1025, 1047 Ginzburg, Moisei 1001,1340,1342 Giovanni Battista Piranesi 106, 1361, 1442, 1448-1449, 2255 Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa 249, 380
gladiator 1094, 2138-2139 Glasarchitektur 747, 858, 918-919,
988, 1051
Glass House 237, 768, 988, 1050, 1478-1479, 1514, 1622-1623 Glass Pavilion, Cologne 702, 747, 987 Glass Skyscraper, Mies Van der Rohe 988, 2171 glass blower 740 glass brick 768, 987 glass tax 918-919, 999, 1050 Glass, Jacqueline 336 globalization 112, 1509, 1559, 1614, 1674, 1686 Globe Tower 2166
goat 14, 191, 900, 1424, 1448-1449, 1787 Goffman, Erving 2186-2187, 2224-2225, 2227, 2229, 2239 gold 13, 15, 18, 240, 246, 267, 441, 479-480, 552, 616, 799, 830, 945, 1050, 1351, 1579, 1601, 1777, 2125, 2131,
2136
gold rush 945 golden ratio 182, 884 Golosov, Mikhail 1001 Gongcheng Zuofa 413, 457 Google 76, 189, 847, 1259, 1540, 1658, 1668, 2230 gorilla 2261
Gothic 106, 136, 221, 223, 251, 259-261, 263, 265, 267, 269, 271, 380-381, 464, 485, 516, 571, 627, 704, 713-714, 1021-1022, 2031, 1108, 1118-1119,
1307, 1411, 1440, 1446, 1455, 1462, 1627, 1828, 1830, 1832, 1834, 1840, 1928, 1956-1963, 2088 Goury, Jules 243, 382 GPS (Global Positioning System) 76 graffiti 1111, 1345 Granada 243, 1021,1197 Grand Canyon 1090 Grand Central Terminal, New York City 222
Grand Tour 260, 538, 1448 Grandval, Gerard 1188-1889, 1191, 1247 granite 112, 135, 138, 481, 931, 941-942, 1515, 1525, 1797, 1899 Grant Associates 1039 grass hut 486
Graves, Michael 763, 980, 1050
3.	Ventilation: Larkin Building	322
4.	Lighting: illuminated ceilings, Louis Kahn, 328 hacking, Toyo Ito
6.	Surveillance: Newark airport, casinos 346
7.	Acoustics: tests, domestic	348
Inventory of the false ceiling	356
Weakest surface	358
War on the false ceiling, I & II	360
Flexibility & symbolism	364
True ceiling	366
bimness or, the problem of integration 370
by jeffrey inaba and benedict clouette / c-lab Return of the ornamental ceiling	376
Sky	378
roof
Introduction	389
In the beginning	390
Lost tradition	392
How to build a roof: Antiquity	394
how to build a roof: Yingzao Fashi	396
Song dynasty	401
Design guides	405
Hierarchy-driven design	409
Roof curvature	413
Metaphors	417
Yingzao Fashi and Fluxus: a comparison 421 Curbing corruption	425
Value engineering guide	429
Accountancy	433
Song dynasty: Renaissance	441
Poetry and Philosophy	447
Song: Painting	451
Rediscovery of the Yingzao Fashi	455
How to build a roof: Renaissance	456
Universal element	458
Rain pipe, according to Viollet-le-Duc	464
Domes: cosmic houses	472
Domes: ancient connections	476
Political domes: 1855-2014	478
Domezeen: global persistence	480
20th century rooftop exchanges	482
Flat vs. pitched	488
Shells: thin, thinner, thinnest	506
Innovators	508
Theories and patents	510
Testing	512
Media	516
pitched roofs in beijing:	518
he yuri & zhu xiaodi interview by rem koolhaas Prospect for the roof	524
Colored roofs: white, red, green	532
Advanced huts	536
LXXVI
11773, 1775, 1783, 1785, 1793,
1840, 1847, 1995, 2027, 2220, 2271-2272, 2279, 2285, 2289 ini, Gianfranco 366 Anne 601, 1611 losef 497
is, Edouard 1038, 1051 in House, Los Angeles 934 Riviera 1208 246-247, 1309, 2130,
Sigmund 567, 694, 1209, 1246
Paul 2232-2233
arch friendliness 606-607
;o, Sou 2328 a Palace 1573 , Massimiliano 537 Buckminster 153, 950, 959,
1561, 1616
ar 513
■e 27, 65, 182, 231, 259, 271, 321, 60, 627, 784, 1218, 1288-1289, 1458, 1476-1477, 1510, 1520,
1587, 1621, 1736, 1814, 2184-2185, 2323-2324 m 160, 2038, 2108 igic 2200 918, 959, 1049 n Gallery 998
itese, Milan gallery 63,150,
67, 336, 456, 485, 519, 736, 797, 21,886, 998, 1018, 1050-1051, 1089, 1254, 1256-1257, 1260, 1266, 1311, 1396-1397, 2187, 2264 ¡zed steel (iron) 307, 494-495,
af Life (algorithm) 242
s Ponthieu 2257
»City 271,381, 1033, 1172, 1337,
1551, 1720, 2260
obe 1560, 1563, 1574-1577
les 464-466, 468-471, 1119, 1840
r, Charles 274
r, Tony 762
n 102, 1771
» (Chinese partition door) 128 af Paradise 545, 549, 554 Antoni 639. 1084 r, Nicolas 1456-1458, 1550 image 1086
Frank 192-193, 535-537, 847,
14, 928, 962, 969, 971, 980, 1048,
• 550, 632, 730, 765, 772, 1284, 1527, 1653, 1767, 1886, 2020,
»I Motors 926, 947, 1048 :ide 2066
¡cation 1208, 1307, 1311, 2115 sic dome geofencing 344
i III, King 1586 î V, King 1102-1103 n Democratic Republic
l) 1143, 1781
ny 42, 56; 114, 117, 238, 376, 456, ¡01-502, 509-510, 526-527, 532, >39, 549, 636-637, 661, 681, 740, '94-795, 825, 840, 842-844, 902, ¡13, 916, 922, 929, 981, 983, 1000, 1015, 1023, 1046, 1051, 1055, 1099, 1126, 1142, 1163, 1212,
door
Introduction	545
Trajectory: dematerialization of the door 546 Scale comparison: notable doors vs.	548
typical doors
Gendered door behavior	550
How to open a door	551
Articulated door	552
Archetypes	554
Rites of passage	560
Farcical doors	562
Sitcom device	564
Inevitable symbolism	566
Doors to the beyond	568
84,000 dharma doors to 100	570
Super-symbolism	571
Gateways	572
City gates	580
Burg Hochosterwitz: 14-door security	584
Tools for defense	598
Secret doors	600
Cross and bible door	604
Front porch friendliness	606
Five men of the Forbidden City	608
Domestic doors	616
Status and symbolism	618
Doors vs. walls	620
Missing walls, missing doors	622
description of a door	624
by bruno latour Components of the door
1.	Pivot	625
2.	Hinge	627
3.	Automatic door closer	629
4.	Panel	630
5.	Knocker	632
6.	Bell	634
7.	Latches and knobs	635
8.	Handle	636
9.	Lock and key	642
Ubiquitous door: Pattern recognition	654
Automatic door	656
Against the door: Werner Sobek	660
"Always closed": revolving door	662
Open doors of power	666
Playtime	668
Air curtain	670
Space doors	672
Airport: stretched door	676
gravity 4, 13, 33, 53, 55, 57, 59, 68-71, 137, 458, 635, 674, 1036, 1254, 1477, 1563, 1604, 1660-1661, 1700, 2038, 2057, 2149, 2166, 2213, 2245, 2271 gravity flush 1660 Great Depression 478-479, 926,
945, 956, 973, 975, 978-979, 1202,
1419, 2275
Great Fire of Chicago 135 Great Mosque, Cordoba 18, 124 Great Orme Mines, Wales 2140 Great Pyramid of Giza 872, 886, 888 Great Stink of London 1561,1590, 1594-1595, 1719
Great Wall of China 91, 102, 203, 401 Greater London Council (GLC)
940, 979
Greece 6, 260, 900, 1055, 1145, 1428,
1566, 2289 Green Party 2185
green façade 1030, 1038-1039, 1523, 1692
Greenaway, Peter 1662 greenhouse 814, 845, 985, 997-999,1009, 1017, 1035, 1038, 1051, 1507, 1524 griffin 638
Grimshaw, Nicholas 961, 979, 1050, 1577
Grohman, Johann Gottfried 2006 Gropius, Walter 131, 278, 296, 488,
490, 538, 639, 768, 780-781, 823, 829, 843, 913, 922, 934, 941, 947, 1048, 1085, 1172, 1180-1181, 1185, 1247, 1623 grotto 1313-1314, 1547, 2293-2298, 2313 Grube, Ernest J. 127 Guangzhou 376, 536, 1258, 1268, 1280, 1678
guardrail 1746-1751, 1764 Guastavino Moreno, Rafael 222-223 Guattari, Felix 764-765, 858 Guelaner, John 2229 Guggenheim, New York 32, 82, 2244, 2256, 2261-2265, 2329, 2333 Guggenheim, Bilbao 914, 962 Guild House, Philadelphia 1027 gulag 107 gun 591, 1752
Gunnar Asplund, Erik 762, 1023,1480 gunpowder 401, 600 gutter 60, 464-466, 468^170, 492-495, 818, 979, 1564, 1590, 1597 Gutzkow, Karl 2188 gymnasium 1566, 2166 gypsum 72, 91, 94, 138, 140-141, 143, 176, 190, 194, 202, 253, 376, 1379 HGA Architects 156 HSBC Building, Hong Kong 2071 HVAC (Heating, Ventilation, Air Conditioning) 47, 292, 301, 323, 326-327, 330, 377, 824-825, 830, 950, 1407-1408, 1460, 1486, 1502, 1532, 1536-1538
De Haan, H.J. 2248-2249 Habuba Kabira 1560,1564 hacking 154, 338
Hadid, Zaha 376, 536-537, 1018, 2328 Hadrian's Wall 1558, 1560 Haesler, Otto 492
Hagia Sophia, Istanbul 16, 955, 2289 hajj 22
hall 17, 33, 54 91, 129, 150, 156, 170, 240, 243, 248-249, 265, 269, 365, 378, 389, 395, 446, 450, 454, 472, 474, 485, 506,
511,519, 566, 624-626, 641, 681 1027, 1036-1037, 1045, 1101, 1131 1266, 1278, 1288-1291, 1303' 135l' 1438, 1440, 1460-1461, 1627, 1733' 1820, 1822, 1834, 1863, 1962-1963' 2065, 2090, 2201, 2329 (Great) Hall of the People, Beijii 365, 520
Halsell, Lucile 1037 hammam 1272, 1562 Hammurabi 133
Hampton Court 1440, 1442, 1586, 1 handrail 1035, 1078, 1736, 1751, 1771 1773, 1782, 1793, 1863-1864, 1866 . 1868, 1884, 1909, 1912, 1973, 1990-2013, 2054, 2068, 2106, 2108, 2183, 2280-2281, 2288 Hanging Gardens of Babylon 107 Hannibal 113, 2254 Harrington, John 1560, 1584-1585, 1600, 1719
Harrison, Pogue Robert 847 Harrison, Wallace K.314, 978 Hart White, Stanley 1036,1051 Haruki Murakami 253 Harvard Graduate School of Design 1, 49, 89, 207, 387, 543, 699, 82 863, 1073, 1253, 1401, 1532, 1557, 17* 2035, 2121, 2243 Harz Region, Germany 2144-2145, 2147, 2152
Hatshepsut Temple 887, 892 Haussmann, Georges-Eugène 107
1078-1079, 1119, 1120-1122, 1212, 1598 Hawthorne, Nathaniel 1468,1470,14 Heatherwick, Thomas 1759 heaven 15-16, 34, 82, 219, 378, 477, 57 574, 615, 886, 1266, 1468, 1470-1471 1502-1503, 1571, 1854, 1929, 1954, 1980, 2092, 2098 Heavenly Gate 574 Heidegger, Martin 1404-1405, 1522, 1550-1551
Heijo-Kyo 1270, 1573 Hejduk, John 2158 H el ixator 2039, 2103, 2117 H el Iyer, S. Stevens 1596, 1600, 1605, ■ 1719
Helweg, Ole 841-842 hemorrhoids 1680 Hennebique, François 224-226, 228-229
Henner, Mishka 1716-1717 Henningsen, Poul 841-842 Herculaneum 702, 738 heritage 177, 380, 518, 712, 1051, 1114, 1259, 1434, 1517, 1548, 1741, 1781, 2261, 2263
Hermitage, St. Petersburg 716 Herod 1082
Herodotus 2248, 2250, 2252 Herron, Ron 1027 Hertzberger, Herman 1034-1035 Herzog & de Meuron 166, 536, 826, 915, 929, 943, 969, 971, 1017, 1038 Hestia 1426-1429, 1527 hibernation 760 hieroglyph 112, 891 high-tech 91, 111, 825, 979, 980, 982, 992, 1008, 1027, 1259, 1486, 1616, 1654, 1678, 1687, 1696, 1703 Higueras, Fernando 1034, 1037 hijab 1109
IBM Building, Chicago 703, 708 ice 42, 82, 322, 468, 471, 494^195, 499, 502, 701, 1056, 1468, 1471, 1476, 1502, 1753, 1777 idols 9, 1077 ikea 528, 533, 961, 1666 illumination 267, 328, 338-339, 376, 652, 706, 780, 1022-1023, 1027, 1029, 1051, 1100, 1313, 1375, 1445 Imperial Hotel, Tokyo 254-255 In Praise Of Shadows (book) 782, 858, 1471, 1613, 1720 Inax 1561, 1678, 1682, 1710 India 104, 111, 117, 121, 126, 150, 195, 307, 318, 322, 380, 395, 456, 476-477, 527, 552, 577, 598, 625, 634, 707, 871, 1038, 1075, 1092, 1101-1102, 1160, 1246, 1270, 1272-1273, 1291, 1365, 1397, 1411, 1506, 1655, 1674, 1686, 1697, 2075, 2281, 2288-2289 Indonesia 82, 202, 393, 480, 486, 527, 717, 1291, 1397, 1425, 1686 indoor air pollution 1538, 1542 Industrial Revolution 230, 325, 746, 973, 985, 987, 1031-1032, 1041, 1305, 1443, 1508-1509, 1835, 2256 industrialization 152, 545, 617, 632,
720, 750, 926, 928, 936, 938, 940, 945, 1032, 1971, 2245
infill 136, 170, 255, 935-936, 941, 975, 1104, 1194 Infla-floor 39
infrared 72, 652, 826, 846, 996, 1004, 1546
infrastructure 45, 230, 261, 371, 373, 674, 782, 785, 956, 1027, 1033, 1045, 1145, 1222, 1273, 1486, 1516, 1522, 1558, 1574, 1590, 1604, 1621, 1642, 1686, 1688-1689, 1695-1697, 1703, 1760, 1779, 1812, 2046, 2112, 2207, 2236, 2256
Ingolstadt 1789, 1802, 1868, 1897-1898, 1900, 1902, 1906-1913, 2005, 2031 inquisition 1108, 1295 instagram 1241 Instant City 1014
Institut du Monde Arabe, Paris 823 insulation Intel 186-189,192 intelligent Window 834 inter-war 1075, 1183, 1247 International Building Code 194,
544, 694, 1256, 1363-1365, 1372-1377, 1396, 1730, 1736, 1747, 1764, 2288 International Building Exhibition 1061
International Consumer Electronics Show 838
International Court of Justice,
The Hague 104
International Inventions Exhibition
1602
International Residential Code (IRC) 1092, 1246
International Space Station 3, 13, 70,
84, 672, 674-675, 1700 International Style exhibition 256 Internet 72, 75, 186, 188-189, 344-345, 388, 650, 1039, 1048, 1238, 1242, 1338, 1497, 2230
Iraq 393, 578, 654, 951, 1104, 1290-1291, 2252
Iron Curtain 478, 913, 1143 Irori 1425, 1431
window
Archetypes	700
Trajectory: conflicts of the window	702
Etymology	704
Functions of the window	706
'Ik: Mayan glyph and window	710
Window types: Charles Brooking Collection 712 Fortochka	716
Windows without glass	717
Window as place	718
Window behaviorology	720
Bulging bay window	724
Mitigating the window: curtains and drapes 726 Window taxed	728
Gendered window	730
Dutch windows	732
Reasserting window as place	736
Glass	738
Growing panes	740
Size vs. clarity: cast and spun glass	744
Crystal Palace to Glass Pavilion	746
Ribbon (Le Corbusier) vs.	748
Portrait (August Perret)
Window shopping	752
Picture window craze	754
Storm windows	760
Window profiles: 20th century architecture 762 Philosophical point: black hole / white wall 764 were windows eyes?	766
by manfredo di robilant Absorbing modernity I: Japan's	782
glassmaking mission
Absorbing modernity II: Saudi Arabia's	784
window boom
Yuanda: Largest window manufacturer	788
in the world
Standardized: Hong Kong	786
Sticker window: Qingdao City, China	792
belgian windows in the congo:	794
remi van parys interview by amo
Belgian windows in the wild	810
Window anti-manifesto	812
Dealing with sunshine	814
"just draw a rectangle": the liability of 816 window details by anonymous architect x passing the buck in window design 818
by anonymous architect x opening the un-openable window:	821
mathias schuler interview by tiffany obser
Perfect seal and sarin gas	830
The green light and the semi-operable 832 window
Intelligent window & biological window 834
LXXVIII
■Hilberseimer, Ludwig 1045 Kills, Nicolas 1436 ■Hilton, Paris 845 I Himalaya 1126,1923 ■Hindu 486, 552, 577, 695, 1100-1101,
Ï 1514, 1697 Hfopocratic 1578 ■Hippodrome 506, 509, 512 ■Hiroshima 783, 1337, 2273
■	Hiroshima Peace Memorial Park 783 Hitachi 2230
Hitler, Adolf 665, 694, 707, 1146, »1153-1157, 1777 Hob grate 1442 Kfobsbawm, Eric 269, 381, 1293 Hoffmann, Bruder Taut 492 ■Hogarth, William 1262 ■Holl, Steven 969, 971, 1386-1387
■	Holland 182, 483, 494, 534, 732, 742, 795, »1129, 1771, 1775, 1781, 1785, 1793, 1854 Hollande, François 1265 Holloway Road Underground 2054,
Holscher, Uvo 2248
H)ly 19, 53, 65, 116, 158, 368, 477, 481,
§»638, 765, 900-901, 1082, 1109, 1154,
Wm. 1272, 1429, 1444, 1471, 1570, 1580, m 1789, 1832, 1840, 1940, 2255 Homer 56, 82, 1309, 1426, 1502 Homo sapiens 390, 2124, 2261 Kominid 1412-1419 Honeywell, Mark 1498 Honeywell 1497-1499, 1503 Hong Kong 82, 162, 397, 790, 1346, m 1365, 1380, 1714, 2037, 2072, 2108, ■2110, 2112, 2114-2115, 2117, 2229 ■»kworm 1561, 1612-1613 Hopper Closet 1600 Horiguchi, Sutemi 483, 538 Horse 401, 560, 701, 1114, 1146, 1313, IB 1425, 1536, 1579, 1614, 1777, 1783, ¡■1910, 2037 Horta, Victor 725 Hot air curtain 670 Hotel des Invalides, Paris 479 House Without Qualities, Cologne ■765
House of Industry, Moscow 2172 ■busing and Urban Development
H (HUD) 918, 940, 1049, 1625 Howard, Ebenezer 1172, 1337 Hôweler, Dorothee 393, 538 Hùgo, Victor 112
Himanism 772, 776, 859, 1187 Humpherson, Frederick 1600-1603,
HrHumy, Fernand 2257 ^■iter-gatherer 390
^Hong 1278, 1645, 1675
Regency Atlanta 1203, 2182, ¡■2191-2193
Hydraulic 224, 603, 628-629, 656, 803, B931, 1564, 1600, 1661, 1719, 2149, 2157, ¡»212, 2214, 2238 ^Hna 1541
^Kjrometric Chart 1492 ^■pocaust 997, 1408, 1432, 1434, 1440,
[ 1461
^^■ostylel24
■AC building, New York 928
^KTA (International Air Transport
HNiociationJ 676, 688, 690, 693, 694 703, 708, 926, 947, 1048
Window vs. screen in	836
Things to Come (1936)
ommetaphobia: a short history	840
of the growth and shrinkage of windows in buildings and cars by niklas maak
Profile library	850
façade
Introduction	865
Trajectory: Before façade,	866
"façade" façade, after façade Etymology	868
Tensions of the façade	870
1.	façades before the "façade"	874
Stone façades of Petra	876
Feng Shui of façades	878
Modularity	880
Spring Morning in the Han Palace	882
Western vs. Chinese	884
Egyptian façades	886
2.	"façade" façades	896
by stephan triiby
Façades before and after "façading"	906
3.	façades after the façade	908
material assemblages
by alejandro zaera polo
1.	Material assemblages	912
2.	Curtain Walls	920
3.	Precast concrete	930
4.	The airtight envelope	944
5.	Watertight: face-sealed	envelopes 954
6.	Screens	966
7.	Insulation	972
8.	The all-glass environment	984
9.	Double façades	996
10.	Tensile façades	1010
11.	Media façades	1020
12.	Vegetated façades	1030
13.	Kinetic façades	1040
4.	façade futures	1052
First parametric façade
Expiration of the curtain wall	1054
Solar façadism	1056
Façade as mask: Melbourne and Recife 1058 Bioreactor façade	1060
Toilet façade	1062
Catalogue of façade operations	1064
Irwin, Robert 166, 243, 380 Ise Shrine, Japan 524, 931 Islam 52, 244, 1101, 1104, 1272, 1291, 1494, 1789, 1988
Isozaki, Arata 26, 82-83, 514, 620, 637, 639, 694, 1018
Katsura Imperial Villa 131, 620 Israel 19, 34, 53, 82, 104, 156, 571, 1191, 1193, 1197, 1213, 1413, 1881 ISS (international Space Station) 55,
84, 1700, 1720
Italy 123, 195, 226, 228, 260, 381, 456, 490, 495, 502-503, 516, 646, 742, 774, 776, 816, 914, 1055, 1089, 1094-1095, 1099, 1137, 1187, 1197, 1442, 1450, 1578, 1732-1733, 1783, 1789, 1793, 1829, 1840, 1847, 1881, 1936, 1981, 2061,2289,2328 Ito, Chuta 482
ItO, Toyo 341, 537, 1028-1029, 1051, 1758
ivory 15, 21, 1021
Ivory Coast 481
Jackson, Michael 33, 1240
Jacoby, Helmut 171, 296
jaguar 845, 2263
Jahrhunderthalle 485
Jaipur 721
jali 93, 126, 705
Japan 28, 51, 82, 84, 203, 254-257, 359, 393, 458, 460, 482-483, 526-527, 532, 538, 549, 620, 720, 782, 929, 931, 937, 1016,1037,1089, 1162, 1270,1346, 1425, 1471, 1613, 1673, 1675, 1682-1683, 2064, 2081, 2229, 2279, 2285 Kyoto 55, 77, 130, 459^160, 620, 767, 782, 918-919, 1030, 1038, 1041, 1254, 1276, 2087
Osaka 514, 782,919, 1016 Tokyo 74, 254-255, 720, 722, 831, 857, 915,929, 937,979,1024-1025, 1046-1047, 1162, 1346, 1617, 1655, 1758 Yokohama International Passenger Terminal 376, 1254 Jeddah, Saudi Arabia 785, 1104, 1107,2100
Jencks, Charles 871, 1066 Jenkins, Tim 648 Jennings, George 1592-1594, 1600-1601
Jerusalem 10, 53,104, 477, 1087, 1191-1192, 1560, 1570, 1911, 1940 Essene and Dung Gates 1560, 1570, 1720 Jet Age 676 Jetsons, The 959
Jewish 17,601, 1087, 1193, 1212,2130, 2238
jharoka 1075,1100-1103 Jie, Li 396, 401, 421, 425, 538, 881 Jiehua 401
Joachim, Mitchell 835 Jobs, Steve 524 Johansen, John M 843 John Hancock Tower 927, 992, 1048, 1050
Johnson Wax Building 181 Johnson, Philip 171, 178, 236-237,
768, 871-872, 942, 1246, 1478-1479, 1514, 1622-1623 Jomon era 393 Jones, Owen 243
Jordan 108, 393, 877, 1487, 2188-2189 Jung, Carl G. 567, 694
junk 491, 499, 1419 Justus Lipsius building 1264 K-7 918, 938-939 Kaaba 18, 786, 931 Kafka, Franz 91, 559, 694, 2290 Kahn, Albert 913, 923, 957, 961 1001, 1048, 2257, 2262	’ J,
Kahn, Louis 116, 170, 255, 288-289 336-337, 763, 867, 895, 915, 1246 Kaogongji, Zhouli 1266, 1270 Kapoor, Anish 1018-1019 Kardashian, Kim 1238-1239 Kashmir 104 Kawaya-no-kami 1571 Keally, Francis 479 Kedelson Estate 1569 Kelly, Richard 170, 334, 1026, 1051 Kerr, Robert 1279, 1305-1307, 13Q9Î Khai-Dinh tomb 1784 Khrushchev, Nikita 203, 918, 93 1049, 2064
kinetic façade 1040-1043,1045 King David 9 King François I 1960 Kira, Alexander 1561, 1624-1625 1633, 1636, 1681, 1720 Kircher, Athanasius 150, 202, 225 Kirkbride Plan 1258, 1271,1282, 1284-1286
kitsch 164, 492, 637, 1038 Klotz, Volker 2188 Klumpner, Hubert 2232, 2235, 22 Knoll 160
Knossos 1308-1309, 1311, 1560, 1 1720, 2250-2251, 2333 Kodak 2160 Koenig, Pierre 236, 988 Kohler 915, 1048, 1673 Kollhoff, Hans 840 de Kooning, Willem 2264 kosmokrater 389 Kraus, Karl 896 Krayl, Carl 988, 1050 Krishna 11-12 Kroll, Ignaz 1929 Kronish House 257 Krug, Edgar 747 Kubrick, Stanley 59, 82-84, 711, 1350-1352, 1354, 1357 Kugler, Franz 491 Kuimintang 1644 Kuma, Kengo 1018 Kunstlinie Almere 90 Kurokawa, Kisho979, 1617, 1720sf Kursi 1431
Kvarnstrom, L. 2020 Kyoto Protocol 918, 1030, 1038 Kysela, Ludvik 1023 LEED 832, 982 La Tourette 1196-1197 Lacaton & Vassal Architects r 1038, 1210-1211, 1246 Ladakh, India 1614 Lady Gaga 1239 Lagos, Nigeria 1558 laissez-faire 136 Lambert, Phyllis 170, 173, 178, 2~ 380, 1048
Lan Architects 943 de Landa, Manuel 1020, 1051 Laprade, Albert 985 Large Panel System (LPS)918,938, Larkin Building 254, 324, 1049, 151
London Transport Museum 2082, 2088
Loos, Adolf 59, 147, 867, 1022-1023, 2299
Lopez de Arenas, Diego 114 Louis Vuitton 1758 Louis XII 1118-1119 Louis XIV 1586 Lourdes 2293-2297, 2326 louver 322, 328, 782, 813, 926,
1006-1008, 1041, 1045, 1061, 1075, 1348, 1438
Louvre Pyramid 872, 993 Lubetkin, Berthold 2244, 2261, 2264, 2333
Lubin, Arthur 656, 694 Lucae, Richard 233, 380 Luckman, Charles 913, 924, 942, 978 Luther, Martin 1580 Luxfer Prism Glass 747, 1048, 2262 Luxor, Egypt 887, 1031 luxury 44, 167, 170, 236, 263, 390, 555, 602, 605, 660, 665, 686, 742, 746, 751, 789, 830, 846, 1058, 1075, 1225, 1228, 1232, 1237-1238, 1403, 1478, 1489, 1493, 1524, 1625, 1664, 2005, 2100, 2179 Lynch, Kevin 1508, 1551 L'Architecture d'Aujourd'hui 256,
380, 1531, 1550,2271,2295 MacLaine, Shirley 845 Macau 347, 1687, 2087 Machine Age (First and Second)
56, 83, 748, 892, 1040-1041, 1480 Machine Room 276, 2123, 2129, 2202, 2204, 2212-2219, 2238 Machine Room-Less 2123, 2202, 2213-2214, 2216-2218, 2238 Machu Picchu 702, 709 Maciunas, George 421 medina 480
Madison Square Garden 42 Madonna 898, 1150, 1445 maeniana 1080, 1094 Magritte, Rene 566-567 Mahabharata 11,17, 83 Maillart, Robert 504, 506, 508, 510, 512-513, 538, 660
Maison Dom-lno 41, 62, 77, 182-183, 229
Maison Drusch 2292
Maison Jaoul, Neuilly-sur- Seine
763
Maison La Roche 1531 Maison Tropicale 1045 Maison de Verre 768 Majiang 518-519 Malaysia 481, 827, 1347, 1679 Malta 1107, 1884, 2026-2027 Man Ray 736
Manchester, England 74, 83, 230, 870, 1051, 1056, 1254, 1559 mandala 30, 1270, 1272 manifesto 191, 229, 260, 296, 518, 780, 812, 1037, 1162, 1242, 1468, 1476, 1511, 1514, 1532, 1584, 1624, 2060, 2117, 2238, 2258, 2271, 2316, 2325 Mann, John Randall 1601 Mann, Thomas 1075,1128, 1246 Mansfeld, Al 493 marble 6, 16, 33, 54, 62-63, 112-113,
135, 352, 390, 480-481, 485, 592, 921, 1411, 1432, 1447, 1449, 1477, 1484, 1567, 1781, 2264, 2313
balcony
Introduction	1075
Balconies of Rotterdam	1076
Typology: Inside Outside Trajectory: the Balcony's Expressions	1080
Archetypes	1082
Impure forms of the balcony	1088
Origin Stories: Maeniana, Arengario,	1094
Hourd, Breteche
Jharoka	1100
Mashrabiya	1104
Beauty Railing	1112
Romeo and Juliet	1114
Venetian altana and opera box	1116
Pahs, 19th Century: La mode des balcons 1118 Saniorium Craze	1126
Political balcony	1136
Mussolini and the Vatican	1138
Proclaiming communism	1140
Weimar Germany	1142
II Duce's arengarios	1144
Rationalism vs. Fascism	1146
Formula for the political balcony	1150
Hitler on the balcony	1152
Tide turns for the balcony	1156
Postwar political balconies	1160
Tokyo: Hirohito & Mishima	1162
Munich's Olympic Village, 1972	1163
Ceausescu	1164
Bottom-up balcony	1166
21st century political balconies	1168
Social balcony	1172
Baby balcony	1178
Gropius's steel frame balcony	1180
the impossibility of a universal balcony: 1182 mutuations of a modern element across the mediterranean by tom avermaete
Unite d'Habitation	1200
New York discovers the social balcony	1202
John Portman's interior balconies	1203
Venturi and Scott Brown vs. Paul Rudolph	1204
Mies in Montreal	1206
Balcony fantasies: the Riveira, Freud, Chanel 1208 Balcony as savior	1210
Art / market balcony	1212
Sukah balconies of Brooklyn	1213
Consumed balcony:	1214
Beijing and Hanoi
Vancouver's enclosed balcony craze	1215
Moscow	1216
Odessa	1217
Dubai and the laundry debate	1218
Dubai: thinning	1222
962. 981 ¡024,1404 124b
R -er >391, 1546, 2211
Bruno 32-83, 624, 623, 694,
§j^^&95, 128, 490, 493, 586, 588, 595,
-	.‘^*617, 934, 1047, 1104, 1464, 2006
Marc Antoine 392,
1030-1031, 1051
^^Hpttian Library 1962-1963 l^r^Kjon mines, Athens 2124, 2141,
^^Kry 1562-1563, 1566, 1580, 1591, i 16:16, 1720
^^^feton Arme 225, 508 -'■^Krbusier 41, 47, 62, 83, 182-183,
¡¡IXr 455, 494, 499, 502, 702, 709, 748, '^■Si-763' 766-768, 830, 858-859, 871 919, 936-937, 947, 1001-1003, '£^■¡3, 1051, 1172, 1174, 1200-1201,
•/ «; ,i' 1511, 1520, 1531, 2303
Viollet 54, 114, 136, 203, 392,
-	539 873, 10/5, 1096-1099, 1185, Rl587il924
^Kgue of Nations 914, 1149 ^^K?/ng from Las Vegas 1204, 1246 ^^Rer 173, 639, 686, 835, 846-847, lfm 2141
^^HPorter Butler 1005, 1051 ^^HfStephen 648 ^■ds, Lewis W. 1463, 1550
^Knef, Mark 2248
189, 718, 1010, 1013-1015, 1018, 1075, 1080, 1172, 1183, 1279, 1738 ^Hjn, Vladimir 480, 1080, 1140-1141, Bl 50,,2259 ^^Hbune 1080, 1150 ^H^rihardt, Rainer W. 636, 638 249, 380, 1449
JeanOacques 770, 859, 891,
^Hpsing, Lawrence 182-183
House, New York 294, 924-925,
l^Ka. 978, 1026, 1048 ^^Irimo 1610, 1720 ^Httown 39, 49, 950, 959, 1533 ^^Rator 2102
^^K(magazine) 40, 53, 236, 348, |^Kr353, 1337-1338, 2166
Emitting Diodes (LED) 329, i-^R-344, 377, 475, 533, 917, 1028-1029, ||^HS;'2104, 2214
Peru 798, 1106, 1108-1109, 1161 ^^Rln 478, 780-781, 829, 975, 1049,
Center, New York City 829
^Hum 40, 61-62, 82, 84, 1305 ^^Rl16, 438, 528, 625, 709, 1436, 1565 ^^■76, 615, 638, 1449, 1981 ^^Hiralde, Inaki Aliste 169
Wright, Frank 57, 83, 91, 138, 181, 254-255, 324, 380, 482, 538, 762, 934, 945, 988, 1048-1049, |^Hp, 1246, 1477, 1480, 1513, ||^HM265, 2329, 2333 ^^Rfeearing wall 89, 148, 915, 935,
^■»Rtotion 1042, 2225-2226, 2284 ^Rioli, Carlo 770-771, 859
^^Ra 1075, 1088-1089, 1129, 1134, i^Ki5-1147, 1183, 1185, 1187 ^^R^oghem, Han 494, 497
Micropolitical balcony Green balcony 21st century: anti-social and exhibitionist balconies Pools
Future balconies Celebrity balcony a manifesto: balconism by constant dullaart
1224
1226
1228
1234
1256
1238
1242
II
dedications	XXXIX
rem koolhaas: elements XLI
LXIX
werner sobek:
XÇI
interview b.Y rem koolhaas, Stephan truby. james westcott 0
elements of architecture Cl 2014 Venice architecture	
biennale	
corridor Yn,.. d..m.H	
Introduction	1255
Etymology	1256
Declining in architecture,	1258
increasing in metaphor Corridor types	1260
From madness to panic	1262
Corridors of power	1264
Transversal vs. tangential corridors	1266
Linear plan (asylum) vs.	1282
pavilion plan (hospital) From hall to corridor	1288
the corridor-cell complex	1290
by stephan truby welbeck abbey	1316
photos by hans werlemann War of corridors	1334
Corridor as shelter	1336
Cold war urban corridor	1337
Corridors of the Pentagon	1338
Social housing	1340
Narkomfin revisited	1342
Marcus Aurelius 2255 Marina City, Chicago 1232 Marot, lean 816 Marx, Groucho 562, 694 Marx, Karl and Engels, Friedrich 91, 189, 1075, 1172-1173, 1182-1183 mashrabiya 717, 724, 815, 935, 1080, 1104-1106, 1108-1109, 1187, 1196, 1198
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 1269 mastaba 886, 888 Matta Clark, Gordon 31, 83, 167 mausoleum 126, 150, 460, 624, 707, 1140, 1273, 2259 Mauss, Marcel 2224 MaxWan Architects 736 Maxxi Museum, Rome 2328 May, Ernst 482, 486 Maya 11, 26, 710-711 mayor 457, 481, 518-519, 521, 535,
1110, 1763, 1913, 2080, 2177 McDonald, Roxana 1434, 1439-1440, 1550
McGraw-Hill Building 869 McLuhan, Marshall 1024, 1051, 1491 McPhee, John 1489, 1550 Mecanoo 536
Mecca 4, 18-19, 29, 35, 73, 83, 125,
480, 786, 931, 1272
Medellin, Columbia 2110-2111, 2117 media façade 913, 917, 1020-1022, 1024, 1026-1029
Medical Research Council 2184 medieval 54, 226, 245, 259, 260, 272, 417, 476, 724-725, 760, 868, 887, 1075, 1119, 1138, 1144, 1288, 1411, 1438, 1440, 1445, 1447, 1460-1461, 1468, 1478, 1550, 1566, 1574, 1577-1578, 1720, 1767, 1832, 1892 Mediterranean 618, 743, 891, 1182, 1187, 1191, 1195, 1197, 1199, 1247, 1414, 1419, 1566 Medusa 638
Mehrotra, Rahul 1692-1693, 1695 Meiji 130, 254, 782-783 Melnikov, Konstantin 780-781, 1001, 1480, 2259-2260, 2333 Melville, Herman 1472-1473 Mendelsohn, Erich 492, 496, 1023 Mendini, Alessandro 639 Menlo Park 192-193, 535, 847-848 Mercedes Benz 845 Merkel, Angela 1265 Mesopotamia 474, 743, 1564-1565, 1720
MetLife Building 941 Metabolism 171, 176, 1513, 1676 Metropolis Water Act 1594-1601 Metropolitan Museum of Art 1088 Mexico 10, 105, 160, 203, 308, 509, 516-517, 710, 1089, 1254, 1686, 2328 Meyer, Hannes 1172 Michelangelo 385, 479, 898-899, 1941, 1962-1963, 2255, 2333 microchip 647, 1028, 1051, 2200 Microsoft 2128, 2238 Mielke, Friedrich 1727-2033 Mies van der Rohe, Ludwig 7, 202, 236, 300, 488, 622-623, 639, 703, 708, 762, 766, 845, 872, 913, 915, 925,
934, 988, 1026, 1045, 1048, 1050, 1206-1207, 1664, 2171
mihrab 4, 29, 125, 480, 1272 -J Milan 82-83, 226, 319, 485, 487, 539 859, 1039, 1049, 1159, 1186-1187 ' 1221227, 1630, 2060 military 19, 52, 59, 64, 209, 271, 283-400-401, 441, 509, 510, 519-521,
598, 654, 891, 912, 914-916, 947' 950-951, 960-961, 973, 978, 1010-1013-1017, 1034, 1037, 1075, 1080 1087, 1096, 1098-1099, 1118, 114o' 1270-1271, 1299, 1301, 1338, 1459' 1640, 1775, 1812, 1908-1909, 2270-2271
Milizia, Francesco 392 Millard House, Pasadena 934 Miller, Herman 16, 182, 185, 979,
1031, 1050
minaret 1083, 1789, 1803, 1927, 1982-1989, 2031, 2033, 2258 mine 140, 1923, 2030, 2125, 2131, 2141 Minimal Dwelling Unit 42 minimalism 164, 637, 660, 1481, 1609, 1650
Miralles, Enric 943 Mise-en-scene 149, 337, 2266 Mistiuk, Roman 1237,1251 Mitsubishi 782, 2064, 2073, 2100-21 2129, 2215, 2238 Miyake, Seiichi 51 Modem Times (film) 1043-1044 modernity 173, 203, 353, 384, 389, 41 516, 704-705, 733, 768, 772, 774, 776, 782, 784, 859, 900, 920, 1022, 1183, 1195, 1255, 1269, 1448, 1471, 1533, 1593, 1613, 1720, 2186 module 19, 27, 55, 166, 172-173, 182-183, 221, 329, 400-401, 404, 408, 620, 675, 815, 880-881, 934, 1191, 1565, 1700, 1908, 2203-2204 Modulor Man (Le Corbusier) 182, 183
Moe, Kiel 321, 380, 383, 1532, 1537, 1550, 1555
Mohenjo Daro 1560, 1564, 1720 moisture 54, 464, 818, 825, 853, 916, 946, 951-952, 965, 970, 1492, 1705 Mon Oncle (film) 778 monastery 395, 770, 876, 1033, 1254, 1275, 1295, 1450, 1560, 1568, 1777, 1909, 1911, 1929, 1978 Monkey closet 1592-1593, 1600 monolith 103, 134, 767, 865, 917, 927, 931, 935, 946, 955, 992, 994-995, 1034 1048, 1536
Montpellier 284, 832, 942 Montpellier, Allan 832 Monument to the Third International 1042, 2258 Moon 438, 444, 447, 765, 780, 797, 950, 1113, 1352, 1571, 1613, 1700 Moore, Charles 844, 1246 Moore, Jerry 393, 538 Moorish 243, 1106, 1108, 1196 More, Thomas 1579 Morphosis 970-971 Morris Hunt, Richard 138, 2153, 2159 Morris, William 164, 1030, 1032-1033, 1051, 1185, 1247, 1437 Morse, Edward 254, 380, 1004 mosaic 6, 17, 19, 61, 127, 241, 475, 479, 749, 987, 1307-1308, 1432, 1981 Moscow 307, 480-481, 567, 610, 780-781, 938-939, 1001, 1003,
Near Death Experience 1395, 1396 Negri, Antonio 189 Neoclassicism 138, 747, 1032, 1110 Neo-prairie style 1659 neolithic 8, 25, 114, 1421 Nero 132-134, 477, 2136 Nervi, Pier Luigi 505, 507-508, 511, 516 Nest Learning Themostat 1497, 1503 Netherlands 11, 90, 121, 195, 526-527, 535, 537, 549, 601, 734-735, 928, 999, 1055, 1231, 1349, 1378, 1736-1737, 1764, 1781, 1783, 1785, 2005, 2013, 2094-2095, 2140, 2229, 2230, 2279,
2281
Neue Nationalgalerie 7, 300, 639 Neufert (Ernst) 549, 2249 Neuilly House 2273, 2305, 2307, 2311, 2327
Neutra, Richard 254-257, 380, 988, 1043, 1134
Niche 4, 29, 125, 142, 189, 552, 571, 577, 702, 736, 794, 848, 886, 888, 893, 916, 958, 1191, 1228, 1510, 1529, 1531, 1580, 1979, 1989, 2006, 2100, 2329 Nicoletti, Andrea Francesco 212 Niemeyer, Oscar 1745, 2266-2267, 2330-2331 Nigeria 1558, 1686 Nightingale, Florence 1258, 1283, 1285-1286, 1303, 1396 Nightingale floor 2, 54-55, 77, 82, 84 Nile River 887, 889 Nintendo Wii 1405, 1407 Nishihonganji Temple, Kyoto 782 Nk'Mip Desert 110-111 Nobel Prize 534, 1515 noise 53, 180, 191, 252, 304, 350, 353, 380, 487, 624, 634, 649, 653, 703, 773, 818, 823, 825, 846, 945, 963, 1232, 1282, 1470, 1502, 1584, 2184-2185 Nolli, Giambattista 2255 nomadic 18-19, 874, 876, 1010-1011, 1014-1015, 1540, 1547, 1972 Normandy 465, 469, 2292 Northrop, Albert 306 Notre Dame du Haut, Ronchamp 762
Notre Dame du Rainey 935, 1048 Notre Dame cathedral 460, 556,1843 Nouvel, Jean 537, 763, 823, 929, 1038, 1047, 1550, 2271, 2328 Nugent, Tim 2244-2245, 2249, 2268, 2270, 2272-2291 Nuisance Removal Act 1590 Nuremberg 1023, 1099, 1154, 2016,
2275
nursery 91, 1043, 1279, 1307 nursing home 1349 nylon 919, 1012, 1016, 1051 obelisk 877, 891, 1942 Oblique 221, 428, 1191, 1357, 2259, 2271, 2273, 2292-2293, 2295, 2299, 2301, 2303-2307, 2311, 2315-2316, 2318,
2323, 2326-2327
obsolescence 141, 202, 797, 914, 1530 Occidental Chemical Building 1006-1008 Occupy 1170, 1658 oculus 220, 377, 479, 931 Odessa 1217 Odyssey elevator 2211 Oechslin, Werner 896, 905, 1066 Office Space (film) 187
Pruitt-lgoe myth	1344
Corridor cities	1346
Skyscraper corridors	1347
Dementia corridor	1348
Dutch nursing home corridors	1349
corridor syntax	1350
by kevin mcleod
Feng Shui: mitigating the corridor	1358
Vatican: first exit corridor	1360
Coded corridor	1362
Corridor patents	1366
The quantified corridor	1368
International Building Code:	1372
description of a corridor Anatomy of a corridor	1378
Evacuation	1380
Transfer corridors: World Trade Center	1382
Corridor landscape	1388
Airborne corridors	1389
Video game corridors	1390
Signage	1392
Underwater corridor	1394
Final exit	1395
fireplace
Introduction	1403
Heidegger's "site of all sites"	1404
Nintendo Wii: Fireplacing	1405
Trajectory: genealogy of bifurcation	1406
Growing fireplace: cave to powerplant	1408
Etymology: hearth vs.fireplace	1410
Hominid + fire	1412
Cooking hominid: BolomorCave, Spain	1414
fire and language: josep fernandez	1417
interview by amo
Feng shui and the fire	1422
Archetype: fireplace regardless of climate 1424 Hestia, goddess of architecture	1426
Adapting Hestia: Roman Vestal Virgins	1429
Fire + architecture: inexorable integration	1430
Chimney + privacy: thermal isolation	1438
Anglo-Saxon obsession	1440
Christianity declares the fireplace obsolete 1444 Noble fireplaces of Welbeck Abbey	1446
Piranesi's fantasy fireplaces	1448
Expansion	1450
Siberian fireplace	1452
DeanOacques Lequeu's Gothic fireplace	1455
Smoke doctors: Savot, Gauger,	1456
Franklin, Rumford
Heating public space: John Soane	1460
Fireplace as ventilator: David Boswell Reid 1462 Fireplace™: Prometheus patented	1464
Chimneysweeps	1466
Nathaniel Hawthorne, "Fire Worship"	1468
| l , MU/, U-iiJ. liJJ, iuii.
¡¡^■§)j!l380, 1468, 1480, 1674, J^Bfol2065, 2085, 2117, 2172-2173, ■2259i 2260, 2333 ^Bser, Alfred 338
j^KhUe 4, 18-19, 29, 35, 52, 93,
127, 242, 244, 457, 472-473, g^BT 480-481, 887, 955, 1021, 1083, ¡¡■fcO-1291. 1789, 1986-1987, 1989,
^KquitO 825, 1644
^Kld'110, 119, 802-804, 808-809, 917,
^Kulin, Etienne 1741 ^Bynt Olympus 15,1426 ^^Ent Rushmore 1058
^Kise 651, 796 ^^Eon, Joseph 116
^^■*658, 2185
^Bf :.54, 75, 91, 108, 110-111, 390, 414, ¡^■¡16-417, 420, 875, 888, 1411, 1423, |H|69,4507, 1518 ^Bpial 126, 1075, 1100-1101, 1246,
^K)0n 170-171, 173, 715, 822, 825, 918, f^El, 925-927, 929, 947, 949, 965, ¡■|}4^985, 990, 992, 1000 Bumbai, India 1235, 1561, 1688-1689, ¡^■92-1693, 1698-1699, 2107 ^H)ford, Lewis 1048, 1508-1509,
I 1519,11551
^Knich, Germany 136, 504, 509, 539, ^«2,825, 1017, 1154, 1163, 1459, 1913, ¡^Bb6-2187, 2328
^Bpcipal 43, 155, 900, 980, 1094, 1099, |Hil5, 1605, 1645, 1654, 1670, 1689, ¡^■93, 1696, 2117, 2159 ^B^tori, Saverio 774, 776-777 ^B&eum of Modern Art, New York (H&'84, 236, 256, 539, 772, 859, 914, g^B1 ,’2207, 2261 Hlil, Robert 555, 695 ^Bssolini, Benito 1075, 1080, |^Bf6-1138, 1144-1146, 1148-1150, 1158-1159
^B^bridge, Eadweard 1627, 2246 2184-2185, 2238 ^■RDV 1231 Myanma 117
^Bbster Cathedral 1844 ^BA 55, 71, 83, 509, 575, 672-675, 694, IHNs 1352, 1502, 1561, 1673, 1700, ^»131 WB] Architects 832 ^^pil Fanous Architects 994 Wabokov, Vladimir 2188, 2190 H&der, Ralph 1625 ^Hpkin Capsule Tower 979, 1617 ^Bed 112, 227, 1086, 1134, 1426, 1624,
I 1627, 1639 ^H>les, Italy 598, 721 ^■»oleon 251, 891, 1561, 1587 House, Akita City 783 ^Bpmfin Building 1001, 1259, 1340,
Bash, John 251, 932
^Blnal Energy Act, 1978 919, 1006, ■ '035
^B'onal Fire Protection Associa-
^BNFPA) 140, 309, 1362, 1364, 1396 i^Hpnal Security Agency 652 ^Hnalism 521, 1193 ^W|08-509, 960, 1049, 1258, 1284
Herman Melville, "I and my chimney"	1472
New York: fireplace city	1474
Domestic core	1476
the well and the chimney	1477
by Sébastien marot
Fire in the Glass House	1478
Architect's fireplaces	1480
Boiler vs. fireplace	1482
London's great smog	1484
Climate control in the White House	1486
Young savages	1488
Oil Crisis	1489
Fireplace, radio-place, TV-place	1490
Cool is the new warm	1492
Natural cooling:	1494
Hyderabad's inverted chimneys History of the thermostat	1496
conscious fireplace: tony faded interview 1497 by amo
Inglenook enlargement project	1504
hearthbreaking	1506
by Sébastien marot
Functionally exitinct?	1524
fireplaces in the 21st century return to the radiant: kiel moe interview 1532 by will lambeth
Deadly persistence of the fireplace	1538
Feeding the flames: Addis Ababa	1540
Energy poverty and the clean cookstove	1542
Fireplace vs. phone	1544
Protective bubble: "Local Warming" by MIT 1546 Extinction	1548
toilet Ï ^
Introduction	1559
Trajectories: unification and divergence	1560
Etymology: unameable element	1562
Early toilets and sewers	1564
Ancient Greece: communalism	1566
Rome's Cloaca Maxima	1567
Christchurch monastery and cathedral	1568
Kedelson estate	1569
Divine instructions	1570
Deities and demons of the toilet	1571
Start of privacy: the chariot latrine	1572
Toilets of Japanese palaces	1573
Garderobe	1574
Pope Julius ll's toilet	1578
Utopias	1579
Luther's revelation on the toilet	1580
Breughel the Elder's Netherlandish proverbs 1582 First flush	1584
Decorating (and hiding) the chamber pot	1586
Yemen: integration into architecture	1588
Victorian england: First flush,	1590
Oil Crisis 1973 912, 916, 916-919, 927, 952-953, 979, 981, 1004, 1006, 1035, 1489, 1511, 1524 Okakura, Kakuzo 130 olive oil 15, 21
Oliver, Paul 108, 393, 538, 1268 Olympics 74, 509, 1019, 1153, 1428, 1558, 1645, 1777, 2285 open air theatre 1094 open plan 28, 91, 93, 146-147, 157, 171, 174, 180, 182, 184, 188-192, 202, 330, 622, 847, 1255, 1347, 1622 opera 140, 151, 168, 203, 272, 274, 279, 307-308, 376, 487, 536-537, 562, 942, 1049, 1080, 1117, 1729, 1738, 1773, 1855, 2281, 2285 oratory 724, 1563 oriel window 724, 1187, 1514 Orpheus 112
orthodox 65, 480-481, 774, 1036-1037, 1087, 1213, 2130 Osiris 568
Oslo Opera House 151 Otis, Elisha 2152, 2154-2156 Ottoman 545, 585, 1104, 1106-1107, 1197, 1199 Oud, JJP494, 1185 outhouse 1561-1562, 1612-1613, 1654-1655, 1703 Owen, Nicolas 600 O'Brien, Conan 187 O'Meara, Carra Ferguson 1445,1550 pagan 472, 477, 877 pagoda 25, 112, 401, 484, 845, 2070, 2292
Pakistan 104, 1101, 1272, 1494, 1686, 1923
Palace of Minos, Knossos 1560, 1565 Palace of Siena 1099 Palace of Westminster 258-271, 381, 728, 858, 1462, 1594 Palais Gamier 274-277 Palatine Hill 132, 1429 Palazzina Furmanik 775-776 Palazzine Figari 226 palazzo 44, 212, 215, 249, 250, 279, 774, 776, 859, 898-899, 1079, 1117, 1136, 1150, 1799, 1959, 2255, 2333 Palazzo Rucellai, Florence 898-899 Palazzo Valmarana 1799 Palazzo Vecchio 215 Palazzo Venezia, Rome 1079, 1136, 1150
Palazzo del Cinema 279 Palestine 477
Palladio, Andrea 871, 1066, 1729,1733, 1764, 1798-1799, 1838, 1846-1847,
1862, 1935-1936
Palm Springs, California 236, 534 Palmyra 1981
Pan-Am Building (Metlife Building)
941
panic 544, 602, 1262, 1337, 1514, 1654, 2227, 2233 panic room 602 Pankhurst, Richard 1540 panopticon 651, 1293, 1297 panorama 28, 703, 753, 766, 776, 1121, 1230, 1238, 1490 Pantheon of Paris 478-479 Pantheon, Rome 220, 380, 931, 955 panther 636, 638 parachute 1752
paradise 390-391, 539, 545, 549,
847, 1206, 1507, 2077 parametric 49, 159-160, 376, 389, <
867, 982-983, 2220 paranoia 140, 602, 686, 1392 Parc de la Villette 993 Parent, Claude 2244-2245, 2271-2 2292-2293, 2296-2297, 2299, 2301-2306, 2311, 2314, 2316, 2327, 2333
parking lot 14, 77-78, 2204 Parler, Peter 1828, 1840-1841, 18 1848, 1924
parlor 91, 142, 1282, 1288, 1440, 1-1 1469-1470
Parthenon, Greece 1021 Partizanskaya Station 2065 party wall 102, 134-135, 137, 140,
307
passive climate control 706 Pasteur, Louis 1462 paternoster 2146 patio 618, 1218 pattern recognition 654 pavement 7-8, 53, 76, 534, 748, 11; 1417
Pavilion Suisse 936 Pawson, John 1481 Paxton, Joseph 702, 746, 921, 987,;
1048, 1050, 1313 pea-souper 1484 Pearl River Delta 406, 422, 430,
442, 452
Pedetti, Maurizio 1735, 1860, 1862-1863, 1871, 1873 Pei, I.M. 508-509, 872, 927, 992-993 pendentive 243 penguin 2261, 2264, 2333 Penn Station 336, 953 Pentagon 1338-1339 penthouse 177, 254, 493, 1234, 2215, 2229
People's Action Party 2230 Pepsi Cola 925, 1026, 1048 Pereira, William 942 Perineal region 1624, 1631, 1633-16 peristyle 478
Perraudin, Gilles 113, 1536 Perrault, Claude 392, 897 Perret, Auguste 748-749, 934-935, 1049
Peru 358, 526, 798, 1106, 1108, 1749 Petra, Jordan 876-877, 1979 Petronas Towers 1347 Peugeot Metomorph 1236 Pevsner, Nikolaus 1185, 1247, 1936 Pharaoh 108, 887 Philippines 338, 1166, 1712 Philips 342, 344, 937, 1393 Philips Pavilion 937 Philosophy of Structure 508-509 photovoltaic 387, 532-533, 535, 815, 870, 1007, 1522-1523 Piano, Renzo 153, 366, 967, 971, 102 2069
piazza 774, 1094, 1138, 1144, 1147, 1149, 1159, 1941, 2313 Piazza San Marco, Venice 2313 Picasso, Pablo 178 Piccadilly Circus, London 1024, 10 picture window 50, 707, 752-759, 786, 788, 988
pig 835, 1614, 1714-1716
Porcheddu 226, 228-229
Great Exhibition, Great Stink,
porous 465, 468, 494, 964, 1016, 1174, 1200, 1210, 1340, 1650, 1674 Porsche 846
portico 148, 1082, 1169, 1185, 1197,
1257, 1309, 1509, 2250 Portland Building 980 Portman, John 646, 992, 1203, 2123, 2182, 2191-2193 Bonaventure Hotel 992,1203 portrait 485, 610, 736, 748, 772, 774, 783, 1291, 1354, 1466, 1579, 1583-1584,
1651
Portugal 794, 796, 798, 1051, 1450, 1923, 1940
Post Office Savings Bank, Vienna
494
Post-colonial 767, 1081, 1193, 1247, 1562, 1719
postwar 27, 39, 49-50, 56, 455, 509, 511, 733, 776, 841, 858, 913, 915-916, 924-925 936-938, 941, 947, 950, 952, 959, 960, 966, 974, 978-980, 988, 1003, 1014, 1023-1024, 1026-1027, 1035, 1048-1049, 1054, 1075, 1160,
1162-1163 1187, 1195, 1197, 1199,
1232, 1236, 1335, 1486, 1533, 2066,
2270,	2275
postmodern 315, 337, 393, 539, 637, 725, 942, 965, 967, 972, 979-980, 982, 1027-1028, 1075, 1143, 1203-1204, 1246, 2044-2045, 2117 Potemkin Village 864 Potsdam 1142, 1767,1771, 1773, 1780-1781, 1783, 1792, 1797, 1802-1823, 1831, 1833, 1836-1837, 1942, 1944-1953, 2000-2001, 2003, 2005, 2012, 2020, 2031 Potsdamer Platz, Berlin 840 Pozzo, Andrea 239, 1953 Prada 915, 929, 1018, 1068 Prague 147, 221, 998, 1023, 1099, 1166, 1812, 1840-1841, 1844, 1924, 1959, 2065, 2117
prayer 2, 4, 5, 18-19, 22, 29, 35, 52, 73, 83-84, 125, 724, 768, 1083, 1585, 1789, 1795, 1927
prayer rug 2,4,5,19,22,29,35,52,73,83 prehistoric 1492, 1565, 1719, 2141, 2238 pre-war 185, 188, 966 Prefab 82, 84, 421, 1458, 1616 preservation 82, 84, 173, 178, 332, 380, 603, 869, 1035, 1041, 1048-1050, 1066, 1372, 1419, 1426, 1428, 1517, 1741, 1760, 1778-1779, 1781, 1783, 2245,
2271,	2299, 2314, 2327 President of the United States 1169,
105, 148, 478, 532, 940, 1167, 1202, 1339 Bush, George W. 532, 1167, 1648 Carter, Jimmy 532, 1487 Ford, R. Edward 762, 858, 1049 Franklin, Benjamin 1458-1459,
1532, 1534
Kennedy, John F. 1160, 1202 Obama, Barack 532 Nixon, Richard 1487 Reagan, Ronald 532, 1658, 2117 Roosevelt, Franklin Delano 1490 Pretoria Central Prison 648 Price, Cedric 39, 65, 83, 918, 1027,
1051, 1603
primitive 102, 108-109, 112, 213, 392, 499, 536, 794, 890, 957, 1011, 1021,
exalted plumber
Genealogy of the flush toilet	1600
Frederick Humpherson's Beaufort	1602
Establishment of the Final Toilet	1604
Toilet moves into bathroom	1606
Trough	1607
Twyford Range: 1994 & 2013	1608
Auschwitz: enforced communal toilets	1610
Anne Frank family toilet	1611
Outhouse	1612
Sanitation without water	1614
American Standards	1615
Buckminster Fuller's one-piece bathroom 1616 Kurokawa's capsule toilet	1617
Wet wall	1618
Hotel toilet: The Statler, Buffalo	1619
Toilets in the typical plan	1620
Toilets in No Stop City	1621
Philip Johnson's Glass House	1622
the bathroom:	1624
alexander kira's manifesto for intimate ergonomics
American flush: a primer	1640
Whole Earth Catalogue	1642
Beijing's public toilet drive	1644
New York's disappearing public toilets 1646 Codification	1648
American Stall: the fight for privacy	1650
Public toilet sex sting	1652
Unisex toilets	1653
High tech public toilets	1654
Charmin's "sit or squat" app	1655
20th century: one bathroom is not enough 1656 Taking over the American floor plan	1658
Thirsty toilets	1660
Peter Greenaway's 26 Bathrooms	1662
Minimal / maximal	1664
Bathroom as stage	1666
Waste management: Dubai	1668
Burj Khalifa: Toilet talk	1670
Global toilet types	1672
Incomplete globalization of the western toilet 1674 Eccentricities exposed	1676
Pressure to sit	1678
Pressure to squat	1680
Washlet	1682
Toilet field: Limpopo, South Africa	1684
End of the "final" toilet	1686
Dharavi, Mumbai: community toilets	1688
legitimizing the slum: the iconic	1692
toilet block by rahul mehrotra Dry latrines	1696
Space: toilets without waste	1700
Low tech	1702
1 ¿O,	IO*t,	ÖOÖ, Oy/-Oaö
ML John 128
¡■Lm 22, 53, 203, 632, 770, 1272, 1431, ^■¡53 1940, 2075, 2294 ^Hngton, Alastair 741, 751, 921, 986,
^Kr 112, 127, 514, 552, 750, 1256, 1785, ¡BLl, 1844, 1863, 1864, 1986
Giovanni Battista 106, 1361. §■^42, 1448-1449, 2255 ^■Lno, Giovanni 871 > Pissoir 1654
HLhed roof 241, 248, 282, 484, 488, ¡■91-495, 498-504, 534-535, 784 ^Htsburgh Plate Glass Co. 986,
I 989-991
^Hnef of the Apes (film) 942 ^Hnetarium 504
^Kter 127, 136-138, 140-141, 170, 173, ^■3, 237-238, 243, 253-255, 306-308, IKgo’ 888, 1447, 1504 ^■pterboard 93, 141, 195, 252 Hito 447, 994, 1037, 1402, 1426, 1428 Bayground 106, 1225, 2230, 2266 HLt/'me (film) 101, 668 ^Bstocene 1413, 1419-1421 ^^Kiglass 752
■^¡y the Elder 112-113, 456, 997, 1051, ¡^»90-1291, 1567 i Hg-in 185 1237 ■fambing 89, 91, 148, 154-155, 210, 292, §Boi. 368, 374, 1372, 1476, 1511, 1514, |Bfe9-1560, 1574-1575, 1590, ¡¡■S96-1597, 1606-1607, 1618-1620, |Hp3, 1645, 1650, 1663, 1671, 1710, |Bh 8-1720
^Btumati; 265, 294, 657, 806, 1011, Hi3-1014, 1016, 1051
Edgar Allan 48, 53, 64, 2186 ^Ker 1496, 1505
^■and 307, 526, 794, 1055, 1335, 1479, ■1576, 2229
Hnice 346, 608, 654, 694, 831, 306, 1110, ¡Bl63 1167, 1171, 1459, 1484-1485, |^K2, 1711, 1880, 2111, 2190 ^Hock, Jackson 53
^Hption 261, 265, 900, 944-945, 952, g^Hf85, 1508, 1526, 1538, 1542, 1719,
Marco 476
Hmer 39, 65, 95, 946, 991, 1012-1013, gj^Hfl 6-1017, 1707, 2091 ^»vinyl Butyral (PVB) 991 ^Bjïeii 740, 743, 986, 1094, 1442 Hfempidou Centre 366, 1027, 1050, ¡■514, 2069, 2272 ■it, Henri Maclaine 393, 538 ^■ente, Johannes 639 ■N, Gio 774, 776, 1186-1187 ^BArt 173
Be 1138-1139, 1150, 1161, 1360-1361, Hp78, 1721, 1868, 2255, 2333 ¡■Alexander VI 1578, 1721 ¡¡■Benedict XI 1139 ¡■pean-Paul II 1161 ¡■Pu,ius 11 1578 jjBNicholas 1111360 ^■iular Mechanics (magazine) B 658, 695, 1044, 2077 ^Belain 441, 635, 918, 926, 956, 959, ¡¡■pi, 1567, 1579, 1586, 1592, 1594, ¡$■>96, 1600-1601, 1603-1604, 161'1, ¡¡■^72-1673. 1683, 1719
Bill Gates's "Reinvent the toilet"	1703
challenge
Digital toilet	1710
Bathroom post-typhoon	1712
Pig's toilet	1714
Toilet landscape	1716
stair
Trajectory	1729
Blondel's universal stair formula	1730
Three masters: Vitruvius, Alberti, Palladio	1732
Three hierarchies: clerical, feudal, bourgeois 1734 Netherlands vs. rest of the world	1736
Theatrical architecture	1738
Galaries Lafayette	1740
Grand stairs, demolished	1742
Tailor-made: Laurin stair and Elsa's stair	1744
Guardrail design	1746
Four-inch ball test	1748
Safety concerns	1750
US fire escape patents	1752
Prefabricated stair	1756
Boutique stairs	1758
9/11: stair as hero	1760
Fun theory	1762
Health theory	1763
on friedrich mielke and the study	1766
of stairs by Stephan triiby Venice statement	1768
by friedrich mielke
how many stairs have you measured	1770
in your lifetime: friedrich mielke interview by Stephan triiby
A stair museum	1799
Friedrich Mielke: a stair bibliography	1800
1.	Dissertation (1956):	1804
The stair of the Potsdam townhouse
in the 18th century
2.	The history of the German	1824
staircases (1966)
3a. The townhouse in Potsdam (text) (1972) 1836 3b. The townhouse in	1837
Potsdam (images) (1972)
4.	Scalology (1985):	1838
Collected writings on stair research (vol. 1)
5.	Scalology (1986):	1848
Collected writings on stair	1858
research (vol. 2)
6.	Stairs between Tauber, Rezat	1856
and Altmühl (1989)
7.	Scalology: Stairs in Eichstätt (1986) 1860
8. Scalology: Stairs in Breslau (1990)	1874
9. Scalology: Stairs in Vienna (1990)	1875
10.	Scalaology: Collected writings (vol. 3) 1882
11.	Stairs in Ingolstad	1904
1031, 1408, 1431, 1440, 1488, 1630,
1787, 1795, 1922-1923, 1996-1997,
2140, 2294
primitive hut 213, 392, 536, 1011,
1031, 1408
prismoidal light 231 prison 19, 106-107, 134, 136, 194, 517, 613, 626, 648-651, 694-695, 714, 1101, 1150, 1163, 1255, 1281, 1291-1301, 1307-1309, 1311, 1313, 1334, 1357, 1396-1397, 1468, 1470, 1610, 2123 privacy 91, 126, 146, 154-156, 184, 191, 202, 380, 545, 564, 683, 694, 726, 772, 825, 1075, 1117, 1189, 1214, 1228, 1245, 1279, 1299, 1305, 1310, 1438, 1559,
1572, 1574, 1578, 1587, 1619, 1625, 1650-1651, 1654, 1679, 1693, 1704, 2227, 2229, 2323 privatization 732, 1559 privy 1288, 1561-1563, 1571, 1583-1585, 1590, 1595, 1612, 1868 Probst, Robert 185 proctologist 1680 Progress 127, 193, 260, 390, 410, 495, 513, 915, 1001, 1246, 1309, 1390, 1402, 1404, 1428, 1458, 1485, 1520, 1534, 1548, 1560, 1686, 1688, 1700, 1730,
1748, 1764, 1888, 2064, 2202, 2237, 2259, 2333
Prometheus 1402, 1464, 1468, 1548 propaganda 311, 1153, 1335,2064,
2107
prostitution 733 Protestantism 1580 Prouvé, Jean 934, 975, 1045, 1050 proverbs
A room of one's own 184,1305,
1397, 1559, 1684
Don't get the wrong end
of the stick 1558
Falls off the Balcony 1204
Hand over fist 186
It hangs like a privy over
a ditch 1583
Rub Salt into the Wound 979 They both crap out of the same hole 1583
To wipe one's ass on a door 1583 Pruitt-lgoe 927, 940, 1344-1345 psychology 61, 83, 188, 191, 202-203, 350, 380, 567, 901, 1051, 1853, 2189, 2239
Public Health Act (UK) 1590, 1594 public toilets 1563, 1592, 1607, 1616, 1632, 1644-1648, 1653-1655, 1675,
1678, 1688, 1719
Pugin, Augustus Welby 260-261,263,265, 267, 269, 271, 381, 900, 905, 1067, 1460 Pulp Fiction (film) 1491 punkah fan 322
puritan 1291, 1295, 1299, 1301, 1303, 1309, 1559, 1560
PVC 40, 115, 797, 801, 807, 919, 983,
1016, 1670, 1688 Pylon Temple Gates 887 Pyongyang, DPRK 2075, 2085 pyramid 112, 381, 405, 872, 886-889, 891-892, 927, 942, 993, 1066, 1176, 1354, 1768, 1919, 1921, 1961, 2248-2249, 2258-2259, 2312, 2333 Qibla Wall 125
Qing Dynasty 102,128, 413, 457,
521, 528
quartz 918, 941, 942 Quatremere de Quincy 1073, 1 1119, 1183, 1204, 1247 Quattrocento 240 Queen Mary 1102-1103 Quonset hut 915, 960, 1049 Quran 13, 18, 22, 477 RFID 647
radiation 165, 683, 703, 813, 821, 928, .. 935, 946, 996, 1047, 1366, 1403, 1456 1458, 1461, 1463-1464, 1476 Rael, Ronald 111 Ragette, Friedrich 203, 393, 539,
1720
railway 140, 519-522, 545, 740, 892,
1254-	1255, 1261, 1311, 1521, 206l',
2076, 2083, 2178, 2186
rain 390-391, 464-465, 468, 490-491 494-495, 499, 503, 662, 770, 865, 875, 956,965, 1049, 1061, 1112-1113, 11 ‘
1255-	1257, 1268, 1512, 1518-1519,
1546, 1565, 2142
rainscreen 867, 912, 916, 918, 9I 1049-1050
rammed earth 111, 121 Rappel-a-l'ordre 767 Rapunzel 1447 Ratti, Carlo 1546 Raumplan 146-147 reception hall 1101 regionalism 387, 798, 988 Reich, Lily 170, 202 Reichstag 502, 1018, 1142, 1834, 23: Reid, David Boswell 258, 260-261, 263-265, 267-269, 271, 322, 381, 1 1550
Reid, John Lyon 303 renaissance 113, 122-123, 246, 260,
396, 441, 456, 467, 470, 472, 479, 48!
494, 502, 627, 636, 638, 766, 772,
900, 903, 905, 1066, 1080, 1108, 111 1204, 1441, 1448, 1578, 1721, 1767,
1779, 1803, 1828-1829, 1831-1833,
1835, 1846, 1892, 1928, 1936, 1956, 1958-1963, 1999, 2031, 2134, 2333 Reno, Jesse 2050-2054, 2056,
2058-2059, 2102 restroom 155, 336, 346, 640-641, 695, 1562, 1593, 1646-1647, 1650, 1653, v: 1719-1720
retiring rooms 1593 Revit 373,816-817, 2219 revolution 158, 164, 188, 191, 224, 324, 455, 520-521, 610, 617, 768, 770, 921, 973, 985, 990, 993, 1001, 1014, 1032, > 1039, 1041, 1075, 1137, 1140-1143, 1153,1160,1164-1165,1171,1178,	,
1305, 1357, 1421, 1443, 1468-1469,
1509, 1513, 1590, 1644-1645, 1703,
1705, 2123, 2160, 2202, 2214, 2255,
2258, 2261, 2266, 2304 revolving door 546, 549, 660, 662-665, I 670, 694
ribbon window 748-749, 767-768, 780 783, 1001
Ricci, Leonardo 780-781 Ricciotti, Rudy 971 Rice, Peter 993, 1050 Richmond Palace 1584 Riefenstahl, Leni 1154, 1429 Rietveld Schröder house 162, 622,
1480
Rietveld, Gerrit 162, 298, 622, 1480
S-trap 1561, 1569, 1590, 1593, 1596, 1600-1601, 1604, 1710 SANAA 59, 90, 820-821, 823, 825, 829, 971, 992, 1089 SARS 44
SENSEable Cities Lab 1546 SHoP Architects 942 SIVEC marble 480 SO-IL 1019
Saarinen, Eero 582, 926, 947, 1048 Sabine, Wallace Clement 150, 223, 380
Sackett, Augustine 141, 195, 203, 252 Sainsbury's 74
Sainte Bernadette du Banlay, Nevers 2271,2298, 2300 Sakeiarios, Pericles 843 Salk Institute, La Jolla, California
288
Salomon de Caus 997 Samsung 347, 838
San Francesco della Vigna, Venice
770
San Francisco 153, 189, 308, 603, 687, 725, 914-915, 941-942, 969-971, 1508, 1551, 2108, 2263
Sanssouci, Potsdam 1938,1946, 1952 sand 30, 64, 111, 494-495, 512, 535, 707, 740, 1650, 1703, 1705, 2248 Sandberg, Jared 1502, 1551 sandstone 94, 113, 1862, 1899 Sangallo, Antonio Da 898, 1936 Sanisette 1654 sanitarium 1131 Santa Maria Del Fiore 246, 382 Santa Maria, Aracoeli 1941, 2255 Sant'Elia, Antonio 1042-1043, 2060-2061, 2068, 2117 saqqara 886, 888, 892 sarcophagus 2259 sarin gas 831, 944
sash window 700, 712,714, 726, 748, 773 satellite dish 1077, 1218, 1223, 1543 Saudi Arabia 583, 703, 784-785,1104, 1365, 1381 Savot, Louis 1456 Säenz de Oiza, Francisco Javier 1186-1187, 1189
scaffolding 277, 478, 870, 1159, 1610, 1929
Scala d'Oro 1794-1795 Scalae Sanctae (Sacred Stairs) 1911 scalalogy 1767-1768, 1771, 1773, 1779, 1802, 1838-1903, 1908 Scandinavia 965 scavenging 1696 Scharoun, Hans 988, 1050 Scheerbart, Paul 747, 858, 1022, 1024, 1051
Schieblock, Rotterdam 535 Schindler 254, 256, 934-935, 988, 1134, 2064, 2067, 2077, 2095 Schindler, Rudolph 256, 934-935, 988, 1134
Schinkel, Karl Friedrich 491, 1031, 1296-1297, 1750, 1833, 1835,
1948-1951
Schneider Schumacher Architekten
377
Scholer, Friedrich Eugen 892-893 Schuler, Matthias 821,1048-1049 Schultze-Naumburg, Paul 488-489, 498, 539
12.	Handbook of Stairs:	1914
a catalogue of components
and types (1993)
13.	Stairs in Potsdam (1994)	1944
14.	Spiritual stairs between earth and 1954 heaven (1996)
15.	Gothic and renaissance stairs (1999) 1956
16.	Stairs in art (2000)	1964
17.	Collected writings (vol. 4) (2001)	1976
18.	Spiritual stairs, fictional stairs (2001) 1982
19.	Stone spiral staircases in	1456
Turkish minarets (2002)
20.	Handrails and balustrades (2003)	1990
21.	Stair models (2007)	2014
22.	Stairs in Nuremberg (2008)	2016
23.	Man and stairs (2008)	2018
24.	Pupils look at stairs (2009)	2022
25.	A photographer's look at stairs (2009) 2023
26.	Stairs in the wild (2010)	2024
27.	Stairs of the world (2011)	2028
escalator	*>*0™ wto#®
Introduction	2037
Trajectory: straight path of the escalator 2038 Escalator * stair	2040
Hidden world	2042
Escalator vs. stair	2044
A look back:	2046
Harvard Guide to Shopping (2003)
Path not taken: the spiral	2054
Grand synthesis	2058
Manifesto vs. reality	2060
Wide-stepped escalator	2062
Power plays	2064
Genericide	2066
Crazy for novelty	2068
Asia gets the escalator	2070
Hong Kong's mega escalators	2072
Continuous rise: Kabul,	2075
Pyongyang, Ahmedabad Interlude: the travelator	2076
Procedures of the escalator	2078
Escalating laziness	2080
Stand on the right	2082
Customs of the escalator	2084
Escalator anxiety	2086
Maintenance	2088
End of the wooden escalator:	2090
Kings's Cross fire
Running to stand still	2092
Corporate consolidation	2094
Empty step phenomenon	2096
Escalator code	2098
Return of the curve	2100
Space-saving spiral	2102
LXXXVI
Janeiro 1110. 1238. 1246.
^^B?093, 2111 I . j. gociety 1255
l^Kf passage 560, 694, 1426 ^K>f Zhou 405 |Brl#Ancrene 705, 840, 1719 ^^|&rts, Henry 1590-1591
Hood Gardens 1089, 1340 ^^K3, 32, 46, 76, 656, 1041, 1047,
^^■Lfeller Center 2165, 2167 ^^Kgfeller, John D. 1612 i^Bo 1864, 1868, 2005-2006 Auguste 2258
^Ker's, Richard 366, 979, 1027, 1048, |^BLl051, 1514, 2069 ^Bje, Michael H. 80
^^pnan Forum 900, 1567, 1720,
I - 9, 2254 ^^Bhan Limes 103
^^Kesque 259, 571, 1108, 1854 ^Hgiticisrn 491, 526, 766, 1032, 1577 ^Btorantin 1560, 1579 ^■e 116, 132, 138, 203, 212, 226, 239, ^^■260, 378, 458, 460, 477, 774-777, i^Hl899, 931, 955, 1048, 1079, 1080, §^■9, 1094, 1096, 1138, 1147, 1150, H9, 1271, 1291, 1341, 1360-1361, |Hfe2, 1514, 1550, 1567, 1578, 1720, ¡^■h, 1936, 1941, 1953, 1961, 1963, f^K, 2138, 2254-2255, 2328, 2333 ^Beo and Juliet 1114-1115 ^^Key, George 918, 940,1049 Point Tower 940, 1049 ^^fielet, Jean-Baptiste 113, 392, 479 ^^H»p garden 1033, 1225 ^Bnba 46, 78
^^B16, 1752, 2123, 2134, 2142-2143, j^Bfe-2151, 2154-2157, 2176, 2202, ^Bl2-2213, 2216-2217, 2221 ^Hjtnauer, Michael 768-769, 859 ^Bsl, Aldo 319
■jterdam 36, 74, 76, 217, 364, 367, 480, j^^K494, 535, 538, 549, 655, 734, 736, ^B?; 871, 941, 1077, 1523, 1649, 1677, ¡Hti, 2005, 2229, 2253 Hfeseau, lean Jacques 390 ^HMCombaluzier 2168-2169
Botanic Gardens, Kew 999 »>1 Institute for British Archi-^Bs, RIBA 271, 381, 508, 842, 1048, 1590, 2333
^B>er 8, 54, 61-62, 320, 640, 829, 919, ^■4|.978-979, 1013, 1049, 1640, 2077, »2090, 2303
^B^ens, Peter Paul 1402
^^Ryi Andreas 33, 116
^^Hfsky, Bernard 1494, 1550
^Hblph, Paul 50, 58, 83, 966,
^Bfe-1205, 1246
^Hjgenberg, Sergius 170
^^Rfhomas 943
^■£{4-5, 18-19, 29, 35, 52, 54, 64, 73,
^Bp3;252, 321, 749, 1470
^^■1785, 2147, 2150
^Hfcrd, Count 223, 1459, 1504, 1511,
^B|l1, 146, 481, 526, 772, 774, 864, ¡■terns, 1268, 1282, 1316, 1477,
1674, 1687, 2166, 2293 ^Bkin, John 746 ^Bpelt 978
Variable speed escalators	2106
Captive audience
Lost in space	2108
Beyond the mall: Medellin	2110
cities without ground	2112
by adam frampton, jonathon solomon and clara wong
Escalator vs. stairs, redux	2114
elevator
Introduction	2123
Trajectory:going down, going up	2124
Anatomy	2126
Newsfeed	2128
Elevator magazines	2132
Modernization takes command	2134
Going up: deus ex machina	2136
Going down: mining	2140
Harz, Germany: the Manhattan of going down 2144 Fahrkunst	2146
Twisted iron cable	2147
Electric motor	2149
Traction	2150
Manhattan: the Harz of going up	2152
Safety brake	2154
Iconography of safety	2156
Core	2158
Elevator bank	2159
Elevator button	2160
Signal control	2161
American elevator optimism...	2166
...terminates with the core Eiffel tower: American vs.	2168
European elevators
Europe vs. Russia	2170
Elevator banks at the center of	2173
Stalinist symmetries
Institution of the elevator operator	2176
Movable room: elevator Interiors	2178
Elevator music	2184
site of contingency: the elevator	2186
as organizer of city narratives by andreas bernard
exposed core: the réintroduction	2192
of scenography by john portman & associates
From self service...	2196
...to dispatch control...	2198
...to fuzzy logic	2200
The Odyssey: the vertical and	2202
horizontal elevator
Journey of the odyssey	2208
Odyssey revisited	2210
Machine-room less elevator	2212
Generic elevator	2214
Schwerin Castle 1778-1779 Scotland 120, 728, 1301, 1316, 1448, 1574, 2290
Scott Brown, Denise 763, 1027,
1075, 1204, 1246 Scott, Michael 843 Scott, Ridley 1028 Scully, Vincent 772,859,1172,1246 Scuola di San Rocco 1936 Seagram Building 171-174, 176, 178, 257, 334, 709, 766, 872, 925, 1026 sealant 918, 945-949, 951-952, 965,
990, 993-994, 1048-1050, 1054 Sears Tower 82, 295, 1091, 1347 Seattle 360, 654, 832, 929, 969, 1086, 1654, 1703, 1720
Second World War (World War II)
62, 64, 364, 455, 508-509, 511, 717, 724, 772-773, 912, 914-916, 923, 926, 935, 938, 946-947, 959-960, 965, 973, 975, 978-979, 981, 990-993, 1003,1012-1014, 1023, 1143, 1172, 1193, 1309, 1335, 1337-1338, 1494, 1663, 1767, 2272, 2275
secret doors 600, 602 Sedlmayr, Hans 229, 768, 859 Seeberger, Charles 2050, 2052, 2056-2059, 2061, 2067, 2102 Seinfeld, Jerry 169, 565 seismic 68, 105, 396, 914 Sejima, Kazuyo 821, 823, 829, 992 semiotics 764-765, 913, 972, 1022, 2027, 2037
Semper, Gottfried 91,108-109,178, 203, 235, 239, 243, 380, 392, 1011, 1051, 1155,1403,1507-1509,1518,1551, 1937 Seneca 390,1411
sensor 41, 72, 89, 105, 343, 650, 653,
660, 953, 1006-1007, 1047, 1255, 1349, 1497, 1502, 1546, 1654, 1710, 1958, 2181-2182, 2186, 2273, 2305, 2311 Seoul, Korea 929,1018, 1024,1029, 1254, 1267, 1274, 2087 septic tank 1674, 1686, 1689, 1696,
1706, 1708
Serlio, Sebastiano 44,122, 203, 553, 695, 764, 896-897, 1961 Seville, Spain 721, 731,1108, 1197 sewer 261, 493, 1391, 1522, 1558, 1560, 1564-1565, 1567, 1573, 1580, 1590, 1592, 1594, 1597-1599, 1605, 1640-1641, 1674-1675, 1686-1689, 1702-1703, 1705, 1719 sexpartite 221 Shakers 57
Shakespeare, William 1114 Shakira 1239
Shanghai, China 307, 483, 485, 521, 535, 788, 917, 1024-1025, 1112, 2083, 2101
Sharon, Arieh 1191-1192, 1193 Sharoun, Hans 1835 sheep 104, 558, 560 sheet glass 746, 751, 782, 916 sheetrock 140-141, 166, 170,195, 201, 237, 252
Shenzhen 397-398, 433-434, 448, 537, 2078
The Shining (film) 711,1350, 1354 Shintoism 572
shoji 91, 549, 782-783, 1041, 1276, 1613 shopping mall 371, 830, 840, 980, 2075, 2110-2112
Shu, Wang 522-523 Shulman, Julius 236, 988 Shute, John 897 shutters 592, 665, 702, 704, 762, 770 774-777, 815, 842, 1041, 1046 Siberian fireplace 1452-1453, 1480 Sicheng, Liang 455, 487, 518-519 521-523, 539, 884, 1066 Sicily 241, 1789 Sick Building Syndrome 944, 952 1049
Siculus, Diodorus 2248 sidewalk 74, 870, 927, 1647, 2076, 2 siege 592, 598, 612, 1096-1097, 1576 Siegert, Bernhard 571, 580, 695 Siemens 813, 846, von Siemens, Werner 2144, 2149-2150
Siena, Italy 17, 871, 1099 Signal Control 2161-2162 Silica 738, 974 Silicon Valley 186, 535, 735 silver 635, 747, 927, 1447, 1579, 2124, 2141
Simmel, Georg 556, 695, 2186-2187 2226
Simondon, Gilbert 1048, 1519-152 1551
simulacrum 112 Singapore 82, 533, 561, 694, 788, 82 1039,1051,1214,2128,2223, 2230-2231
Singer Building 1259, 1347 siphon flush 1640 Sistine Chapel 385 Sisyphus 735 Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (S 330, 644, 924-925, 941, 980, 1026 sky bridge 953, 1266-1267, 1386 slaughterhouse 2256 slavery 107, 1134, 2319 sleeping balcony 1134 sliding door 549, 620, 659-661, 671, 734, 848, 883, 1215, 1276, 1697, 21 2233, 2235
Sloterdijk, Peter 151, 1291,1397, 1506-1507, 1551
slum 338, 963, 979, 1092, 1202, 1688, 1692-1695, 2037, 2111, 2117, 2235, 2237
smart 342, 345, 421, 547, 634, 647,! 694, 816, 912, 919, 923-924, 1006, 1 1500, 1655, 1703, 1775, 2128, 2238 smart building 1006 smartphone 1028, 1655 Smeaton, John 931 Smith, Baldwin 473-474, 477, 539 Smith, Will 1238-1239 Smithson, Alison and Peter 171, 1089, 1185, 1189, 1340 smoke detector 300, 314, 1373, 1378-1379, 1500-1501 smoke doctors 1403, 1456, 1532 Snohetta 151
snow 255, 447, 467, 471, 490-491, 494-495, 499, 502^503, 619, 662, 760, 773, 1128, 1316, 1354, 1469-1470, 1519/ 1753, 1777
Soane, John 144, 932, 1460-1461, 1509 Sobek, Werner 660-661, 826, 1048, 1499, 1681
Sobinco 644, 794, 796, 798-800, 808 Sochi Olympics 1558
Stadelmann, Rainer 2248 stairs
grand stair (Escalier Royal) 275, 1738-1742, 1785, 1843, 2250 Laurin Stair 1744, 1790-1791, 1882, 1892-1894
prefabricated stair 1756 spiral stair 1579, 1745,1767, 1778-1779, 1781, 1788, 1797, 1799, 1828-1830, 1834, 1840-1841, 1843-1844-1845, 1847, 1855, 1862, 1866-1867, 1881, 1888, 1890,
1902-1903, 1908-1911, 1913,
1920-1921, 1924-1936, 1960,
1982-1989
winding stair 1830, 1846, 1881, 1913, 1934, 1948
free stair 1832, 1847, 1900-1901 straight stair 1829, 1834, 1870, 1884, 1888, 1898, 1921, 1924, 1936, 1948 exterior stair 1753, 1832, 1900-1901, 1941, 1973, 1974-1975, 2027 garden stairs 1833, 1900-1901, 1942 'primitive' stairs 1922 pilgrimage stairs 1833,1940 stair eyes 1879
Stairwell 1001, 1382-1383, 1676, 1820, 1829, 1846-1847, 1862-1863, 1870 Stalin, Joseph 107, 521, 918-919, 938, 1001, 1140, 2065 Stalingrad 2272 standardization 116, 141, 182,
254, 256, 389, 421, 768, 915, 1293, 1615-1616, 1619, 1648, 1892, 2229 Starbucks 188, 528, 1646-1647 Statler Hotel, Buffalo 1561, 1619 Stealth Bomber 846 Steiff Toy Factory 1000,1051 Stephenson, Elliot O. 1747-1748, 1750-1751, 1764
Stirling, James 763, 915, 967-968, 2303 storm window 760-761 Street-in-the-sky 1088 stucco 243, 261, 492, 494-495, 967,
981, 1781
Stuttgart 488, 492, 500, 502, 660-661, 708, 823, 826, 892-893, 915, 967-968, 988, 1291, 1396-1397, 1681, 1720, 1833, 1835, 1892, 2183 styrofoam 318, 524-525, 981 Stovesandt and Nix 1934 subway 74, 216, 492, 831, 1391, 1646-1647, 1655, 1762, 2037,
2051, 2085, 2105, 2110, 2117 sukkah 1213
Sullivan, Louis 140, 208, 278, 1030, 1032-1033
Belt: the new rope	2216
Carbon: the new hemp	2217
Elevator determines tower design	2218
Ending the tyranny of the cable	2220
the elevator's social script	2224
by stefan hirschauer
Postscript: cultural cab expecations	2229
Core memories: Singapore	2230
schindler's survival strategy:	2233
paul friedl & hubert klumpner interview by rem koolhaas
ramp
Introduction	2245
Pyramids	2248
Palace of Knossos	2250
Tower of Babel: utopia / dystopia	2252
Captilone switch: from Forum to Vatican 2254 Flows of industry	2256
Revolution: Tatlin and Lenin	2258
Melnikov's sleephouse	2260
Penguin ramp	2261
Precursors to the Guggenheim	2262
Artists and the Guggenheim I	2264
Brasilia: Ramp as stage	2266
Intro: Tim Nugent & Claude Parent	2268
a life in ramps i: tim nugent	2274
interview by Stephan petermann Universality adopted	2288
Kafakaesque wheelchair ramp	2290
a life in ramps ii: claude parent	2292
interview by rem koolhaas arhitecture principe	2316
by claude parent and paul virilio Artists and the Guggenheim II	2328
Postscript: Brasilia	2330
Sumer, Sumerian 19, 60, 83, 625, 1564 Summerson, John 896-898, 905,
1067, 1185, 1554 superblock 1202 Supermax prison 650 supernatural 15, 1100, 1350, 1357 Superstudio 44-46, 82-83, 1714, 2316 surveillance 41,105,189, 210, 305, 343, 346-347, 590, 651, 654, 688, 693, 694, 1098, 1281, 1293, 1299, 1500, 1650-1651
sustainability 76, 211, 369, 387, 389, 396, 524, 532, 535, 670, 814, 843, 865, 1007, 1039, 1057, 1210, 1227, 1403, 1522, 1683, 2037 Swarovski 1673
f^Hl housing 535, 940, 979, 1172, ^^Hl202-1203, 1210, 1217, 1228, EotiS 1340, 1880 ¡^^■¡eres Centrales 1195 i^^Kford Manor1204 ^^Kaces d'Abraxas 942 ¡¡'First Houses 202 ^^^■Kitagata Apartments 1089 i^^BHousing 1191-1193 l^Kgasa Apartments 774-776 ^K-Marx-Hof 1075, 1172,
^■^'Choux1079, 1188-1189 ¡^■L South Houses 1202 ^Kjn Hood Gardens 1089, 1340 Blancas 1186-1187, 1189 ^^Key Towers 1205 ^Hpendas de las Cocheras ¡¡^■¿Sarria 1188-1189 ■Walden 1190-1191 ^Klism 521, 1075, 1080, 1172 ^Kst 164, 938, 1032, 1075, 1140, |^B-1143, 1172, 1183, 1247, 1779, ■761* 2186
^^Kty for Hygienic and Cheap Housing 1176
for the Promotion of Area ^^H^-ce Centres (SPARC)
^^■¡4690, 1693, 1696 ^^■tes 483, 1428 Hm 1005, 1009 ^H|:118, 134, 203, 433, 590-591, 593, ^^■611,615, 891,901,951, 1096, 1116, ^Hp1142, 1156, 1162, 1334, 1576, ^^■>1812, 1981
Jonathan 2112-2113 ^Ka of Sleep 2260 ^^Kjynasty 25, 61, 128, 401, 405, ^^Bt17, 425, 429, 441, 447, 1112, 1247 ^^^■Desert 105 Hag, Susan 871 Plrbonne 1166, 1551 ^^■Africa 117, 195, 648-649, 695, 1365, 1413, 1684, 1686, 2125, KtiO, 2261
^^Hgtrell Palace 1577 ^Bef Architects Convention 938 ^^^Balace of Culture and Science 522
^Bt Union (USSR) 480, 538, 673, ^^*918-919, 938-940, 1001, 1336,
space hotel 675 |Space Race 944, 950
^^^bh Steps, Rome 1941 ^^■Albert 508, 511, 1023-1024, ^^■^57, 2076 ^^K}ter, Oswald 486
^HSjoints 919, 984, 993, 995 ^^Kfscalator 2054, 2056, 2100-2101 ^^■29, 465, 468, 518, 1357, 1425,
Ppfgegjfeei; 1601, 1624 ^^Kler 300, 304, 308, 310-311, 368, |^H|T 372-1373, 1375 ^Hjfing 30, 56, 1559, 1624, 1629-1630, ^Hp 1678-1680, 1689, 1704, 1709 ^Hhustine 23, 1929 ^^Bplan 1431, 1436 ^^Hnien's cathedral 1843 ^^Kersburg 306, 478-479, 716, 999,
^Htus Cathedral 1840-1841, 1844
swimming pool 41, 359, 534, 1561,-2,16$	. i vaB
Switzerland 283, 508-509, 53^^936,,969. 971,,9fl^>tfl02, , 1CS3, 1034, 1048, 1127. 1129,1 ?54' 1923, 2064, 2067, 2086,
Sydney Opera House 278, 94^ 1049 Vi symbolism 112, 214, 259, ¡267.. 270, 365, 389; «,*45, 552, 555, 566-567, 571, 580, 604, 618, 632, 636-637,660„6§6,
-.»"rassisi "*
synagogue 91, 156, 472' .IdftiiC .Sdn-jin«!» O Syria 456, 474, 477, 7‘f2,'745 ■»; ¡C/iviUE	«
Systems furnitMBri1d}a1ut)i fieduri 2t Ibeht lueq
tabernacle 472	,
tablet 17, 315, 848, 1309, Tafuri, Manfredo 1185 Tait, Gordon 870,1056 Taj Mahal 126, 2289 Taliesin 254-255
mat yd weivisjrti
Tang Dynasty 401 441, 447, 521, 1270,, 17.19 0 Tange, Kenzo 514, 738
Tanizaki, lun’ichiro 782,858, 1471,1613, 1655; 17'20 Tanzania527, 1425, 1686, lTbffiC lo = -	: ilOiUqsO
Tassel, Emile 725
Tatami 5,27, 43, 48, 52, ^1,„?54, 620, 1425, 1431,, ;, vo‘:
Tati, Jacques 101, 668, 778
Tallin, Vladimir 1042, 2244, 2Ä8, 2261, 233(3 '/G; ‘n‘-
Taut; Bruno 131, 747, 987, 1050, 1183, 1185, 1247	1
Taylor, Herbert I594:erlnaßgu0 aril ol siosiu
Teale, Dr. T. Pidgin 1597
Team 10 1185,1188-1189 ar~. oc
Telegraph 2149, 2258
telephone 294, 333,' 526, 735, 49Ö/1617
Temenos 899-901 insgun mit :i aqnu
Temple of Eder 19/9
Temple of Heaven 219
tent 91, 108, 250-251, 309, 476-477, 509, 951, 1011,
1041,1 133,1425,2316
TSfrasson, AbbiWliq sb»slo :ii eqmsi ni ^BSa terrace 47, 147, 493-495, 50.1.-5Q3; 596, ><*86/776, 1002,,. ■•,'1033-1034, 1037, 1075, 1088, 1320HW3, .110$, 1187, 1195,
■otta 1427
Terragni, Giuseppe 378, 967,1043,1746-1147 terrorism 690, 848, 1163
textile 41, 109, 325, 377, 380, 782, 928, 934, 1011, 1032,
1305, 1352
Thailand 827, 1088, 1559, 1600, 1678, 1678 Thames River 259, 1590, 1592, 1594-1595 Thabit ibn Qurra 395
theater 31, 34, 66, 150, 168, 208, 228, 272-274, 278, 306-309, 311, 464, 985, 988, 1026, 1051, 1058, 1080,1088,1094,
1117, 1301, 1507, 1509, 1650, 1777, 1833, 1835, 2123, 2136-2137, 2166, 2261, 2270-2271, 2312-2313 thermae 1563
394, 400, 432, 477, 490-492, 538, 630, 715, 773, 795-796, 881, 956, 965, 1054, 1193, 1440, 1476, 1512, 1866-1867, 1911, 1929, 2005, 2009-2010, 2012-2013; 2136, 2143 Time & Life Building 768-769 titanium 912, 914, 918, 962 Tofukuji Temple 782 toilet building 1585,1693 toilet paper 1580, 1604, 1611, 1624, 1645, 1648, 1655, 1674-1676 toilet smuggling law 1661, 1719 Toledo Museum of Art 820, 992 Toilet, Casimir 284 Tolmezzo 1450 Tolstoy, Leo 1241, 1246 tomb 2, 11, 48, 60, 110, 113, 460, 472,
474, 477, 549, 624, 702, 707, 876-877, 886, 888-889, 1114, 1272, 1784, 1796, 1940
tongue-and-groove 222, 630 topology 1269, 1293, 1301 topos 1507 torana 552, 577, 694 Toronto 82, 906, 1203, 1230-1231, 1241, 1254, 1654, 1703, 1705, 1720 Torre David 2235-2236 Torre Velasca 1226 Torroja, Eduardo 504, 506, 508-509, 511-512, 516 torus 68, 1254 Toto 1672-1674, 1682-1683 Tower of Babel 1585, 2245, 2252-2253, 2258
Tower of Winds 1028 Trachtenberg, Marvin 393, 539 trading floor 16 trailer home 957, 963 Trajan's Column, Rome 1021 tram 932, 2226 trampoline 58, 1729, 1752 Transamerica Pyramid 942 transversal 1266-1269, 1270-1281, 1293 trauma 841, 1360, 1363 travelator 2038, 2052, 2072, 2076-2077 trench 493, 504, 1334-1335, 1564, 1570, Trente Glorieuses 1189,1195, 1247, 1740, 2272
triple glaze 660, 827, 843, 953, 1008 Trombe, Felix 919, 996,1004 tropical 985, 1045, 1106-1114, 1607,
1705, 1716, 2322 Trump Soho 703, 830 TSA (Transportation Safety Authority) 547, 676-678, 682-683, 686-687, 695
Thermostat 303, 318, 825, 1407,
1486-1487, 1496-1503, 1551 Thoreau, David 1470 Thyssenkrupp 2095, 2099, 2117, 2128-2129 tiger 1214
tile 7, 19-20, 27, 47, 60-62, 82-83, 127, 222-223, 252, 290, 297, 307, 329, 336, 351, 358-360, 371, 394, 421, 433, 454,
456, 474-475, 479, 481, 484, 490-492, 494, 498-503, 535,
552, 571, 921, 934-935, 955, 962, 968, 1031, 1054,
1096, 1311, 1390, 1443, 1445, 1477, 1645 Tillmans, Wolfgang 1105, III
timber 25, 35-36, 114-115, 134, 138, 215, 248, 252, 306, 390,
Tsien, Billie 970
tuberculosis 766, 1126-1128, 1131, 1133, 1538, 1613
Tudor 627, 713-714, 725, 1440, 1504 Tugendhat House 762,1043 Tulou 121
Tunbjork, Lars 722 Tunis 1104, 2255
Tunisia 1107, 1767, 1786-1787, 1972 Turkey 52, 78, 218, 251, 480, 1104, 1290, 1410, 1563, 1674, 1775, 1979, 1982-1989, 2289 Turkmenistan 874,1083 Turner, William 1031 Turrell, lames 2264, 2329 TV 186, 344, 1027, 1075, 1163-1164, 1407-1408, 1490, 1510, 1523, 1529, 2186
Twyford 1600-1601, 1608-1609 typhoid 1613, 1687 typhoon 1712
typical plan 1204, 1620, 2159, 2167 Tyvek 913, 951 Tzonis, Alexander 899-900, 905, 1067 1185
U-Value 827, 973, 975, 982
US Department of Housing and
Urban Development 1625
US National Institute of Standards
and Technology 1263, 1364, 1382,1395
UN Studio 928, 1029
UNESCO 508, 1548
Uganda 1709
Ugly Belgian Houses 810
Ungers, Oswald Mathias 765
Unité d'Habitation 936,1049, !200 ;
1202, 1341, 1531 United Nations 314 University of Bologna 508 Urban Think Tank 2236 urinal 1579, 1601, 1624, 1632-1633, 164* 1648-1649, 1653, 1661, 1677, 1689,, | 1700, 1705, 1720
Utopia 44, 183, 493, 517, 747, 939, 943/5 959, 979, 1041, 1051, 1172, 1206, 1225 j 1390, 1579-1580, 1621, 1951, 2123, ¡3 2252-2253
Utzon, lorn 279, 487, 539, 942, 1049 .Æ VDL Research House (Neutra)
256-257
VM Homes, Copenhagen 1242 ? vacuum 46, 64, 70, 78, 130, 950, 982, r| 988, 989, 1008, 1483, 1624, 1641, 1700 j Vago, Pierre 2295
valve closet 1584, 1590, 1600	, J
Van Alen, William 962 Van Eyck, Aldo 121,487, 539, 1185, 1481 Van Kannel, Theophilus 662-664, 670 Van Parys, Remi 794-796 Vancouver 115, 1215, 1251 Vanderbilt, George 1606 Vasari, Giorgio 215, 246 Vatican 479, 533, 1079, 1138, 1150,1360, 1578, 1846, 1961, 1963, 2255, 2289 t| vault 64, 127, 191, 221-223, 230,
241-242, 248-249, 255, 264-265, 275,.J 282, 284, 332, 337, 395, 456, 473-474, J 508, 513, 605, 887, 942, 1114, 1307, 4 1311, 1346, 1461, 1509, 1565,
1584-1585, 1612, 1767, 1798, 1929 Venice 6, 16, 240, 250, 279, 485, 539, ,ï| 638, 742, 770, 775-776, 1099, 1117, J 1448, 1768, 1794-1795, 1936, 2313 'Æ Venice Biennale 98-99, 144-145, 201^1 2211, 2220-2221, 2271, 2303-2304 i ventilator 258, 261, 799,1462-1463 4 Venturi, Robert 763, 768, 859, 1027,Æ 1075, 1204, 1246 Venus 1167, 1567, 1606, 1719 veranda 501, 620, 1088, 1094, 1257, >1 1268, 1514, 1693 Vercovicium 1558, 1560 vernacular 46, 82-84, 108, 203, 393, 486, j 538, 604, 827, 918, 943, 965, 971, 1030,a 1035, 1192, 1194-1197, 1199, 1268, | 1516
Verona, Italy 1044, 1114, 1246, 1791 i> vertigo 79, 1091, 2322 Versailles, Palace 54, 847, 1089,
1277, 2289
Versailles, Treaty of 1315
■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■■I
Virgins
^^K oruen & Associates 2066 and Albert Museum 269,
^Kan 91, 146, 180, 259, 269, 271,
VI
Kt 1303, 1305, 1307, 1311, 1337, K7 1443, 1466, 1577, 1590, 1659, 1719, 2178 games 846 l iMo, 202, 307, 461, 494, 509, 639, ¡¡hE|932. 955, 998, 1022-1023, 1075, ¡■fe, 1160, 1172-1173, 1182-1183,
■ 1246 1458, 1812, 1835, 1875, ¡¡»^8-1880, 1937, 2031, 2130, 2238 ^Kam 1254, 1539, 1767, 1784-1785,
l Vilk Aghion 935
^Hpirasole 1044 Vi a Mairea 762, 772 Miller 147 Rot,
^BSavoye 352, 913 lta||a Tugendhat 762, 1043 ^B'inci, Leonardo 381, 1350-1351, *560, 1579-1580, 1720, 1936 ^H(y, Rafael 870
Hence 51,132,1116 ^■Uet-le-Duc, Eugène 54, 100, 114, |HL?03, 392, 462, 464, 873, 1075, Pi 096-1099, 1185, 1587, 1924 H|o) Paul 2271, 2292-2295, 2298-H|b9; 2303-2305, 2316-2325, 2333 Bual fence 105 Htantini, Antonio 6 Eta 17à, 608, 778, 830, 1088, 1119,
1138, 1150, 1187, 1203, 1230, »232, 1255
vitrine 845, 1228
Eftivius, Marcus Polio 112, 150, 203,
Htl2, 390, 392, 394, 456, 477, 538-539, ^»?70, 868, 896, 905, 1030-1031, »423.3427, 1508-1509, 1551, 1729, »732. 1764, 1846, 2&40 »|Ensingen, Ulrich 1844-1845 Von Klenze, Leo 1909-1909 vfortex 1710.
d Vries, Gerrit 393, 538
5/VTO (World toilet Organization)
M|59, J687, 1721
n, Konrad 234
Wagner, Otto 494"-495, 524, 639,
W Jby, Curt A. 641
W Iker Art Center, Minneapolis 166 Walkie Talkie Building 870, 1066 . «Vail Street 848,'978, 1170,1658, 2128,
.Wat Street Journal 686, 695, 1502 ^»^1668
Eflpaper 93, 164-165, 1032
^Bjter, Thomas Ustick 478 (ton, Frederick 40, 61-62, 932 _Jchol, Peter 1758 »re, Isaac 1569 H^hol, Andy 5, 34,2185 Bner Brothers 169, 2184 Bfi down toilet 1604 ^Blhington Blackwell, George 246 »pington, D.C 180, 202, 282, 300, ^p8i,479, 549, 635, 667, 1048,
1050-1051, 1161, 1254, 1299, 1338, 1463, 1650, 1721, 1764,2111,2117, 2176, 2277, 2279, 2333 washlet 1562, 1624, 1631, 1675, 1682-1683, 1710-1711 washout 1600, 1603 water closet 1476, 1560, 1562-1563, 1565, 1584, 1587, 1990-1992, 1994, 1600, 1606, 1616, 1624, 1628, 1631, 1633-1634, 1640, 1648, 1661, 1719 watercourse 498, 501, 503, 1590 waterproof 62, 372, 499, 501-503, 720, 819, 913, 916, 918, 945-946, 955-956, 963, 965, 970, 1017, 1048 Weimar 490, 1172 Weissenhof Siedlung 488-489 Welbeck Abbey 1258,1291,1310-1317, 1396, 1446, 1447 welfare state 940, 979 Wells, H.G 836 Wenzhao, Robert 483, 539 West, Kanye 1238-1239 Westminster, London 134, 259-261, 269, 271, 381, 728, 1462, 1594 wet wall 93, 155, 1618 wheelchair 1674, 1751, 1767, 2131, 2245, 2249, 2270, 2272, 2276-2278, 2281-2282, 2284-2285, 2290-2291 White Collar Factory 190, 368-369 White House 148-149, 532, 1161, 1169, 1486-1487
Whole Earth Catalogue 1642, 1719 whole body imaging 683 WiFi 165, 1379, 1711 Wilford, Michael 763 Wilhelm I, Friedrich 1771, 1812, 1822 Wilkinson, William 224 William III 728 Williams, Tod 970 Willis (Sears) Tower 82, 295, 1091, 1347
wind-catchers 1494-1495 window tax 728-729, 858 Windsor Hotel 1362 Windsor, England 1600 Winter Garden 999, 1009, 1210-1211 wireless 343-344, 1259, 2235 wiring 28,47, 89, 91, 368, 373, 865, 1511;,2163 Wittenburg 1580 Wittgenstein, Ludwig 639 Wittkower, Rudolf 123 Wohnbad 1624,1636-1637 Wong, Clara 2112-2113 Wooden escalator £090-2091 Woods, Shadrach 1185..--1192,
Woolwich Rotunda, London 251 Woolworth Building T259, 1271, 1347 World Bank 1686, 1688, 1690, 1693,
World Cup 1111 226
World Expos 484, 919, 937, 939, 956,
1012, 1022, 1051
Brussels World's Fair, 1958 937, 939 Great Exhibition, London, 1851
646, 918-919, 987, 1050, 1118, 1124, 1508, 1559, 1592-1593, 1600, 1653, 2156
Exposition Universelle, Paris, 1889 526, 1041, 1051 Osaka, 1970 514-515, 919, 1016 Stockholm, 1930 1023
Chicago World Columbian Exhibition, 1893	l
91, 140, 1022
Chicago World's Fair, 1932 484, 956 World Health Organization 952, 1485, 1538, 1672,
1702, 1706, 1708, 1719
World Trade Center, New York City 1259, 1263,
1347, 1382-1386, 1396, 1729, 1760, 2037, 2125,
2130,2167
Wrangham, Richard 1412, 1534, 1551
Wren, Christopher 267, 271, 478-479, 1442
Wright, Frank Lloyd 57, 83, 91, 138, 146, 181, 254-257,
324, 380, 482, 516, 538, 750, 759, 762, 858, 934-935,
945, 947, 988, 1048-1049, 1172, 1246, 1477, 1480, 1513, 2261-2264, 2329, 2333	j
Xenakis, Iannis 937 Xiaoping, Deng 2070
YWCA Conference 1041	‘
Yale 3r., Linus 646
Yale University 336, 941, 994	J
Yamasaki, Minoru 509, 1344-1345, 1382
Yamashita, Kazumasa 767
Yangzhou, China 1259,1278
Yelp.com 833
Yemen 110, 580-581, 1104, 1107, 1588-1589
Yglesias, Caren 116	j
Yingzao Fashi (YZFS) 25, 60-61, 82-83, 396-455,
457,538,617,881	J
Yingzao Fuyuan 552, 576	*
YouTube 54, 82, 84, 345, 1640, 1721	!
Yuanda windows 788-789
Yurta 874	|
Zapata, Sergio 1	j
Ze Dong, Mao 521, 610, 1160, 1644	J
Zebrun, Cameron 166	■■
Zedong, Mao 521, 610,1160,1644	j
Zeiss, Carl 504, 512
Zeus 2, 15, 21, 82, 477, 1402, 1426, 1428
Ziggurat 1176, 1459, 1979, 2252, 2258	I
Zimbabwe 1561, 1687, 1720	;
zinc 2125
zodiac 487, 539
zoo 2261	J
Zuccari, Federico 246	\
Zuckerberg, Mark 192-193 Zumthor, Peter 376
Zurich 161, 377, 508-509, 510, 512, 766, 858, 1183,
1247, 1451, 1624, 2232, 2236, 2328	j
ETO »M [<
With no handles, buttons, or switches anywhere in the house, all systems, openings, and closures are controlled by a proto-tablet (made by Sobek 10 years before the mass introduction of tablets) -which Sobek demonstrates here for Koolhaas.
werner sobek (born 1953) is a german architect and engineer known for high-tech structural inventions - among them vacuum-supported façades and adaptive shell structures, asked to talk about a radical engineer's attitude towards architecture's oldest, even most prosaic components, sobek meets the editors first at his home in Stuttgart before the formal interview begins in his nearby office, house 128, completed in 2000, is a much-photographed - but, we realized, never properly captured - glass cube overlooking Stuttgart's valley, one of sobek's aims was to eliminate all handles: doors and windows melt into the ultra-thin glass skin, everything in the house - including its floor heating and cooling system - is controlled by a custom made tablet command station, making sobek's home about a decade ahead of the introduction of the tablet and the digitally-controlled smart home, (at the time of the interview, sobek had just launched a tech company spin-off to bring a german smart thermostat to market - years before nest et al.) nis overall goal might be described as high-performance sustainability, the holy grail is achieving the triple zero® standard he developed (meaning no fossil-based energy consumed, no emissions, and no waste) - but achieved with aesthetic refinement, only certain types of solar panel
f>ass muster, for example, with offices around the world, sobek rames the largest political, demographic, and environmental questions with a sense of rehearsed urgency - "to build a new environment for 2.5 billion people under 20 means we need to rebuild the world as it was in 1930 once more within ten years" -while freely acknowledging that his competence lies on the expensive high-end of technology and environmental control, es for the elements of architecture... for sobek, they are useful starting points but ultimately restrictive categories, in his vision of the future, most of the elements have either been made redundant by technology or been subsumed into continuous, multi-functional skins.
interview by rem koolhaas, Stephan triiby, james westcott Stuttgart, june 18, 2013
2013 Sobek on the gangplank entrance to the home he designed for himself in the late 1990s: House R128.

sensor
Werner Sobek [Pointing at device on wall.] This is a wireless sensor unit with a photovoltaic cell and a small battery. It measures temperature, humidity, and daylight intensity. It is also able to infiltrate airwaves: the sensor is linked to a self-learning building automation system. You can use it to switch on the lights or to raise the temperature. Or you can say:
"I will be back tonight at 11pm" and then the system will adapt the heating accordingly, making sure your home is comfortably warm when you return - and that you save as much energy as possible in the process. It is connected to a meteorology station so it knows exactly how the weather will develop in the next hours. Using this information it finds the exact moment to start the heating. When you enter your home it has the right temperature - not too late, not too soon. Students of mine took this idea and created a start-up to develop it into a commercial product - which, by the way, can help you use 40 percent less energy.
Rem Koolhaas So that alone could solve global warming?
WS Certainly not in itself, but it is a substantial contribution.
RK So why is it not known better?
WS We had to develop it from scratch. That took three to four years. Then we had to find companies to produce it. We tested it for one season, and it works, and now we're ready to take it to the market. RK I think one of the issues with global warming is a complete lack of coordination between businesses, countries, the EU.
WS And very often the objectives are in fact unreasonable. The German government for example favors thermal insulation of existing buildings; they provide financial support if you do it. This completely ignores the real problem: energy efficiency is nice, but it's C02 emissions that matter more. We should focus on this issue. I'm pretty sure there are other and better ways of achieving such a target.
insulation
lames Westcott Was that the campaign where the advertisement was images of buildings wearing woolly hats?
WS Exactly. If you do a very simple calculation, in Germany we have [hands out fact cards] about 35 million energetically inefficient housing units.
The average size of a housing unit in Germany is 82 square meters; the typical cost of thermal refurbishment is 700 to 800 euros per square meter. But let's take a very low number, like 500 euros per
square meter. So the refurbishment of a 70 square meter home would cost 35,000 euros. To put it in a nutshell: 35 million housing units to be insulated,
500 euros per square meter and 82 square meters per unit. This means that 1,400 billion euros have to be invested if we want to achieve the objectives of the German government. In comparison, rescuing the Euro zone is a small task...
RK ...compared to saving Germany.
WS It's an undoable thing.
RK I think this is a very common situation. All of us who are involved in the sector suffer: we have insights, but the insights are neutralized since we can't connect to the political level.
WS Or only in an insufficient way. I made it up the ladder to our Minister of Building Affairs. He was shocked and said: "Obviously nobody has calculated this in my department yet."
RK And is the 500 euros per square meter figure fair?
WS It's low, far too low to do it well. When I told the Minister last December, he got white-faced and said "We have to meet again in January as soon as you are back from Patagonia." When we met again, he said: "Your number is wrong." At first I was shocked. But he quickly added that he had asked all the specialists in his ministry and they said that 500 euros per square meter is far too low: you should calculate with 900 to 1,000 euros, which then leads to an investment of 3,000 billion euros in total.
RK And therefore you focus on other things, the management of what exists, through innovations like your intelligent energy system.
WS Because the system costs 10 euros per square meter, and saves you up to 40 percent of your energy needs.
RK Is this card you just gave us part of a method for making significant points?
WS It's for politicians. Now this [points to a photograph] is from a competition we won, a Plus Energy House that produces 170 percent of the energy it consumes. It stands in the center of Berlin.
It has no foundation, and it's 100 percent recyclable.
zoiz bttizienzhaus Plus Mouse, berlin, produces 170 percent of the energy it consumes.
■
g(ephan Triiby The interesting thing with regards to the elements °* architecture here is the floor, which ■ an inductive charging device. You just park your electric car, and it gets charged up. rK So this produces 70 percent more energy than it needs, and that feeds the car? yys The house produces 170 per cent of its energy needs itself from renewable sources. 100 percent for the house, 60 percent for the cars, 10 percent for the grid. There are two electric cars and one electric bicycle. The house consumes around 10,000 kwH, and there are 7,000 left for the two cars and the bicycle.
RK How do you generate the energy?
WS It's only photovoltaics, on the roof and the southern façade. The latter is not totally effective because it's vertical and there are some trees in front of it. And the PV panels on the façade are amorphous.
RK What is an amorphous photovoltaic?
WS Visually it has a very smooth black surface, not the typical crystallized pattern, which I don't like. However, on the roof we have the crystallized pattern. RK How much room is there in your work for your personal preferences, not to say obsessions? In other words, if you overcame your taste, and would be willing to have an ugly photovoltaic...
WS If it is ugly I wouldn't use it. I have only one goal, and this is that the entire built environment has to be sustainable and aesthetic at the same time.
WS [Showing photograph] This is D10, another house, in Biberach an der Riss. It's a Plus Energy House that produces about 120 percent of its energy needs from renewable sources, and of course it's also fully recyclable. It's very, say, Calvinistic on the inside, very minimalized. During wintertime the floor has different temperature zones. So if you close your eyes and walk barefooted, you know exactly where you are.
RK So it's a sort of poetry?
WS Yes, it's nonvisual architecture. At night you know where you are, even if you don't switch on the lights. RK I'm interested how one has to touch architecture less and less, for example in your own house, where there are no handles. But here the floor can be manipulated with different heats, and you almost always have to touch the floor.
WS Yes, this was my intention. People feel it, they welcome it.
RK So the paths where people move through the house are cooler?
WS The bathroom is a warm zone, as are the kitchen, dressing room and breakfast areas. The walkways and the floor around the bed are cooler.
RK How does this house achieve the 120 percent rating?
WS The entire roof is covered with photovoltaics.
RK But the amorphous black ones?
WS Yes, because there are other houses around.
We have these cantilevering roofs that shade the casement; we have no direct sunlight in summer -
there is no direct cooling load. In my own house, in Stuttgart, we do have a cooling load,
because it is too radical. The glass for D10, which
2013 D10 House, in Biberach an der Riss, produces 120 percent of its energy needs from renewable sources, "and of course it's also fully recyclable."
comes in huge pieces
- 2.8 by 3.2 meters - is triple glazed, perfect quality, also with a krypton filling and an invisible metallic coating. The glass for R128 shows even better thermal qualities. It is also triple glazing with krypton filling and in addition has a special low-e coating on the center pane. The center pane is made of PET-film. For R128, it was the first time this glass had been made. So I didn't even get a warranty from the supplier.
RK Is there any advantage to big glass panels?
WS You have less framing, and the framing is usually the weakest point, where you have thermal bridges. But what interests me more is that less framing reduces the visual obstacle. At R128, we had to have 80 mm wide strips of plastic covering the joints and the adjacent spacers. The reason for this is to protect the glue fixing the spacer to the glass from UV-radiation. I would be much happier if we didn't have to do this, because we even minimized the width of joints themselves, which makes their optical appearance much more elegant. We even minimized the size of the clamps or clips holding the glass panes: just four 18 x 18mm clips are holding a piece of glass with a dead weight of 200kg. However, glue technology was not that far advanced in 1999, so we had to take the solution of the plastic strips, which we still have at R128. It is a document of its time.
tolerance & precision to **
ST Can we connect this with the word “tolerance?" If we are asked to place a door into a concrete wall, you work with tolerances. But you criticize the architectural world for having archaic tolerances.
WS Because the technologies we are applying in the building sector are not today's technologies. If we really want to minimize the use of material and waste produced, if we want to optimize the inherent quality of our built environment, then we have to work with other tools and methods, which then, as a nice side effect, allow us to make things more precise. If you go more precise you have much more fun in your work, you don't waste as much.
3W But might that kind of precision be extravagant in itself?
WS Definitely not. Clarity, inherent logic and precision are an attitude. They are my attitude.
And they do not yield higher building costs. Some of my buildings may look expensive, but they are not.
RK How much are they?
WS With clients I always have one price, which includes value-added tax plus the engineers' and architects' fees, and this is less than 5,000 euros per square meter. This is not expensive. Not at all, for a plus-energy house. You never need to buy oil or gas for your house again.
building poor
RK Do you think there are more primitive techniques that would enable you to achieve more or less the same results - or better - with less money, less technology, less...
WS This is something I think about a lot, especially when I travel in poorer countries. There is an absolute need to provide building techniques and tools for people who cannot afford what we can afford. But on the other hand, I have to admit that it would be too complex for me to also solve those things. So I focus on my own work, which might be applicable for two out of seven buildings, knowing very well that this might be criticized. I'm incompetent when it comes to improving housing in Mumbai.
RK Was this your first realization of this issue?
WS I had already looked at it in 1983, in North Yemen.
RK What drove your interests?
WS Architecture. Because there's this wonderful type of stone house there built from local material. Every house has a courtyard, no windows at the ground floor, only on the upper floors, things like that.
RK So there are techniques that are more primitive
that succeed in the same way as yours?
WS Yes and no. What do we really mean if we talk about "succeeding"? We have to clearly state that these traditional buildings often provide less thermal comfort and, often enough, have serious problems when it comes to sanitary conditions and hygiene. In the end, it is quite simple: one has to pay for a level of structural safety, comfort, energy consumption and hygiene.
RK Do you think we are entering a final phase in which all materials are going to be the same, more or less, forever? Currently we can think of glass buildings as a fashion that could go away. But we could also state that maybe they will never go away, this is it, we've reached the final point we thought we were at in 1989 when the Berlin Wall fell, and with it a political system. Democracy everywhere, glass everywhere.
WS I don't think that we are there.
RK When will we be there? And will there be 'theres - more than one?
WS I think so. However, predicting the future always includes the risk of failing...
RK So let's talk about the present.
clay walls
WS Today, we do not play the entire keyboard. We have forgotten about a series of tools and meth-ods and possibilities. For example, for the next house I'm designing, I'm working with clay walls.
RK Clay, OK. So this is going back to go forward. WS I would say it is about remembering. There are so many things to be remembered, others to be investigated. For example materials and combinations of materials like mineral fibers or natural fibers and clay. One could spend a lifetime researching them. There are many things that we don't know enough about, like the storage of humidity in a clay wall, how to simplify and how to optimize it. If we use multilayered textiles, or textiles in combination with wooden layers, or clay layers, then we open up a whole new world. You then have the clay to store humidity, and the textiles create a front that keeps the rainwater away, but not the moisture. Breathable skins, energy-harvesting, energy-storing skins - these are some of the things we are going after.
JW What about solid materials?
WS We have the typical set: concrete, brick, glass, steel, aluminum, wood. When I heard that list at one of my first lectures as a student, I thought it was totally unsatisfying, because there is this narrowing down of the materials to a kit, which is proven and
2018 "There are many things that we don't know enough about, like the storage of humidity in a clay wall" - installed here In the NEST research building at the Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Dubendorf.
has a certain tradition. At this time I started to fall in love with fabric, with titanium, carbon fiber, clay, or, later, with a combination of these materials - but not comPos'tes where things become inseparable. From the very beginning, I realized that using composite materials is very good for lightweight structures, but jt y0u cannot decompose them later on it does not make any sense. Now I'm more into researching composite- layered and sandwich structures that can be easily decomposed. And there is a new idea: a composite which is made of one material only. If we, for example, embed high-strength mineral fibers into a mineral matrix, recyclability is not an issue anymore.
■ément-free
ST Do you think your interest in skins has anything to do with elements, or do you think that the idea of the element is not part of that discourse?
WS No. I come from a totally different direction.
ST So do you think your work is element-free?
WS Yes. To talk of architectural elements is OK if we need to tell students how to divide the world into categories, and that one of those is architecture, which then has subcategories when it comes to construction, like the wall, the window, and the door. To make students understand what is out there, I say OK, one of the categorizations is the elements, but next year we won't talk in terms of elements any longer - we will talk in terms of 3D force systems, or 3D acoustic phenomena. We might have to end with something that is called an element, because we have to buy it, say from a façade contractor, but the approach is totally different.
RK We realize that there is a crisis in which we are moving to a different condition, and this is why we are talking to you. But we are also documenting how in the time that elements were or are viable, there was an unbelievable richness in terms of decoration, comfort, intelligence, that was regularly displayed. While in the tendency to minimalism, the rejection of symbolism, a lot of that richness disappears. That is why, even though minimalism is a very défendable drive and to some extent one that I also share, I am increasingly aware that it doesn't make everybody very happy, and that it also made too many domains disappear.
ascetic. It is never Calvinistic, it is rich. You always want to touch it, or you experience it barefooted, you hear it, things like that. And even in the D10 House, there's a golden door...
RK OK, a golden door. So there is a moment of symbolism.
WS Of luxury, of richness, of contradiction.
RK And it's a golden door to the outside?
WS No, it is a sliding door to the kitchen.
ST What I find interesting in your architecture is that there is actually a strong presence of exuberant elements.
WS Yes and no. But in my work, these elements are never an add-on. They are always an integral part of a solution. However, a sliding door could be of wood only, puristic, sand blasted, painted or whatever. I create surfaces that surprise, which make the hand stroke the surface, which make people fall in love with them. So the gold leaf covered sliding door is not decorative, but a highly functional element with my interpretation of the qualities that a surface should have.
parametrics
Bolden door
WS Yes. But in all my work, at first glance you might say it is minimal-istic, but it is never austere or
RK What is your opinion on parametrics?
WS It is important but overestimated. It is important because it allows us to create a model of the building that can be changed easily without huge effort and without making mistakes. It allows the total documentation of a building. The overestimation, in my opinion, is that people talk about parametrics but not about the direction in which we should develop it. It has become a hype. For me it's a tool, like a screwdriver, but not a design method.
RK We know that looking at the elements is the exact opposite of parametric design, where it seems to be about developing a single element, or condition, that takes on any role, and which seems to resist any orthogonality. Nevertheless, in your case, it seems as if orthogonality is extremely compatible with a degree
of scientific thinking. Is that just your personal taste, or do you think there is something more to be said about orthogonality?
WS The more or less non-existence of orthogonality in solutions developed by parametric design
2013 "At first glance you might say [my work] is minimalisée, but it is never austere or ascetic." Golden door in the D10 House, Biberach an der Riss.
is something we need to discuss. I think that things become much easier if one agrees to a few geometric restrictions which all the elements combined in a building have to keep. Basing a building, including all its fit-outs, on a 120 mm and 90 degree restriction is definitely not responsible for the aesthetic and environmental crisis architecture is in today. On the other side, I have to admit that I have a certain preference for orthogonality. It may be a personal taste. It's not really science-based.
RK Have you spoken to Patrik Schumacher?
WS Yes. But we haven't discussed this topic yet.
By the way, we do many buildings for him and Zaha Hadid.
RK Which buildings have you worked on?
WS For example, the Heydar Aliyev Center in Baku, Azerbaijan, was a geometrically highly complicated thing, with 14,000 different façade panels inside and outside.
RK Are you doing engineering, or specifications?
WS For Patrik, typically the façade engineering, the façade technology. We just finished the design for a huge façade for Jean Nouvel's museum in Qatar.
ST Can we go back to Baku? I was surprised to hear that in a parametric building there is something like a façade that can be identified. How does that work in a parametric building?
WS You could call it skin. But if you put up an advertisement looking for a 'skin contractor,' nobody would call. Therefore you're safer with 'façade contractor.' But it's much better to talk about a skin. ST Which industry do you think is most interested in this sort of innovation? Is it the façade industry, the floor industry, the roof industry?
WS It is typically the façade industry, because they underwent many changes and challenges in the last 20 years. Façade technology has developed very fast, and there are very many open minds there, whereas industries like flooring are clearly defined fields, where people cannot really move. Façade is where most of the movement is.
RK Are there Chinese experts that you've ever encountered and basically thought with?
WS We work a lot with Chinese façade contractors. There is a very fast development underway, and the point in time when they are going to pass our technological level is quite predictable. Because there's just much more building, and much more intense pressure to succeed than here. Also in Turkey there are façade contractors and other companies who are absolutely willing to invent and to jump over hurdles, to introduce new technologies because they are convinced that what we currently have is insufficient. Look at the 1950s and 60s in the concrete industry, look at Morandi and all the other
people designing wonderful precast elements.
This is more or less all gone. The technological level on precast concrete is nowadays the same as it was in 1980.
RK How do you account for this disappearance of sophistication?
WS It goes along with the disappearance of craftsmanship in the European sense. And with the loss of clients which are willing and capable of valuing quality. The so-called "value-engineering" does the rest. I still don't understand why engineers accepted that their profession is related to such a procedure. Another phenomenon is that many contractors gave up doing research. In Germany, in the 1970s, all relevant contractors gave up doing research. They had outstanding research departments before, with very knowledgeable people.
But this is no longer the case. Economic reasons are the keywords typically mentioned when you ask why it happened.
RK I think this is all part of not being challenged. There is so much building going on that they could easily avoid challenge.
vollkasko mentalität
WS People nowadays don't want to take any risk. Everyone in Germany as well as in the western world wants full-coverage insurance. "Vollkasko Mentalität," as the philosopher Peter Sloterdijk calls it. It means "total coverage insurance," against everything - including your own stupidity. And if everyone would do research with this mentality in place, nothing would happen. There are no bloody noses, nobody is taking the risk to fail. Where in our profession is the avant-garde? Hegel said: The only failure is to avoid taking the risk of failing.
ST Could we say that here, you are the engineer when you speak about this, and when you speak about the golden door you are the architect?
WS I would not even know what my profession is. And I'm not interested in defining it, because then I would limit myself. When I was a young boy, I was very much attracted to fashion design. I'm probably the only engineer in the world who could tell you which collection of Yves Saint Laurent was designed when. For example his "Ballets Russes," when was that, why was that, what was the context...
RK What kind of milieu do you come from?
WS My father was a metal engineer; he worked at the oldest industrial company in the world, which has been producing since 1345 without interruption. ST What is the name of the company?
WS Schwäbische Hüttenwerke. It's about 85 km from here.
RK And your mother?
yyg She was not educated, because she was a war child. But this intensive looking at the work 0f Valentino, Laurent, etc. guided me into a world 0f surfaces, of colors, also of decorations - a lot of surface effects such as folds...
RK Also of structure, because the way seams... WS Exactly. And now, overcoming this extreme narrowing down of the abilities of textiles - since prei Otto - we want to make it more than a tactile richness: we are researching acoustic qualities of folding textiles, structural qualities, and so on.
RK For me this is one of the most fascinating parts of your work: where you use one element to change the conditions of another. I must ask, in a different loot related question, why is air such an underestimated transforming element?
WS I don't know.
RK Because it's not visible?
WS It is visible! No, building with air is just something that people are not trained to do. Maybe an air-supported dome is about as far as it goes. You may not know about the first vacuum-based façade ever built.
ST At Sachsenhausen?
WS Yes. This is a building using air in a noncon-ventional way. It's a steel space frame, with a clear span of 40 by 50 meters, with huge prefabricated textile panels thrown over it, clamped airtight, and then vacuum-stabilized. So what you see here is
2,000	square meters of fabric clinging to the ceiling with negative pressure. Building with air - or rather with the absence of it. If you switch off the vacuum pump, the textile cover slowly relaxes and you could easily remove and recycle it. The energy consumption of that vacuum pump is, I think, equivalent to eight square meters of photovoltaics.
ST Do you think you could use this innovation also for office buildings?
WS Why not?
ST Or to design a false ceiling in an office building? WS Yes, or even an exterior skin. We are already able to design something which is easy to install and simple to dismantle, and has a plain surface. But we could also combine this with folding patterns on the outer surface, and not only make the folding patterns decorative, but also for diverting rainwater, avoiding icicles, absorbing sound etc.
pt roof
ST What about the roof? The roof seems to be an clement that is closely related to sustainability - the
white roof movement, the blue roof, the green roof... WS I would like to consider the roof as part of the skin. For me, the roof is something inseparable from the façade. There are functions it has to fulfill, from energy harvesting to light transmission, to all the technical aspects summarized under recyclability and sustainability. I think we need a bit more fantasy in how to shape, how to color, how to materialize our roofs. What we have in many countries is merely a prescription of the geometric appearance - whether it must be a gabled roof, or whatever. I think this is too limiting.
ST With your own house, were there any building regulations forbidding flat roofs, which you had to fight? WS R128 does not have a flat roof.
ST Because there are no flat roofs.
WS R128 has a hipped roof with a partial cut-off. It is in full congruence with the building code. You need to know that building administration in Stuttgart is very strict. So there was no chance for me to come up with a drawing showing a flat roof. I had to interpret the code. The surprising element is that I finally came up with cutting off more or less the entire roof - an interpretation of the building code that is legally fully OK.
RK I'm very surprised by the roof - it's charged with so few functions. Because it's not visible, so you could abuse it and make it perform a lot more than it typically does. For instance, it could have much greater storage abilities than it does in recent architecture. It's very rarely used - for example, there's really no intelligent language about terraces on roofs. It's always an added thing. That could be one element where you could invent a lot if you really focus on it.
ST You designed a couple of roofs that are relatives of tents. Do you see a future in a tent-like roof?
WS Not really. The tents I did were for very specific functions, like a temporary stage for the Pope, and exhibition pavilions. The roof is a very functional element. In an office building there is typically just a mess on the top of it, the cooling units, the antennas and so on. Maybe there's sometimes a blind to hide it, but if you look from the top you quickly realize that we should integrate those things more. There's this world of HVAC, which is a world of people not at all educated in architecture or structural design. They don't even have any idea who Maillart is. They come from the machine building industry and they implement their stuff, which is...
RK ...a total nightmare. Why are plenums not used more? Because I think that would, in a way, end their reign of terror.
WS The idea of plenums, of interdisciplinarity, of co-operation, typically does not work, even if their
necessity is indisputable. During their studies, students are carefully separated according to their different disciplines. It is the professors themselves who are unwilling to bridge the gaps, to overcome hurdles. The so-called praxis with its time and cost pressure does the rest. Not to forget the fact that the teams working together at university are typically composed for one project only. At my institute I try to circumvent this by bringing people together repeatedly in the same team. But to come back to HVAC: it has a big importance for the aesthetics of a building, but the people in charge of HVAC are mostly completely unaware of what they are doing to the architecture. We should oblige HVAC people to introduce aesthetics into their duct and wire layout. And if they do so, you could even leave the hood open because it looks nice.
ceiling vs. floor
ST Do you see any future in the ceiling?
RK I would like to complicate the question: what is actually the difference between the ceiling and the floor? Is it one thing, or is it two things?
WS Up to now we walk on the one and don't walk on the other. I think that's maybe the only difference. RK Typically, the floor can be charged with heating, and that's really all, whereas the ceiling is charged with more things. But there is a philosophy of air coming through the floor. Is this simply a matter of fashion?
WS Oh, there's a lot of logic behind it. If the air comes through the floor you have the problem that dust and dirt might be blown up into the air...
RK Cycled - which is a problem in museums, for instance.
ST But to come back to this question of ceiling or floor, in your house you used the ceiling for HVAC, and in other projects, you used the floor. Is that an accident?
WS For me the one is just as good as the other.
It just depends on the specific problem. If we have a multilevel building, we can have a raised floor; if it hangs downwards, we call it the ceiling. But the functionality is the same. We do this in office buildings, because, say, walking noise protection is not that important, and we have a lot of cabling that we don't need in residential buildings. Most of our residential buildings have a suspended ceiling, which provides fresh air, heat, and cooling.
partition
RK Let's talk about the partition. It's interesting to consider whether the partition is on its way out,

or whether its current unpopularity will soon reverse How you could charge partitions with additional functions - partitions could also potentially illuminate or could be the universal system that you talk about in terms of heat.
WS In the projects we've developed over the last few years, the preconditioned air supply comes from the floor or from the ceiling, which makes sense because the distribution is much easier. I think effects like sound absorption and humidity absorption are something where walls, or partitions, could be very important. You could add more functionality to them than being just an obstacle to a visual connection -light, for example. I think this is probably the trend.
RK This is the one element where there is really a clear appetite for textile solutions. The dilemma is how to solve the rigidity issue if you're dealing with a textile.
WS Foam structures. Showing a textile skin. Within my own work I am actually on my way to freeing the partitions from any wiring, electricity, water, ducts, or whatever. It makes much more sense to embed all this in the ceiling or the flooring, but not in the walls. Wall plugs as you see them in this room - this is not the future.
ST According to our research, partition walls are also mainly driven by fire protection.
RK You could say that almost every element suffers from the obligation for fire protection. But you can actually solve it in an efficient way - there is a kind of bomb that sucks all the oxygen out of a space... WS Fire protection is becoming more and more of an issue, for example in the new airport of Berlin, with a trend towards protecting people from anything - a vollkasko mentalitat.
RK Do you know the inside story of the new Berlin airport? Is fireproofing the most serious obstacle? WS It's a serious issue, but it's not the only one. I know a lot about the inside story but please understand that I do not want to talk about it. The media reported quite a lot about it already. Things like the idea of having specially trained people to stand guard and operate the doors in case of fire.
RK That sounds like another element: human smoke detector.
WS Vollkasko mentalitat again. It is something which spreads out in regions like the United States and then comes to central Europe. It creates a lot of work for lawyers, and endless restrictions, for example, to the car industry, to architecture, to structural engineering. We become entangled in a web defined by all those restrictions, and at the very end innovation is no longer possible because you keep on hitting restrictions. In places like Russia and China, there is much more openness because there is not
2005 "If you switch off the vacuum pump, the textile cover slowly relaxes and you could easily remove and recycle it." Station-Z: covering for crematorium at Sachsenhausen concentration camp.
t that Vollkasko. They are still moving upwards -U you climb upwards, you think totally differently. rK The point is that that mentality is politically the easiest way to give the citizens of those countries the idea that they're protected. So it's entering very quickly in Dubai and even in Russia. Because it's the one thing that you can offer, an incentive without democracy.
WS Right - but we have the same situation here.
"We serve you and we protect you."
■invent the door
rK I'm wondering whether it would be good to simply name every element and get your response. You can respond emotionally, you can say that it is dead, or that it's coming alive. Let's start with the
door.
WS I think the door should be reinvented. Overcome the handle. Overcome the physical object that somehow turns against you.
RK I think in the case of the door, the more you abandon the physical, the more you surrender to a scary, Orwellian, insidious situation.
WS You asked me for a frank statement. When the famous Swiss engineer Robert Maillart was doing his first bridges, there were always cracks close to the abutments. So he added a little more reinforcement, and a little more on the next bridge, but still there were cracks, and he didn't understand why. Then he made a very fundamental statement, which is part of my philosophy. He said: "If the walls crack then I will not have them in future bridges anymore." And this is what I mean with the door. If I consider this to be something in my daily life to overcome, my radical statement is to just get rid of it. What is the door for? OK, it should be something that is soundproof, airtight. Can we achieve this with other means? This is the question I am asking my people, which gives them a nervous breakdown.
RK Do you have any sympathy for particular types of doors - for pivoting doors or revolving doors?
WS Maybe there should not be a rigid physical piece that turns or slips or pivots, maybe it should be something soft, for example something inflatable made from fabric.
RK But movement - isn't that a particular quality?
I love the revolving door because it gives me the ability to change its spin.
WS Yes, there's a quality to that.
ST I was very interested in the nonexistence of doors in your house. I think a burglar couldn't even find the door...
RK Do you think that the door will become less or more important in the future?
WS I think less.
RK Because? People are less interested in defining their own territory, or they want to share their interiors, or...
WS I think this sharing of the interior will become more important in the future. There will be more openness, more communication. But the door as an element of architectural importance where you put effort into it, to make it functional, make it look great - this effect will probably be diminished while other things become more important. So this is a rebalancing of the importance of the elements.
DW You've said that the future always ends either with, or in, the toilet. What did you mean by that?
WS I'm not really a toilet specialist, but it's just something that I realized, whenever people do a design that they consider future-oriented, either biomorphic or whatever, all of that ends at the door to the toilet. What we should do first is to develop words that are commonly accepted, to describe what's going on. And then analyze what could be optimized, what could be changed, to make it more comfortable, more hygienic.
TW There is a lot of innovation in the toilet in Japan, all oriented toward comfort.
RK I think in the absence of the concept, Asia is extremely interested in comfort, and you could say that they modernized at the point when we started to talk about comfort. When I was working in the US on the public library in Seattle, my ear picked up the word comfort - "more comfortable" - and it began to define the steepness of staircases, the steepness of ramps, the interiors, the softness of every material. WS In Japan there was something in the 1970s called the human washing machine, which was a shower without water that was based on high-frequency radiation, so you just stepped in and there was an electric field established and you walked out dry as before, but you were clean.
RK I think we should stop. This has been an unbelievably interesting morning, and sorry to irritate you.
WS It's OK.
RK We are also trying to irritate ourselves.
WS Yes, and I take the freedom to, let's say, doubt your categorizations. Otherwise it's not fruitful.
RK We are comfortable with that.
2000 "House R128 does not have a flat roof. It has a hipped roof with a partial cut-off. It is in full congruence with the building code."
elements of architecture
ft* S' m H PV WM ™ m ,R|fL S	¡»g
J0 II I OL 'm.m iEmk ¡1 m 1 * §Ej^
I	if	III	:i
■ -i i;V>3eli Of ,b9tq i-30S vi'iOmmOO 91', '-■: OV	'inCVi^'/C b'i-rv,
I. • W ■	M
architecture
k-as-exhibitîon...
areas the exhibition typically cornes first and the alogue boils down and documents its components, book came first... the exhibition in the Venice nnale's central pavilion was a three-dimensional iization of the book's key stories and realizations...

1

■■■■HM




ïï.
tfiiimor

n WAR]
v.• »Mit miiiW xrilli
wak]
SJSJ tW'lii >*ii£

HVAC
" learning' thermostat
radiant
mobile heat beams
P1448
»■'■M
P1546
ah n.
AiJ fifi
Ail IM
1
image credits
Wolfgang tillmans V-XXXVI
luna
Lll
werner sobek / zooey braun XCIII, XCIV, XCV, XCVI,C
amo
XCI, Cll, CXIII-CXIV, CXXVIV-CXXVV, CXLIIl-CXLIV, CXXXIII-CXXXIV CXLV-CXLVI, CLIII-CLIV, CLVII-CLVIII, CLXVII-CLXVIII, CLXXV-CLXXVI
philippe ruault
CVII-CVIII, CXVII-CXVIII, cxli-cxlii, clxix-clxx
andrea sarti
CXXI-CXXII, CXXIII-CXXIV, CXXXVIV-CXXXV, CLIX-CLX, CLXXXI-CLXXXII, CLXXXIII-CLXXXIV
francesco galli
CV-CVI, CIX-CX, CXI-CXII, CXV-CXVI, CXXV, CXXVI, CXXVII-CXXVIII, CXXXV-CXXXVI, CLI-CLII, CLV-CLVI, CLXI-CLXII, CLXIII-CLXIV, CLXV-CLXVII, CLXXI-CLXXII, CLXXIII-CLXXIV
giorgio de vecchi
CXIX-CXX, CXLVII-CXLVIII, CXLVII-CXLVIII, CXLIX-CL
hans werlemann CXXXI-CXXXII
irma boom CLXXIX-CLXXX
mit sensible cities lab / aaron nevin CLXXVII-CLXXVIII

CORRIDOR
Where once utility was a virtue, the 21st century finds itself curiously incapable of accepting the utilitarian... comfort has replaced it, even in elements like the corridor that are stretched and meant to be crossed in a minimum of time... (InterContinental, Davos.)
CORRIDOR
PAGE 1
contributors stephan trüby hans werlemann kevin mcleod
...the word corridore - a person who runs to transfer messages, and later the space for running next to city walls -first appears in 14th century Europe... by the 19th century, the corridor finds its calling as a device for organizing huge quantities of cells in the new institutions of modernity (prisons, asylums, country piles, social housing projects)... confronted by the imperative of the open plan since the 20th century, where tne issue of connecting multiple separate rooms is moot, the corridor is banished from architecture as a scenographic and social tool... the corridor now lurks backstage: required, and designed, by safety codes, and meant to be used only in a state of panic while exiting a building in an emergency, the contemporary corridor is ironically a confirmation of our worst fears of corridor as jonely, blank, interminable passage... now that the corridor is reduced to an escape route, we will never, for that reason, be able to escape it... meanwhile corridors thrive as meta-hors: there are economic corridors, wildlife corridors, eritage corridors...
corridor
PAGE 2
The Topological Birth of the Corridor. The upper diagram shows that four rooms (the black dots) can be linked directly to each other on a plane, while the lower diagram shows that five rooms cannot be linked directly to each other anymore on one plane - a torus would be needed in order to link them directly. Or, in a world dominated by gravity, a corridor Is needed... (Stephan Triiby, Geschichte des Korridors, Karlsruhe: Hochschule für Gestaltung, 2011.)
PAGE 3
CORR|DOR
One of the earliest instances of the notion of the corridor is in 12th century BC Chinese bronze Inscriptions. The root of the Chinese for corridor is [yán], meaning roof and wall (on one side but not on two - if the wall / line is on two sides, the character means door). Corridor is connected ¡P Chinese etymology with a fundamental notion of architecture, as basically what results from the combination of a wall and a roof.
In Europe, the corridore, meaning first a person who runs to transfer messages, and later the space for running on or next to city walls, appears in the 14th century. By the 18th century, the corridor becomes a fundamental element of architecture utilized for changing spatial and social relationships, finding its apotheosis in the institutional architecture of modernity (asylums, prisons, hospitals, social housing projects). From the First World War onwards, the corridor becomes a crucial metaphor for planning on a regional scale: there are now economic corridors, wildlife corridors, railway corridors...
In the 20th century, confronted by the imperative of the open plan (in offices primarily but also in homes), and the associated ideals of interior vistas, transparency, and flow, the corridor is deemed an antimodern tool that encourages cellular, inhibited buildings and behavior.
The corridor is forced to retreat to the backstage of architecture. The contemporary corridor is not designed, but scripted by code writers. Where it was once a space to be occupied - like the wide 18th century "galleries," where, in English stately homes, a variety of servants and visitors would often sleep - it is now a safety device, a space merely to be exited.
The corridor now is a void sustained by a glimmering array of devices, from exit signs to motion sensors to fire sprinklers to illuminated, way-finding carpets. The number and complexity of devices embedded in corridors increases as buildings grow bigger and higher.
The contemporary corridor is ironically a confirmation of our worst fears about the corridor as a lonely, blank, interminable passage...
Because the element has historically been an instrument of speed, its transition to a device of egress is not a degradation but an update: the corridor adapts to the higher demands of contemporary risk society. Preserved as building code, the corridor maintains its crucial role in architecture despite a century of neglect. A new (but also very old) paradigm for the corridor, found in classical Chinese architecture, is the open, ambulatory, directionally promiscuous loop...
Banished from public-facing architecture and stripped of its role as a venerable organizing device, corridors are still everywhere. They are the paths of trains, planes, and cars, they are the territory through which today's global economy is sustained. The corridor becomes a global element, no longer confined by the scale of architecture. Though the corridor is crystalized as an escape route, paradoxically, we will never be able to escape from corridor.
PAGE 4
ETYMOLOGY
Outdoor to indoor + the persistence of movement: Evolution in the meaning of the corridor
CORRIDOR
/'kDricto:(r)/
Definitions:
1.	A passage, covered walk, or avenue between two places, (obsolete)
2.	A main passage in a large building, upon which in its course many apartments open.
Unless noted, source Is:
"corridor, n.". OED Online. Dune 2013.
"Corridor" contains (at least) two embedded etymologies: an outdoor passage that becomes - in architecture and language - indoor (and, later, outdoor again); and a relation to movement. The Latin andron signified a passage or long gallery between the walls of two houses for rain to pass. In the 14th century the old Italian term corridore, derived from the Latin currere (to run) referred to a way on top of fortified city walls, with similar meanings in English, French, and German. Curridore, an English word dating from the 17th century, means a covered passage or walk between two places. According to Robin Evans's Figures, Doors and Passages, the first appearance of the modern sense of corridor occurred in John Thorpe's Beaufort House in England, where he notes "a long Entry through all."
The notion of a long, stretched space relates to the 18th century French significance of galerie, meaning a room that is longer than it is wide. The term "corridor" doesn't emerge until later. Lord Byron's Cosair in 1814 is the earliest mention in English literature, which assumes its meaning from movement. German and Dutch gang relate to "going"; gangan to the act of walking, and "how one runs," with roots in the Sanskrit word for leg, jangha. In all Romance languages, "corridor" relates to running or flowing. In English, the word relates to coreor, Old French for runner. The Latin root curro means to run, firmly rooting the corridor as an in-between space, allowing for circulation. In 19th century Italian, corridore turns into corridoio, meaning a way inside a building. In the 20th century the term reverts to describing an external environment ('Polish corridor' or 'Peace Corridor').
aisle 18th century English, also a passage or corridor.
1814 "Glimmering through the dusky corridore, Another [lamp] chequers o'er the shadowed floor."
In Byron, George. Corsair ¡¡i. xix. 90 1st edition, London: Printed by Thomas Davison (1814).
corridor 2012
International Building Code: an enclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel.
1620 "From thence a Curridore, or priuate way, to his Castle of Saint Angelo."
In Horae Subsecivae, 366, 1620
means floor and corridor korridor flur gang
German
gang overloop galerij
Dutch
corridor
French
corridoio vestibolo
galerie 18th century French meaning a room that is longer than it is wide.
Italian
corridoio
Italian a long passage in a building or between two buildings.
courier
English meaning a messenger sent in haste.
courridour 16th century French from courir, meaning to run.
corridore	corrert
Italian a long passage	Italiantoa
in a building or between two buildings.

pasillo
Spanish
corredor 18th century Spanish meaning a gallery on a house or about it, or pillars about a yard. Also a curtain, broker, any sort of runner.
Stevens, Dohn. A new Spanish and English dictionary: collected from the best Spanish authors, both ancient and modern. London: 1706.
Greek lounced "diadromo"
coulisse 1700 English
corredor
Spanish
corredor
Portuguese
6iá6po|ao

PAGES
eie, eele, eile
12th century Analo-Norman meaning
*ngofabuildin9
insula 6th century post-classical Latin meaning "island" was used for aisle.
qang 12th century Old Dutch meaning road and waterway.
zengti 12th century
Lithuanian meaning to
walk, go fated to verb "to go, to walk"
gang 12th century Old High Dutch related to the verb "going."
gangan 100 ad
Germanic the activity of walking, derives from "how one runs" and the "route one takes." This relates to how one behaves and conducts oneself. Similar developments in meaning from stairs, to passage and landing.
M. Philippa e.a. (2003-2009) Etymologisch Woordenboek van het Nederlands.
galer
Old French verb related to Italian gala, meaning to rejoice.
gaaldery, gelery	curritorium 6th century
Old Dutch meaning	Late Latin
portico inside or outside of a building.
coreor 12th century Old French meaning runner.
COUieTs 12th century Old French meaning flowing.
coladitz 12th century Provençale meaning flowing.
couleis 12th century Old French meaning flowing.
CÖläre 3rd century Romanic meaning to flow
andron 3rd century Latin meaning passage or long gallery, a long narrow space between the walls of two houses for rain to pass. Originally, andron also meant the part of the house in which men resided.
Valpy, Francis Edward Jackson. An Etymological Dictionary of the Latin Language. Published by Baldwin and Company, 1828.
corour, currour
English meaning courier, these words derive from coreor, Old French.
j® [lang] 100 ad
Chinese 6 [lang], meaning corridor, porch, portico, veranda, or hallway. Its combined word of [yan] for meaning, and SP [lang] for sound.
LST Seal (A*3S*M JKSIi) (Characters: chineseetymology.org)
ala 6th century BC Latin meaning wing of a building, often a church.
jánghá 400 bc
Sanskrit meaning shin, leg or shank.
corridorium
Latin original form
curro
Latin verb meaning to run.
f [yan] i2th-7th bc
Chinese i [yan] is one of root words of Chinese characters. It means a place with a wall and a roof, or wide and numerous.
Bronze (£3tS6JI Mi) (Characters: chineseetymology.org)
PAGE 6
)RRIDOR
CORRIDOR: DECLINING IN ARCHITECTURE, INCREASING IN METAPHOR...
0.0007%
0.0006%
1829 Eastern State Penitentiary, Dohn Haviland, Philadelphia.
1894 Roofed Wall,
Chen Clan Acad*
0.0005%
0.0004%
1140- Welbeck Abbey, UK.
1841-43 Great Moreton Hall.
1865 The Royal Herberts Sir Douglas Galton, Flo Nightingale, London.
1852 Hospital for the Insane of the Army and Navy and the District of Columbia.
0.0003%
0.0002%
0.0001%
1760
1780
1820
1840
1860
CORRIDOR
PAGE 7
1930 Chrysler Building, New York.
1897 Lu's Sait Merchant House (ffi'j+mKHiitti), Yangzhou, China.
300
use of the word 'corridor' in books scanned by google (1750-2008)
% of total words in English books
metaphorical corridors
year of first use
1913 Woolworth Building, New York.
1972 Corviale Project, Rome
1928-1932 Narkomfin Building, Moscow.
1908-1968 Singer Building, New York.
1973-2001 World Trade Center, New York.
rnr-TTT-Trm
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000
PAGE 8
CORRIDOR TYPES
nkJi
Wall-Wall
Corridio
Wall-Wall-Ceiling
0.9m-1.3m
Wall-Wall-Ceiling
Wall-Wall-Ceiling
1.6m-2.2m
Wall-Wall-Ceiling
2.4m-2.6m
Column-Column-
Ceiling
Column-Column-
Column-Column
Single-Loaded / Egress
Single-Loaded / Ingress
Double-Loaded / Staggered
Double-Loaded / Aligned
Ä [läng]
Aisle
»
CORRIDOR
PAGE 9
PAGE 10
FROM MADNESS TO PANIC
1735 William Hogarth, In the Madhouse: the corridor as a seml-Inhabited space where life spills over and Insanity plays Itself out freely...
CORRIDOR
PAGE 11
2001 Corridor as a pure escape route, where delay or complexity proves fatal: World Trade Center evacuation simulation by buildingEXODUS, in a 2005 report by the National Institute of Standards and Technology. (See "Transfer Corridors," p. 130.)
PAGE 14
THE TRANSVERSAL CORRIDOR
The high-style classical east Asian corridor is typically a) outside, b) a sheltered gallery, c) a frame surrounding a courtyard, and d) an alternative, direct route through a series of courtyards. In most temple and palace architecture, the main tower or building is located in the center of a void surrounded by courtyard-corridor type buildings. Constructed as a complex and not as a single interior space, individual buildings are connected by diverse types of corridors such as courtyard-corridors, roofed walkways, skybridges, and perimeter corridors - all or them wrapping or penetrating a void: this is the transversal corridor, a line that can cut through a system of lines (or spaces). The transversal corridor can also be ambulatory: the open pathway around a courtyard.
Following the principles of cosmology established in the early dynastic period (Zhou, ca. 1046-256 BC) and the treatise of Zhouli Kaogongjl (Record of Trades), corridoric buildings are widely used to create order and harmony. Rules of orientation apply to individual buildings and to palaces, temples, and urban design. According to the Zhouli, the cosmologically ideal shape of a city is a square (a rectangle is also occasionally permissible), mirroring the Earth, which is perceived as a square against a round heaven. This canonical form, aligned according to the points of the compass, foreshadows the patterning of later imperial capitals and dwellings. Cities generally face south, the direction associated with the yang (and odd numbers), the sun and life-giving forces. Individual buildings also follow the same principle, facing south and arranged symmetrically along a north-south axis, the complex including an entrance gate and a hall that opens to the entrance.
Type 1: Courtyard- Injeongjeon (main hall corridor - Transversal. of palace).
Type 2: Walled & Roofed Corridor -Transversal.
PAGE 15
ca. 1824-1830 SMB (Donggwol-do, Eastern Palace), Seoul: two palaces described in the painting are built in 1405 (Changdeok Palace, right side), and 1483 (Changgyeong Palace, left side). In this complex, there are at least four different types of corridors. Except for the practical function of providing passage, they are used to Intensify the dignity of the palace...
Seonjeong-jeon area (King's Office Hall).
Skybridge: transversal.
Huijeong-dang (King's office and living quarters).
Perimeter.
Huijeong-dang (King's office and living quarters).
<L*.
PAGE 16
TRANSVERSAL
1894 Chen Clan Academy, Guangzhou: a compound navigated by transversal corridors
-	linear verandas - that cut through courtyards or offer the option of going around their edge.
"Verandas (lang or yanlang) are found widely in southern China, in urban as well as rural areas. They function as transitional space between enclosed rooms and outdoor spaces. Verandas serve also as covered corridors and provide intermediate space for living and working that is neither indoors nor outdoors. They screen interior space from the penetrating rays of the subtropical sun and prevent wind-blown rain from entering living space. Ventilation of dwellings, therefore, is possible even under the worst of conditions."
—	Paul Oliver, Encyclopedia of Vernacular Architecture of the World (Cambridge University Press, 1997).
PAGE 17
TANGENTIAL
1920 The 250-meter long corridor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, connecting buildings 7, 3, 10, 4, and 8, Is known affectionately as the "infinite corridor." It is "tangential" rather than transversal because one must turn off Its relentless path to access one of the cells / rooms that It simultaneously connects and Isolates...
"During modernity, the transversals got replaced by the tangentlals. The fortified traditional Western city with its city gates and main roads is based on a topology of gates - like the enfilade. Inscribed in it is a movement figure which unfolds transversally to the spheric line of city gate and partition wall. The corridor organizations of modernity ended all that and established a principle which allows movement figures to touch a distinct sphere only at exactly one point: the door of the cell."
PAGE 18
TRANSVERSAL
URBAN COSMOLOGY
Cities (and also military camps) were round or usually square, with a palace and governmental buildings in the middle, surrounded by a wall with gates in each cardinal direction. The majority of cities in China, except those limited by natural topographic features, were oriented to the south, as dictated by the cosmological theories where the cardinal points of the compass were represented symbolically.
"In essence, the city was a kind of mandala where the emperor or the king was ruling from a correct position of orientation, i.e. from the center of the axis mundi. The city should be carefully laid out in accordance with a system of orientation which provided law and order, as well as cosmological significance. Thus, the cosmo-magical symbolism of a capital city was both a matter of religion and politics."
— Lars Berglund, The Secret of Luo Shu: Numerology in Chinese Art and Architecture (Sodra Sandby, 1990.)
AXIS: FROM COSMOLOGY TO URBAN PLANNING AND ARCHITECTURE
of King City in Zhouli Kaogongji (Record of Trades), China.
ca. 206 BC-220 AD
Ming Tang-Composite Ritual Hall (of Han Dynasty), Xian, China.
ca. 771-221 BC
Wangzheng (capital of the later Zhou period), China.
618-907 Xi'an (capital of the Tang Dynasty), China.
710-794 Layout of Heijokyo (Capital of the Nara Dynasty), Japan.
1420 Forbidden Palace, Beijing.
PAGE 19
TANGENTIAL

'ORRIDOR

1660 Sapienza, Rome.
CITY SCALE TO BUILDING SCALE
The corridor's main function of speed is derived from its etymology. In the 14th century, the corridor was not a place, but a person. From currere, to run, the corridore first described a courier, and eventually referred to the pathways above fortified walls, which enabled the transfer of messages. With the invention of the trace italienne fortification system in the 15th century, military leaders relocated troops to ditches at the bottom of the wall. The corridor followed. In the 17th century, architects interiorized the corridor. By the 19th century corridoio described a passage within a building. The corridor ceased to be an urban element, but still maintained a close relationship to the dimensions of the human body and the function of speed. But now it occurred within buildings rather than between them. Architects gradually abandoned the corridor after its heyday in the 19th century. However, escalating building heights of the 20th century brought increasing demands for the exit corridor.
Stephan Triiby
CONTROL & SPEED: FROM PATHWAY FOR A COURIER TO DEVICE OF SEPARATION AND ESCAPE
1599 Trace Italienne.
1409 Cruciform hospital ward of Santa Maria Nuova, Florence.
PAGE 20
transversal
OCTAGONAL ROOMS & TRANSVERSAL CORRIDORS
In India, Mughal, or Islamic culture of the 16th century developed geometric architecture that combined the cosmologie principles of the mandala with the symbolism and rituals of Islam. The octagon was frequently used to represent the Persian tradition of Hasht Bihish type architecture, with eight chambers surrounded by a main chamber. The corridor here is a holy passage glowing with light from screens at the end of the passage. Spiritually, the corridor is a device for orientation to the world, and to more sacred realms: certain corridors head to the mihrab, the direction of mecca...
ca. 1600s Mughal Serai, Doraha, Ludhiana district, India. This brick walled complex is a caravansary (large inn or hotel), located on the route connecting Delhi, India to Lahore, Pakistan. With about 112 rooms for travelers and pilgrims, it contains a hammam (public bath) on the north-eastern corner, and invludes various octagonal rooms: the sudatorium (largest hall), bathroom, etc.
Plan of Hammam.
View of corridors from largest hall.
1572 Humayun's Tomb, Dehli.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 21
TANGENTIAL
1284 Qalawun complex (madrasa, hospital, mausoleum), Cairo: the corridor functions as a passage to the building from the street and the indicator of orientation of the Qibla.
9th century Nataraja (Dancing Shiva)
Temple, Chidambaram, India: the corridor is the backdrop of the most important urban infrastructure (the reservoir).

PAGE 22
TRANSVERSAL
1394 Jeongjeon (main hall) of Dongmyo Shrine in Seoul: the 100 meter-long corridor (SIS’ located between spirit chambers and platforms for the orchestra and performances, is a space for for royal ancestral ceremonies, mediating the spiritual and the physical world. Also, it is a theatrical space: audiences can observe the whole ceremony through repeated columns.
Corridor ceremony.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 23
TANGENTIAL
1450 Monastery, Buxheim, Germany: the corridor permits passage between monks' quarters and the church; after penetrating the sanctuary walls, the thickened section of the corridor screens the choir from the nave beyond.
PAGE 24
TRANSVERSAL
ca. 1625 Nijo castle, Kyoto: in addition to the basic function of circulation, the corridors (@B) of Nijo act as an environmental control system, activated through the movement of sliding shoji (paper sliding doors) to adjust light, humidity, and temperature.
Multiple entrances and openings.
ca. 1632 The Shoin buildings at Nishi Hongan-ji, Kyoto: the corridor (0®) functions! -as place of appreciating _ multiple compositions 1 of nature through sliding shoji.
Opened shoji.
Closed shoii.
PAGE 25
TANGENTIAL
1682 Palace of Versailles: frugal and communitarian compared to the flamboyant public spaces, the secret passages at Versailles initially permit the discrete movement of servants -and later became a refuge for the royal family during the revolution.
Service corridor / secret passages.
Ground floor plan.

Corridor revealed.
Wall concealing the corridor.
kii'Ukpl«kjW-1 •
PAGE 26
TRANSVERSAL
VISUAL AND PHYSICAL CORRIDORS
1897 Lu's Salt Merchant House Yangzhou, China: parallel to, but inaccessible from, the physical path of travel, a visual corridor penetrates the deep plan, reaching the main hall 90 meters away...
ca. 1368 Siheyuan (courtyard house), Beijing: about 70 meters deep, typical sequence of courtyard houses, connected by the corridor.
"A courtyard is an enclosed area and a private open spaces surrounded by walls or buildings. As the main architecture of Beijing
people for generations, Beijing courtyard house is famous both home and abroad. Since the construction of capital of Yuan dynasty, Beijing courtyard houses were built up along with the palaces, government office, street and Hutong. The courtyard is spacious; the houses are independent and connected by corridors.''
— "Echo: Continuation of Heavenly Creation in the Noisy Time," Urban China 27 (2008), 16.
Ground floor plan and west elevation.
Visual corridor.
PAGE 27
TANGENTIAL
CORRIDOR
.aM Bearwood
Manor, by Robert Kerr, Berkshire, UK.
Corridor users:
Nursery corridor J Woman servantscomdor
Transverse
corridor
Butler's corridor
Men's corridor I
Housekeepers corridor
View of corridors.
Ground floor
CORRIDORS = PRIVACY
"Corridor and universal requirement of privacy:
... when Robert Kerr was informing his readership of the perils attending throughfare rooms, the issue had been resolved once and for all: the corridor and the universal requirement of privacy were firmly established and principles of planning could be advanced with more or less equal application to all dwellings in all circumstances: larger houses, small houses, servant quarters, family apartments, rooms for business, for leisure -these discriminations were subsidiary to the key distinction between route and destination that would henceforth pervade domestic planning.
Kerr made diagrams that reduced house plans to these two categories of trajectory and position, proposing that their proper arrangement was the substratum upon which both architecture and domesticity were to be raised.
... Kerr, for his part, mobilized architecture in its entirety against the possibility of commotion and distraction, bringing to bear a range of tactics involving the meticulous planning and furnishing of each part of the building under a general strategy of compartmentalization on the other hand, coupled with universal accessibility on the other."
— Robin Evans, "Figures, Doors, and Passages" (1978).
1864 Westonbirt House, Gloucestershire, UK.
1870 Hassobury House, Hertfordshire, UK.
PAGE 28
TRANSVERSAL
1894 Chen Clan Academy, Guangzhou: a roofed walkway casts the corridor as an elevated grid. The layout of the Chen Clan Academy is a juxtaposition of roofed and open corridors operating almost like a city grid. Corridors connect 19 buildings with nine halls and six courtyards, creating complex transitions between indoor and outdoor spaces. Here, users can observe the overlap of multiple views and constant changes in nature.
Elevated corridors.
Roofed corridor crossing courtyard.	Covered.	Uncovered.
PAGE 29
TANGENTIAL
1829 Cherry Hill prison, by John Haviland In Philadelphia, designed for segregation and observation. Courthouses, parliament and government buildings replicate the doctrine of cellularity in more subtle ways...
Cherry Hill from above.
Cherry Hill central chamber, with views of corridors.
"The practice of placing individuals under 'observation' is a natural extension of a justice imbued with disciplinary methods and examination procedures. Is it surprising that the cellular prison, with its regular chronologies, forced labor, its authorities of surveillance and registration, its experts in normality, who continue and multiply the functions of the judge, would have become the modern instrument of penality? Is It surprising that prisons resemble factories, schools, barracks, hospitals, which all resemble prisons?" — Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (Pantheon Books, 1977).
1814 Glasgow Lunatic Asylum, by William Stark: spoke-like corridors offer visibility and separation.
PAGE 30
ASYLUM: LINEAR PLAN
KIRKBRIDE: CORRIDOR AS CURE-ALL
In 1854, the American physician and mental health expert Thomas Kirkbride finishes a seminal book on the construction of mental asylums, On the Construction, Organization, and General Arrangement of Hospitals for the Insane. The corridor, fully integrated with the form, program, and activities of the ward, becomes the defining space of the emerging psychiatric hospital typology. The Association of Medical Superintendents of American Institutions for the Insane (now known as American Psychiatric Association), founded by Kirkbride in 1844, adopts and institutionalizes his recommendations for the architectural planning of psychiatric wards. Before the end of the 19th century, American mental hospitals are built in accordance with the "Kirkbride Plan."
Kirkbride proposes a linear, stepped plan with staggered corridors, and asserts that, as part of their "moral" treatment, the insane must be relocated to an ornamented, rural landscape. The non-urban Kirkbride plan exacerbates the corridor to accommodate the specialized needs of the insane. "There is more certainty of the free circulation of light and air, better prospects are secured from all the patients' rooms and parlors, there is less opportunity for patients on opposite sides seeing or calling to each other, and less probability of the quiet patients being disturbed by those who are noisy."
1854 Alabama School for the Insane, built by Samuel Sloan according to the Kirkbride Plan, Alabama.
1854 Thomas S. Kirkbride M.D., On the Construction, Organization, and General Arrangement of Hospitals for the Insane.
Thomas Kirkbride, 1809-1883.
Kirkbride imagines the corridor as a cure-all for architecture as well as its patients: the corridor can resolve problems with program, ventilation, and segregation, lighting, and allow linear expansion. Kirkbride's corridors are a generous 3.5 meters wide, 3.5 meters high, and feature 50 cm thick walls to accommodate ducts and openings for hot air diffusion and ventilation. The corridor is also integrated with ward culture. Because bedrooms are reserved for sleeping, corridors provide communal spaces for daytime activities. Double-loaded corridors are present on every level, driving the stepping, segmented figure of the plan; corridor endpoints are left unobstructed, allowing light to penetrate while reducing the transmission of noise from one ward to another. Kirkbride also uses the corridor to segregate different patient groups without actually separating the wards. The "V" plan prevents gazes from one ward to another, and its mirrored wings separate male and female patients. The stepping echelons separate different patient types, the outermost wards housing the most "excited" patients.
Florence Nightingale, 1820-1910.
1865 The Royal Herbert Hospital, Sir Douglas Galton, Florence Nightingale, London.
1863 Florence Nightingale, Notes on Hospitals (London: Longman, Green, Longman, Roberts, and Green).
“ anyone wishes to see the corridor plan in all its horrors, Scutari [in Istanbul] would have shown them to him on a colossal scale. ... If you make your length too great in proportion to this width, your ward becomes a tunnel - a form fatal to good ventilation. This was the case with the great corridor wards at Scutari."
Notes on Hospitals
(1863)enCe N'9htingale'
PAGE 31
HOSPITAL: PAVILION PLAN
NIGHTINGALE: CORRIDOR AS DISEASE CARRIER
While Kirkbride writes his book on the architecture of asylums, Florence Nightingale serves as a nurse in the Crimean War, and, drawing on the horrors of disease spread by "tunnel" like spaces and poor ventilation, she publishes Notes on Hospitals in 1863.
Under Nightingale's influence, late 19th century hospitals separate circulation space from places of treatment, reducing the corridor to a device linking isolated pavilions. The scheme is exemplified by London's Royal Herbert Hospital, which Nightingale calls "the finest hospital establishment in the United Kingdom, or indeed in Europe. It consists of four double and three single pavilions, with the ends in free air."
In Notes on Hospitals, she writes: "To join all the ward doors and windows on one side by means of a corridor is much more objectionable than even to have a dead wall, because the foul air of all the wards must necessarily pass into the corridor, and from the corridor into the wards indiscriminately.
The whole hospital becomes in this way a complicated ward." Typical corridors deny the four vital conditions of a hospital: fresh air, light, ample space, and the subdivision and supervision of the sick.
In contrast to the psychiatric ward, where every room is connected to the corridor, the Nightingale hospital ward is an autonomous zone in itself, with 28 to 32 patients and access to courtyard views. The Pavilion Plan's corridors (4.5 meters wide, 4.5 meters high) are outside the building, in a fully glazed passage on the ground floor and basement level only. Where Kirkbride's wards integrate supervisor and patient spaces, Nightingale's wards segregate administrative programs from the wards, reducing the spread of disease not just among patients, but between patients, doctors, and nurses.
Unencumbered by obligations toward "moral" healing and psychiatric therapy, the hospital is driven primarily by ventilation and air-access. Nightingale strips the corridor of all functions except as a pure circulation device, shrunken to single story and exiled from the hospital ward.
PAGE 32
ASYLUM: LINEAR PLAN
KIRKBRIDE PLAN
1852 In the Hospital for the Insane of the Army and Navy and the District of Columbia, built by Thomas U. Walter under the Kirkbride plan, the long corridors serve two functions: on the one hand they provide a communal, light filled space where patients can be "in public"; on the other hand they are a tool for separating race and gender, with men on the right and women on left, colored men in the "right lodge" and colored women in "west lodge."
PAGE 33
HOSPITAL: PAVILION PLAN
DE8T0N FOR A PAVILION HOSPITAL.
1873-1889 Johns Hopkins Hospital, by Cabot and Chandler, Baltimore, built according to Nightingale's Pavilion Plan, featuring parallel wards, rather than private cells. Whereas in the Kirkbride plan the corridor is a shared public space that essentially is the ward, Nightingale's hospital ward is segregated from circulation, administrative, and service spaces.
PAGE 34
ASYLUM: LINEAR PLAN
DIFFERENT CORRIDORS FOR DIFFERENT AILMENTS...
Selection of linear Kirkbride plans (left) and Nightingale Pavilion plans (right), from Carla Yanni, The Architecture of Madness: Insane Asylums in the United States (University of Minnesota Press, 2007).
PAGE 35
HOSPITAL: PAVILION PLAN
PROPOSED
GENERAL MILITARY HOSPITAL
VALETTA .
PAGE 36
FROM HALL TO CORRIDOR
"No room has fallen further in history than the hall. Now a place to wipe feet and hang hats, once it was the most important room in the house. Indeed, for a long time it was the house.... Unlike the corridor, the Hall is derived from a building type, rather than a circulation space."
— Bill Bryson, At Home: A Short History of Private Life (Doubleday, 2010.)
According to Bryson, the English word "hall" is already old by the 5th century AD. At this time, hall refers to large barn-like spaces characterized by central fireplaces. Early Germanic people live in a grubenhaus, comprised of a pit, roof, and hearth. Newcomers, the English, replace these houses with halls. According to 1 Alfred Gotch in The Growth of the English House (1909), servants and family eat, dress, and sleep together in halls, which are not rooms or even just a space, but compose the entire house in themselves. The hall is determined by the need for communal access to the singular hearth, and since the hearth is generally not yet enclosed by a chimney, the hall is always smokey.
The hall also reflects and enables the mobility of Medieval and royal estates. Bryson proposes that "it was as easy to take the household to food as it was to bring food to the household, so motion was more or less constant, everything was designed to be mobile." The hall is fairly unadorned and has little furniture, none of it permanent. Floors are bare, dining tables and cupboards are boards laid atop trestles, seating is on mobile benches, beds are transportable mattresses made of straw, and furniture takes the form of portable chests or trunks. The invention of heatproof bricks facilitates the chimney, which in turn allows for a smokeless hall and the occupation of the space above it - eventually called the "grand chamber" - and the proliferation of fireplaces inside the new invention of the room, in which various functions - reading, sleeping, the privy, parlors, libraries - could be separated. Halls became one room within larger, infinitely more complex country houses. Even as certain functions are transferred to other rooms, halls remain important places for the reception of guests, ceremonies, and dining.
1591 The hall in action: Queen Elizabeth's entertainment at Elvetham,
I dined at Stowe yesterday, Nelly Denton and Jock Stew-keley went with me. We met Sir Harry Andrews, & his lady and daughter, his only child there, as also cousin Risley & his lady & Jack Doddington, & 3 sisters of Lady Temple, & Mr Stanion, husband to one of them, & Ned Andrews and Groves his father-in-law, & Thomas Temple & another old Temple with 3 or 4 very drunken parsons, which made up our company. Lady Baltinglass was invited & promised to be there but failed. We saw Sir Richard and his fine lady wedded, & flung the stocking, & then left them to themselves, & so in this manner was ended the celebration of his Marriage a la mode. After that we had Music, Feasting, Drinking, Revelling, Dancing & Kissing: it was two of the clock this morning before we got home.
EDMUND VERNEY TO SIR ROBERT VERNEY, 26 AUGUST. 1675
A
WEDDING
AT
STOWE
1675
Activities of the hall: "Music, Feasting, Drinking, Revelling, Dancing & Kissing" (1675); in another report, from 1736, the Daily Gazetter describes the baptism of an MP's son in a hall in Essex: "most of the common people within four or five miles were made so welcome that they lay in heaps round his house dead drunk ... 400 persons [were] serv'd all at once." (Mark Girourard, A country house companion, Yale University Press, 1987.)
PAGE 37
As rooms become more specialized, English life no longer unfolds ■Cy hall. The hall, first of all accommodating everything, then specializing !n reCeption, becomes increasingly associated with entry, and gradually Educed to a place of passage.
1807 With the proliferation of separate rooms for separate activities, the notion of the hall -wide, full of people and activities - shrinks to a
corridor - narrower, often empty, not programmed itself but linking programs. (Stow House, Buckinghamshire, 1C. Nattes.)
1977 Documented by Christopher Alexander, an attempt to reanimate the domestic corridor -often still called a hall though it is deprived of that space's former glories...
"Of course it is possible to make even very long corridors in a human way; but if they have to be longer than 50 feet, it is essential to break down their scale in some fashion. For example, a long hall that is lit in patches from one side at short intervals can be very pleasant indeed: the sequence of light and dark and the chance to pause and glance out, breaks down the feeling of the endless dead corridor; or a hall which opens out into wider rooms, every now and then, has the same effect. However, do everything you can to keep the passages really short.... Make them as much like rooms as possible, with carpets or wood on the floor, furniture, bookshelves, beautiful windows. Make them generous in shape, and always give them plenty °f light: the best corridors and passages of all are those which have windows along an entire wall."
~~ Christopher Alexander, A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction (New York, 1977), 634.
PAGE 38
Fig. 1
100 AD Pliny's Laurentium.
Fig. 2
100 AD Simple Roman domus found in Pliny's Laurentium.
Fig. 4
ca. 8th century
Palace of the Five Stories, Mayan city of Tikal.
Fig. 5
1385 Murat's mosque, Bursa, Turkey.
fig. 3
778 AD Palace of Ukhaidir, modern day Iraq.
PAGE 39
, Theodor Storm, Pole Poppenspäler, 1874 LL, wattpad.com/12663-pole-poppenspäler-novelle-1874?p=18, 24.06.2010).
2	Walter Benjamin (1928), cited in Georges Tevssot: "The Disease of the Domicile," Assemblage 6. The MIT Press. Dune, 1988.
3	Cf. the embedding of the term "corridor"
In the semantic cluster of collocation graphs.
(For instance, http://wortschatz.uni-leipzig.de/ abfrage/, 24.06.2010).
4	Cf. Margherita Azzi Visentini: Die italienische Villa-Bauten des 15. und 16. Jahrhunderts, Stuttgart: DVA, 1997, 25.
5	Cf. John D. Hoag: Islamic Architecture, quoted after Hohn D. Hoag: Weltgeschichte der Architektur: Islam, Stuttgart: DVA, 1985, 23.
6.	Cf. Paul Gendrop, Doris Heyden: Pre-Columbian Architecture of Mesoamerica, London: Faber and Faber, 1980 (1979) 79.
7.	Mario Bussagli, Oriental Architecture / 1:
India, Indonesia, Indochina (History of World Architecture), Electa / Rizzoli; 2nd US edition,
1989.
8.	Hoag: Islamic Architecture, loc. cit., 167.
9, Cf. Peter Sloterdijk: Sphären III. Schäume, Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.
10. Cf. Kurt Lewin: Feldtheorie in den Sozialwissenschaften, Bern/Stuttgart: Verlag Hans Huber, 1963.
11. Anthony Vidler, "The Third Typology" (1977), 'a: K. Michael Hays (ed.): Architecture Theory Since 1968, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1998, 289.
the corridor-cell complex by Stephan triiby
1.	The Corridor - an "Un-architecture"?
The corridor does not rank high on the list of most-loved spaces. It can hardly hope for sympathy, seemingly damned to forge pathways through enclaves of misery: "a repulsive haze confronted us, as we walked through the long corridor upstairs."1 The chronicle of Theodor Storm's 1874 Pole Poppenspaler is just one example of the corridor's poor standing in our cultural imaginary. In his portrait of bourgeois interiors of the late 19th century, Walter Benjamin also found little praise for "long corridors," saying that one "fittingly houses only the corpse."2 Corridors are typically regarded as "dark," "sinister," and "endless."3 Could we be on the trail of something one might call "Un-architecture"?
The unpopularity of the corridor is surpassed only by its prevalence. One finds corridors in Pliny's Laurentinum4 (built around 100 AD, not far from Rome) as well as in a simple Roman domus (figs. 1-2); in the Ukhaider Palace (built between 764 and 778 AD), the only known desert palace from the Abbasid period in Karbala, Iraq, a corridor ran directly behind the enclosure wall, while another divided the throne room complex from the main courtyard;5 (fig. 3) in the Palace of the Five Stories in the Mayan city of Tikal6 (fig. 4) as well as in the uposathagaras, the great assembly halls of the traditional Ceylonese monasteries;7 Islamic architecture also features numerous passageways, such as in the mosque/medrese of Murat I, completed 1385 in Bursa, where the middle hall is encompassed by a long corridor (fig. 5).8
Corridors and corridor-like rooms can be found in all cultures from all eras, but they never attained the key role in circulation that Western building has accorded them since the 17th and 18th centuries. The corridor became ubiquitous in the 19th century - in offices and administrative buildings, in asylums, hospitals, and tenements, not to mention in prisons and in Victorian country homes. How could such a glaringly unpopular space become so prevalent?
On the one hand, corridors are the result of an unwritten, but all the more influential primary codification that could be termed "spherological,"9 in the language of Peter Sloterdijk, describing the various "Room of One's Own" programs, the countless isolating habitats that pervade modern times. On the other hand, one must say that corridors are also the result of many small secondary codifications that could be called "hodological,"10 in the language of Kurt Lewin. (The Greek word hodos means "path" or "way.") These classifications influenced modern architecture in the form of typologies and model floor plans (fig. 6). They approached organic building methods in the animal kingdom, as described by Anthony Vidler: "Following this analogy, those whose task it was to design new types of public and private buildings ... began to talk about the plan and the sectional distribution in the same terms as the constitutional organization of species; axis and vertebrae virtually synonymous."11 The hodological codifications are not focused on the isolated sphere of the room-cell, but rather on the manner in which they are linked.
Both codifications lead to a kind of generalized Puritan rule, which could be summarized in the motto: "To every person his cell/sphere; to every row of cells, its corridor; to every corridor its topological tree structure." The 5th Duke of Portland exacerbated both codifications - the spherological and the hodological - in the rebuilding of his estate, Welbeck Abbey, in the late 19th century, in which he created a huge network of underground corridors connecting parts of his, and only his, demesne.
PAGE 40
DOR
Fig. 6
ca. early 19th century
Dean-Nicolas-Louis Durand's vestibules.
Fig. 7
1759 Magdalen Flouse for Repentant Prostitutes.
PAGE 41
12	Sven-Olov Wallenstein: Biopolitics and the Emergence of Modem Architecture, New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009, 15.
13	Wallenstein, Biopolitics and the Emergence 0f Modern Architecture, loc. cit., 25.
14. Michel Foucault: Discipline and Punish. The Birth of the Prison, Vintage Books;
2nd edition, 1995, 143.
15. Ibid.
16. Foucault, Discipline and Punish, loc. cit., 184
Cf. Thomas Nutz: Strafanstalt als 'tesserungsmaschine: Reformdiskurs und Gefängniswissenschaft 1775-1848, München: Oldenbourg. 2001, 63.
2.	Prison - cells require corridors
In the late phases of the absolute monarchies in Europe, new building tasks of the state were brought to the fore, that - as a consequence of the English-French "double revolution" (Eric Hobsbawm) of the 18th century - were then perfected by middle class society. This discourse is concerned with - alongside hospitals and mental asylums - prisons. Vitruvian-inspired architectural theories were declared passé, especially in the building of prisons. The rules of decorum regarding proper use of ornamentation and columns that were reflected in the vertical nature of the façade were displaced by horizontally oriented standard floor plans, typologies, and institutional recommendations. Around 1800, architecture changed, no longer striving for a Vitruvian-inspired symbolic system, but rather a post-Vitruvian network: "Architecture lost its traditional authority as a symbolic form, but in this process it also came to be a node in a network of knowledges and practices through which individuals were formed and a modern social space emerged."12 From then on, architecture played less of a passive role representing order, but rather an active role in encouraging (or creating) order: "Architecture is no longer like a body ... but acts upon the body,"13 according to Sven-Olov Wallenstein.
At the beginning of the 18th century, spatial techniques of social discipline were perfected in prisons. The new techniques of isolation and compartmentalization were subsequently used on society as a whole. Michel Foucault, the most important interpreter of social discipline in the Enlightenment, described modern disciplinary power's ambition for order in the following manner: "Avoid distributions in groups; break up collective dispositions; analyze confused, massive or transient pluralities. One must eliminate the effects of imprecise distributions, the uncontrolled disappearance of individuals, their diffuse circulation, their unusable and dangerous coagulation; it was a tactic of antidesertion, anti-vagabondage, anti-concentration."14 According to Foucault, the central architectural instrument used to accomplish this was the cell, the modus operandi of the disciplinary powers: "Even if its compartments are not outwardly realized, the disciplinary room is fundamentally always in the form of a cell."16 To make cells, you need corridors.
The calculated grouping of cells played a decisive role in social discipline - how rows of cells could be integrated into the regime's "channels of communication."16 This strategy brought the corridor to the fore as a surveillance room; the Panopticon principle of controlled cells was simplified and economized into a principle of monitored intermediate space. This principle, originally developed in abbeys and monasteries, was implemented during modern times in three waves of building projects: first in hospitals, then in prisons and barracks, and finally in the residential spheres of tenement houses. All of these building projects were the subjects of elaborate state standardization norms at the end of the 18th and into the 19th century.
A corridor-cell complex was created and reached new heights in prison construction, with fundamental consequences for general architectural topology. In a radical break from the courtly enfilade - a one-point perspective of aligned doorways through a procession of rooms - the transversal corridor type gave way more and more to tangential corridors: 'walking past' a series of closed doors took over from 'going through' open space.
From the beginning, the modern prison was notably distinct from pre-modern jails. Imprisonment in pre-modern jails was meant only for the time before the punishment, usually torture or death, while the incarceration in modern prisons was considered the punishment in itself. Congruously, the term "prison sentence" appeared in criminal theoretical discussion for the first time around 1800.17 Nevertheless, the Catholic church can be considered the first Western institution to have consistently employed imprisonment as a punishment. The church hoped to reform the strayed: "Misery and solitude were to result in
PAGE 42
Fig. 8
1772-1775 Maison de Force prison, by English architect William Blackburn, Ghent.
Fig. 9
1784-1790 Suffolk County Gaol, also by Blackburn.
Fig. 10
1787 Winchester County Bridewell: prisoners divided according to dangerousness.
Fig. 11
1803 Bury St. Edmunds Gaol: radial form.
Fig. 12
1828 Norwich County Gaol: radial.
PAGE 43
K ri Norman Dohnston: Forms of Constraint:
. nrV 0f Prison Architecture, Urbana/Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2000, 17.
g Cf Johnston, Forms of Constraint, loe. eit., 21-
20.
26.
Qf Johnston, Forms of Constraint, loc. clt.,
21 Johnston, Forms of Constraint, loc. clt., 17.
meditation and contrition."18 For this reason, early pre-Reformation institutions have cells, in which heretics and the disobedient were punished; from 1261 every Carthusian monastery was required to have a prison at its disposal.19 Most of the prisons of the Inquisition, founded between the late 12th and the mid-13th century, indicate a use of cells as well.20 In this regard, the state took a long time to learn from the church: "It was only at the close of the 18th century that civil authorities, searching for a substitute for the usual penalties of death, mutilation, or exile, began to use imprisonment on a large scale as punishment, often inspired by church teachings and isolated examples from the past."21
22	Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. cit., 24.
23	lohn Howard, ibid.
24 Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc.cit., 30-31.
25.	Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. cit., 25.
26.	Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc.cit, 31.
27. Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. cit., 30.
Separation and the double corridor
The transformation from a punishing incarceration to one focused on improving the prisoner did not take place in the Catholic prisons, but rather within a Protestant framework. John Floward (1729-1790), the influential English philanthropist and reformer of the penal system, played a prominent role in this development. A deeply religious man, he was a member of the Independents, a moderate Puritan sect.22 Starting in 1774, he traveled throughout Europe, inspecting prisons and other locations, where the unlucky were "rotting in their own waste."23 Fie examined the institutions' air with his own nose, counted the number of inmates and published the findings in his major work, The State of Prisons in England and Wales, one of the first empirical surveys in the field of social studies.24 The book was reprinted four times in the next 15 years; German and French translations were published in 1780 and 1788, respectively.25 Howard, writes Thomas Nutz, "compiled specific knowledge from various discourses about the best organization of prisons and the 'improvement' of delinquents, gaining it a place in the canon of specialized knowledge."26 The central task that Howard passed on to his contemporaries and posterity, was that, in order to reform the inmates, it was necessary to separate them into different classes and provide religious instruction during periods of isolation. He borrowed the essence of this idea from the philanthropic businessman Jonas Hanway, who founded the Magdalen House for Repentant Prostitutes, in which the women were compelled to work, and perform religious observances in their single rooms (fig. 7).27
Howard's teachings were particularly well implemented by the English architect, William Blackburn (1750-1790), the first architect to specialize in the building of prisons. With the Suffolk County Jail (1784-1790), Blackburn further developed the principles of a meaningful prison architecture, which was praised by Howard, in his design of the Maison de Force (1772-1775) in Ghent. The structure can be considered the first large-scale prison in the world (Figs. 8-9). Blackburn's construction was probably the first radial prison, allowing visual inspection of all of the cell corridors from one central point. But it did not fulfill one of Howard's main requirements, namely the separation of different classes of prisoners. Blackburn accomplished that feat with the construction of Winchester County Bridewell, built in 1787 (fig. 10). In his design, Blackburn divided the hitherto customary double-hipped cell tract corridor, thus creating two parallel corridors to divide prisoners according to their dangerousness.
His invention was copied and modified, also in prisons of radial form, until the 1830s: first in Bury St. Edmunds County Gaol (George Byfield with John Orridge, 1803 (fig. 11)); then in Worcester County Gaol (also by Byfield, 1814); or the Norwich County Gaol, (Francis Stone (fig. 12), 1828).
?®- Cf Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc- cit., 185.
The principle of the double corridor developed by Blackburn, the "father of the radial prison," also entered into the codification of the British Society for the Improvement of Prison Discipline. In 1826, the society published Remarks on the Form and Construction of Prisons, in which the comprehensive knowledge of English prison architecture since Howard and Blackburn was collected in a compendium, and consistent design recommendations were made for architects.28 George Thomas Bullar, an architect working for the society since
PAGE 44
Fig. 13
1826 George Thomas Bullar's Mustergefängnis: separation of classes by means of the corridor.
Fig. 14
1848 Insterburg Penitentiary by Schinkel.
CONVICTS RETIRINO TO THEIR CRLI.8.
Fig. 15
1816 Auburn cell block, radial prison built on the principal of the "silent system" with open decks instead of corridors.
Fig. 16
1825 Sing Sing prison, Ossining, New York: radial, silent.
Fig. 17
1834 Ohio Penitentiary: radial, silent.
—
PAGE 45
r;f Nutz Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, foc.oit.189.
30. Cf- d
31.	Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. eit, 1/3.
32.	Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. eit, 158.
33.	Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. ölt., 168.
34. Ibid.
25. Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, ioc. cit., 189.
26. Cf. Johnston, Forms of Constraint, loc. cit.,
1820, drew up nine model plans for the publication. Almost all of the designs incorporated Blackburn's double corridor, so that inmates of different classes had no contact on their way to chapel (fig. 13).29 Bullar's model plans soon gained a wide following, as seen in Westminster New Bridewell, designed by Robert Abram. Examples can also be found outside of England, such as the Meath County Jail in Trim, Ireland (1832) and in Germany at the Insterburg Penitentiary (1848), built by the Prussian Office for Public Works under the leadership of Karl Friedrich Schinkel (fig. 14).30
Separate vs. silent
The separation of prisoners into different groups by way of Blackburn's double corridor caused a dispute between two competing philosophies of prisoner separation: the "separate system," associated with the city of Philadelphia, in which inmates were isolated day and night, and the "silent system," connected to the town of Auburn, New York, where the convicts were in single cells during the night, but worked together silently during the day. While the silent system let individual prisoners merge into a great mass of inmates, the separate system disassembled the group into its smallest "component," the single inmate. The separate system almost always culminated in a building of radial form, whereas the silent system was distinguished by its vast cubic architecture, with cells stacked back to back, which were accessed not by traditional closed corridors, but by narrow, cast-iron balconies. While the separate system had more followers in Europe, the silent system was more popular in the US. The Auburn Prison (1816), Sing-Sing (1825), and the Ohio Penitentiary (1834) were all radial prisons built on the principle of the silent system (figs. 15-17).
The absence of the corridor in the silent system is directly in opposition to the apotheosis of the corridor in the separate system. The separate system laid great hope in the "inner voice" of the inmate. The hope was that the inmate's conscience would kick in and provide the appropriate punishment: "The greater the wrong, the greater the tortured conscience."31 In single-cell imprisonment, the individual forms his own class.32 The isolation of prisoners as a classification technique could be found already at the end of the 18th century - not least in Jeremy Bentham's famous Panopticon (1791), which built on the concept of individual confinement.33 But it wasn't until the beginning of the 1830s, when individual imprisonment was the subject of an empirical study in Pennsylvania, that a foundation was laid for an international discussion. The debate covered all kinds of imprisonment and reached the widely accepted conclusion in favor of individual imprisonment in a "separate" system.34 The Pennsylvanian Quakers were consciously building upon their long tradition of monkish isolation, as they inserted the ideas of contemplation and cleansing of the soul into the discourse of reforming inmates - the word "penitentiary," which stems from the Latin paenitentia (penance), was introduced by the Pennsylvanian Quakers.
Cherry Hill
The prime example of a separate system building was the Eastern State Penitentiary in Philadelphia, known as Cherry Hill (1821-1836). The radical nature of the building is most easily seen in comparison with another Pennsylvanian prison built 50 years earlier, the Walnut Street Prison (1773 - one year after the Maison de Force). The main building on Walnut Street, (demolished in 1836), originally housed a U-formed corridor, which connected group cells, while the Penitentiary House in the courtyard (D) had single cells as punishment rooms (fig. 18).35 Less than 50 years later, the situation was approached in an entirely different way at Cherry Hill: the cell for a single prisoner had become standard practice, used to improve the inmate as opposed to inflicting a harsher punishment.36 This exemplary structure, built by John Haviland, had seven long cell blocks emerging from the center on spoke-like corridors. Each cell had its own tiny yard (fig. 19). Practically the entire solitary detention took place in the cell or the yard. Only in cases of sickness or intermittent bathing
PAGE 46
Fig. 19
1821-36 Cherry Hill Philadelphia: high po|n, of the corridor in pr|so : architecture.
Fig. 18
1773 Walnut Street: U-formed corridor connecting group cells.
Fig. 23
Cherry Hill corridor, used only by guards (prisoners use a door on the other side of their cell, into the yard.)
Fig. 20-21
Cherry Hill observation hub.
PAGE 47
were the inmates allowed to leave their cells; then, they were always masked and called by a number instead of by name.37 The prisoner entered his cell not through the corridor, but rather through a massive, wooden door in the yard, and then through a gate to his cell. The corridors were used almost exclusively by the guards, who wore leather moccasins and snuck up to the observation windows in the cell doors to inspect the prisoners unexpectedly (figs. 20-23).
Cherry Hill represented the high point of the corridor in prison construction. Never again would corridors play such a programmatic role in the architecture of a corrections institution. The apotheosis of the corridor was triggered by the need for isolation and surveillance: it was used as an almost luxurious observation room for guards, as an instrument in the evaluation of prisoner improvement. In the first phases of construction at Cherry Hill, not even doors were featured between the corridors and the cells, just observation windows. This system of non-access was deemed impractical and was abolished during later additions to the complex."38
Cherry Hill was an international object of interest. The most expensive structure of its time and its type, it was visited and assessed by delegates from around the world, especially Europe. They came from Great Britain, France, Russia, Belgium, Prussia - and returned to their home countries as great admirers of the construction.39 The technical facilities were among the most impressive characteristics: "Never before had an architect employed central heating, ventilation and sanitary facilities on such a large scale. No fewer than 450 'dwelling units' had to be centrally provided for."40 In 1839, 4,000 people visited the prison to witness this achievement - the same number of people who visited Niagara Falls and the Capitol in Washington, D.C.
Among the admirers of Cherry Hill was the British military engineer and prison designer, Joshua Jebb. He built the most important European prison of the 19th century, the "Model Prison" in Pentonville, completed in London in 1844 (fig. 24). With this construction, the prison in radial form, which was originally conceived of in England, then optimized in Philadelphia, was reimported back to Europe. The separate system had returned to the land where the Puritan movement originated. Unlike Cherry Hill, the cell blocks at Pentonville were not connected by corridors, but by seemingly sacred galleries or halls of multiple levels. The top row of cells was, as in Auburn, separated from the atrium only by cast-iron bars (fig. 25). Although the word "corridor" can be found in plans and cross-sections of Pentonville, the passageways are nothing of the sort.
This is also the case in the countless Pentonville imitations that were built in the second half of the 19th century all over the world, one example of which is the cell prison in Berlin-Moabit (1844). However, the corridor had already lost its role as a beacon of hope in architectural improvement in prisons by the middle of the 19th century.
3. Victorian country home - voluntary confinement between gentrified corridors
The popularity of the corridor spread across different institutional architecture at an astonishing speed. Yet it took longer for the corridor to become a universal convention in residential architecture. The evolution from external discipline in prisons to self discipline in the privacy of one's own home occurred in the 19th century, and most acutely in England. The culmination of this new architectural tool of self discipline is found in the noble corridor-cell complexes of the English country house, the bastion of the Puritan imperative - "To every person his cell/sphere; to every row of cells, its corridor; to every corridor its topological tree structure" - combined with sophisticated aristocratic living. From the country house, the use of corridors radiated to less privileged strata. The ubiquity of the corridor soon knew no boundaries.
3« Paul Kahan: Eastern State Penitentiary. A History, Charleston: The History Press, 2008, 40.
39.	Cf. Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc. cit., 250.
40.	Nutz, Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine, loc, cit., 250.
Cf Johnston, Forms of Constraint, loc. cit., 73*
PAGE 48
Fig. 24
1844 Pentonville prison, London, Joshua Jebb.
Fig. 25
Pentonville: gallery trumps corridor.
PAGE 49
Ifaren Chase, Michael Levenson: The 41 * tacle of Intimacy. A Public Life for the SP*“ Family, New Jersey: Princeton fctural Press, 2000, 8.
„ Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, loc.cit, 12-
A paradigm shift took place with this development: away from the scenographically oriented architecture of the enfilade and towards the anti-scenographic architecture of private spheres tangentially accessed by a corridor. That which Karen Chase and Michael Levenson call a "delight in being happily apart"41 culminated in the Victorian Era, the most isolating, separation-obsessed epoch in history. Simultaneously, anti-theatrical habitation paradoxically became a highly theatrical experience. Private life became more and more secretive, and in the last third of the 19th century, it retreated successively into the domestic corridor-cell complex - becoming the subject of investigative zeal, and the driving force behind the plan, to such an extent that a "spectacle of intimacy" emerged; "for the public ... the minutiae of daily life were swept into the public theater."42
43 Cf. Michel Foucault, „Of Other Spaces, ultoEtoDias," Architecture, Mouvement, Contlnuite 5 (1984): 46-49.
44	cf. Rem Koolhaas: "Exodus, or the Voluntary Prisoners of Architecture" (1972), in Rem Koolhass, Bruce Mau (eds.): S,M,L,XL, New York: Monacelli Press, 1995, 2ff.
45	For the terms "disciplinary society" and "control society" cf. Gilles Deleuze: "Postscript on the Societies of Control" (1990), in: October, Vol. 59 (Winter, 1992), 3-7.
46. Max Weber: The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, London: Penguin Classics, 2002.
47. Ibid
How can it be that an architectural topology that was approved for and tested on criminals and the insane could be considered appropriate for a family home? Why did excluding "heterotopes"43 become more and more present in inclusive residential forms? Of course there are many overlaps from heterotopic places (prisons, etc.) in which "the other" should be overcome through discipline; and there are also collective residential forms of the 19th century, such as working class housing. But external discipline alone does not explain the fact that, around 1900, even well situated families became "voluntary prisoners"44 in their corridor-accessed rooms. This incredible development can be understood through the successful training of the disciplinary society, which was able to internalize discipline, enhance preemptive obedience, and integrate these newfound abilities into an omnipresent control society.45
Puritanism and the corridor
Puritanism was a decisive force behind this development - a kind of "control society" avant la lettre. Emerging in 1534 after Henry VIII renounced the Catholic church, Puritanism reached its zenith in the 17th century. Oliver Cromwell became a member of the Long Parliament in 1640, leading the Puritan opposition against King Charles I and his absolute sovereignty. Between 1653 and his death in 1658, Cromwell governed as Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland. Although Puritanism was hated in England during Cromwell's military dictatorship due to its intolerance, the "Puritan virtues" nonetheless took a foothold in the Anglo-Saxon lands: ambition, industriousness, striving for success. In the words of Max Weber, Puritanism caused "a ring of asceticism to descend upon life in jolly, old England."46 The sociologist is especially critical of Puritanism's negative effect on the arts:
"It is well known that the lyrics poetry and the folk song, as well as the theater, went into decline after the Elizabeth age."47
Puritanism yielded a general isolation in architecture. In English Puritan literature, one consistently finds warnings against friendship between people - "Only God should be your confidant." Max Weber ascribes this tendency to Calvinistic predestination, the teaching of determinism in the salvation or damnation of man: "God becomes eternally distanced from man and cannot be drawn back, either by magical or sacramental means."48 The tenet of predestination shapes the "dogmatic backdrop of Puritan morality, in the sense of a systematic, rationalized, ethical way of life."49 At first glance, this might seem incomprehensible. How could a tenet stating that man cannot change his fate with his actions encourage man to lead a more self-controlled, methodical life? However, Calvin taught that man could recognize whether he was predestined for salvation based on his ability to perform his duties in the strictest possible way. Although Calvin's predestination teachings emphasized the omnipotence of God and the insignificance of the human will, when combined with the strict morals that Calvin introduced in Geneva, it led to the work ethic upon which the pursuit of profit in capitalism is based.
48.	Volker Heins: Max Weber zur Einführung, Hamburg: Junius, 1990, 64.
49.	Weber, The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, loc. cit., 85.
PAGE 50
CORRIDOR
Fig. 26
1800 Luscombe Castle, Devon: servant wing connected to the main house by one corridor.
PAGE 51
cn Robin Evans: "Figures, Doors, Passages" ilR78) in: Robin Evans: Translations from Drawing Raiding and Other Essays, London: AA publications, 1997, 74.
51 Evans: "Figures, Doors, Passages," loc. cit., 75.
52 Cf. Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, loc. cit., 143.
53. Cf. ibid.
54 Florence Nightingale, ibid.
55.	Flermann Muthesius: The English House, Rlzzoli, 1987, 9.
56.	Ibid.
57. Muthesius, The English House, loc. cit., 29.
58. Such terms as "peers" or "nobility" are reserved for the upper aristocracy.
59. Mark Girouard: Life in the English Country House, New Haven/London: Yale University Press,
1978,214.
50- Cf. Girouard, Life in the English Country douse, loc. cit., 218.
Rooms with only one door
Against that backdrop, Robin Evans maintains that Puritanism is the main force behind the tendency towards isolation in the residential spheres of Anglo-Saxon lands: "These were the years when the puritans talked of 'armouring' the self against the naughty world. They of course meant spiritual armour, but here was another sort, outside of body and soul: the room made into closet."50 According to Evans, this transformation is inseparable from the ascetic direction of the modern world, which he considers to have begun with the Reformation. Evans offers a story told by Cotton Mathers, a Puritan from New England, that gives an idea of how difficult it is to discern between ethic and feeling in this voluntary seclusion. It is said that Mather had a rule for himself never to enter any company ... without endeavoring to be useful in it... To prevent useless intrusions, he inscribed in large letters above the door of his room these admonitory words: 'BE SHORT.'"61 Puritanism was the perfect cultural background for rooms with only one door to become the convention.
The corridor experienced a brilliant upgrade in the English country houses that were built in the late Victorian era. Like no other period in history, the Victorian era promoted defensive measures against social exposure, resulting in the apotheosis of the "social power of the wall."62 Correspondingly, Victorian domesticity resembled an elaborate compartmental system, as described by Chase and Levenson.53 This is underlined in Florence Nightingale's dictum: "Windows are made to be open, doors are made to be shut."54 The unprecedented agglomeration of private spheres in grand Victorian homes did not go unnoticed by Hermann Muthesius: "Perhaps the most striking difference is the lack in England of communicating doors between the rooms, which means that the only access to a room is from a passage or hall. Thus the English room is a sort of cage, in which the inmate is entirely cut off from the next room."55 According to Muthesius, that is "only the latest consequence of the feeling ... that instinctively drove the English to live in detached houses: to be his own master."56
One can already find a particular need for closure and discretion in the typical English swing direction of the doors. The door opens inwards, with its "back" to the room, thus creating a small, temporary vestibule when opened. "The point is," writes Muthesius, promoting the use of this rather uncommon solution on the Continent, "that the person seeking entrance should not be able to look into the entire room through the first crack in the door. Rather, he has to walk around the door, in order to gain entrance, which gives the inhabitant time to prepare for the new visitor."57
Gentrifying the corridor
The upgrading of the corridor during the Victorian Era took place in the specific British class of "gentry" - a typically British and not easily defined social stratum, to which the upper middle class and the lower aristocracy belong,58 ranked above the bourgeoisies and the commoners and serfs below them. In the houses of the gentry, the corridor was literally "gentrified."
The improbable emancipation of the traditionally unloved corridor room can hardly be understood without background. Toward the end of the 18th century, it was fashionable to connect main rooms with the outdoor space. Girouard explains: "The upper and the upper-middle classes had reached the stage of sophistication at which they could react against their own civilization and endeavour to go back to nature."59 Girouard calls this period occurring between 1770-1830 the "Emergence of Formlessness." In this period, main rooms were built on the ground floor so that they could open into the garden. The cellars became darker, and the servants were relocated into a separate building.60
PAGE 52
CORRIDOR
Fig. 27
1841-43 Great Moreton Flail, Cheshire: main buildings linked to side wings with a two-part corridor.
PAGE 53
rf DiN Franklin: The Gentleman's Country j sp and its Plan 1835-1914, London/Boston/ fj°nley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981, 86.
„ rf Glrouard, Life in the English Country
toase, loe. dt, 286.
63. Ibid■
64 Cf. Franklin, The Gentleman's Country House and its Plan 1835-1914, loc. clt., 132-133.
66 Cf. Franklin, The Gentleman's Country House and its Plan 1835-1914, loc. cit., 137.
66.	Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, loc. clt., 159.
67.	Robert Kerr, cited ibid.
68.	Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, loc. clt., 165.
69.	Mutheslus, The English House, loc. clt., 94.
70. Kerr, The Gentleman's House, loc. clt., 68.
71. Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, loc. clt., 166.
J2. Virginia Woolf: A Room of One's Own: New York: Harcourt Brace Dovanovich, 1929.
f®- Chase, Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, !oc. cit., 166.
Around 1800, many English country houses were built with annexes for the servants. The annexes were usually emphatically asymmetric two-part or three-part blocks that were attached to the Palladian-inspired (axisymmetrical) main house ground plan. Muthesius ascribes the superiority of the English houses to the presence of a servant wing.61 The servant wing was often connected to the main house by one corridor, as seen in Luscombe Castle (fig. 26), designed by Humphrey Reptons in 1800. The main house and the servant wing were separated by the so-called "baize door," a door covered in the textile baize (a woolen material from France), affixed with brass nails. This served as the divider between the family and the servants,62 representing the partition between light, air, and fine carpeting on one side and floor screed, linoleum, and "the ghostly smell of stale cabbage"63 on the other. During the first half of the 19th century, the world on either side of the baize door were also typologically divided. Corridors traversed the servants' wing, but not the main wing. Some examples are Great Moreton Hall, built in 1843 by Edward Blore, or Dobroyd Castle, constructed by John Gibson starting in 1865. In both these structures the main buildings were linked to the side wings with a two or three-part corridor connection (fig. 27).64 Similar principles are found in Beaumanor Park (built in 1845 by William Railton) and Tortworth Court (S.S. Teulon, 1849-1852). In both cases, the roofed hall of the main building corresponds to the inner courtyard of the service wing.65
Maximizing comfort through separation
The key treatise for the systematization of different topologies in masters' and servants' sections is Robert Kerr's The Gentleman's House (1865). As suggested by the subtitle - How to Plan English Residences, from the Parsonage to the Palace - Kerr assumed a class division between "upper" and "lower," but he pulled down the dividing wall between middle class and upper class: "The idea of a gentleman's house absorbs such distinctions, even as it preserves and heightens the contrast between better and lower orders."66 Kerr emphasized that he under no circumstances wrote about "inferior dwellings."67 Kerr's houses simultaneously represent the essence of the Industrial Revolution and an escape from it: "Notably, the gentleman's house at once withdraws from the new industrialism and contains it. The spirit of manufacture, from which home is to be a refuge, enters the house in a disciplined squad of modern domestics, whose role is to protect home life from the disruptions they exemplify."68
The principal goal of Kerr's "scientific"69 efforts was the maximization of comfort. He designed floor plans that allowed the inhabitants to move as if on rails. It was unthinkable for a pathway in the house to be simultaneously occupied by a person of another class or gender: "the lines of traffic of the servants and family respectively have to be kept clear of each other by recognized precautions."70 Strict gender separation was especially important to Kerr in the servants' wing. He only made two exceptions to his firm rules of separation: the bedroom belonging to the man of the house was in the female part of the house; and the lady's maid's room was not located in the servants' quarters: "in bringing the lady's maid just across the line into the family region, Kerr cuts her communication with the rest of the servant's department."71
Kerr, a contemporary of Darwin, writes with the spirit of an evolutionary theorist, insofar as his Presbyterian beliefs would allow. His evolutionary history of architecture is driven solely by the wish for "a private room." Kerr reasoned that priests were the first to have their own private room. His patriarchal deduction was that the female wish for what Virginia Woolf would later call "a room of one's own" under the banner of feminism,72 had been underdeveloped for a long time.73 The Victorian lady came into play quite late in Kerr's evolutionary architectural history: Kerr's history "enacts an elaborate narrative, a narrative without characters, in which the setting alone plays out the drama: the struggle of privacy to escape the Saxon hall, to find a second room, and then a second
PAGE 54
Fig. 32
Bearwood second floor plan.
Fig. 28
1864 Robert Kerr's Bearwood, Berkshire.
Fig. 29
Bearwood diagram.
Fig. 33
1812 Eaton Hall, Cheshire, William Porden.
1817 Ashridge House, Hertfordshire, Alfred Waterhouse.
Fig. 35
1864 Westonbirt House, Gloucestershire, Louis Vuillamy.
PAGE 55
story, to escape down a corridor, past an inner door, behind a partition, until, after this long flight through the centuries it finds a place that will suit the fastidious Victorian lady when she makes her belated nineteenth-century arrival."74 The minute she makes her late entrance, Kerr gives her the role of sexualizing the room which she inhabits: "The gentleman's house takes on the aspect of a human body, especially a woman's body. ... The gentleman's well dressed house fuses with his well-adorned wife."75 According to Chase and Levenson, "What Kerr offers his many readers, in effect was a myth of national reconciliation, in which master and servant, man and woman, classic and Gothic, comfort and convenience will move in perfect harmony - as long as they are perfectly distinct."76
Designated corridors
Kerr was not only a theorist, but also a practicing architect. The finest example of his architectural theory is Bearwood Manor, which he built in 1864 for ]ohn Walter, the publisher of The Times (fig. 28-32). The house depicts a scrupulous realization of the architect's zeal for separation, not only in the single cells, but also in the specifically determined corridors between them. In Bearwood there is a "butler's corridor," a "housekeeper's corridor" and a "nursery corridor," not to mention a "women servants' corridor." Altogether, a confusing plethora of specialized circulation paths emerged. Dill Franklin, writing in the 20th century, criticizes Bearwood vehemently, identifying, among other things, "a useless traverse corridor."77
From the second half of the 19th century, it became more and more common to include corridors in the master's wing as well as in the servants' wing of a country house. One can already find evidence of this development at the beginning of the 19th century. In 1812 William Porden completed Eaton Flail, a structure primarily two rooms deep with a middle corridor, which was expanded, among other modifications, into the "grand corridor" by Alfred Waterhouse in 1882 (fig 33).78 Ashridge Flouse, finished in 1817, also exhibits grand bedrooms on the ground floor that were accessed by corridor (fig. 34). But it was starting in 1860 that such floor plans became customary: the servants' wing and the main house connected with one corridor that crossed the entire house, which was becoming more of a two-part construction. The corridor had experienced a gentrification. In the beginning these corridors featured many kinks, in order to keep the kitchen odors from the main house. But little by little, especially from the beginning of the 20th century, the smells of the kitchen were suppressed by different, more technical methods.
Elongation
There are several examples of this evolution, which one could call the "elongation of the corridor." In Westonbirt, built by Louis Vulliamy in 1864, a tentative suggestion of a corridor with many angles and interruptions traversed the entire length of the house (fig. 35). The principles touched upon in Westonbirt are more clearly seen in Flassobury, built in 1870 by Philip Hardwick. It is clearly recognizable as a country house, divided into two by a corridor, and could be broadly described as a two-parter. The corridor still has some kinks and angles, to block kitchen odors, and the connecting passage in the main wing does not flow seamlessly into that of the servants' wing. Wyfold Court,
(fig. 36) the first structure in which the middle corridor is clearly upgraded, was built in 1876 by G. Somers Clark. One entered the house effectively at the edge; the main building was connected on the right-hand side by a 30-meter long corridor with a vaulted stone ceiling.79 An equally linear solution appeared in Rousdon, a building by Ernest George (1883): the corridor, with floor mosaics installed by female prisoners, begins at one corner of the inner courtyard, as described by Dill Franklin (fig. 37).
74. Ibid-
. chase Levenson, The Spectacle of Intimacy, toe. cit., 167.
. pranklin, The Gentleman's Country House and ¡ts Plan 1835-1914, loc. cit., 146.
if *&• Kerr, The Gentleman's House, loc. cit., 155.
78. Cf. ibid.
77. Ibid.
PAGE 56
1872-76 Wyfold Court, Oxfordshire, by G. Somers Clark: first structure in which the middle corridor is upgraded / widened.
Fig. 38
1894 Youlbury Boars Hill, Oxfordshire, owned by archaeologist Sir Arthur Evans, discoverer of Knossos.
Fig. 39
Labyrinth motifs at Youlbury Boars Hill.
Fig. 37
1883 Rousdon, Devon, by Ernest George: the corridor, with floor mosaics installed by female prisoners, begins at one corner of the inner courtyard.
Fig. 40
Knossos, Crete: palace of corridors.
PAGE 57
n cf Sylvia L. Horwitz: Find of a Lifetime. cv Arthur Evans and the Discovery of Knossos, London: Phoenix, 2001 (1981), 133.
81. Horwitz, Find of a Lifetime, loc. cit., 163.
82. Sir Arthur Evans, cited in Joseph Alexander MacGillivray: Minotaur: Sir Arthur Evans and the Archeology of the Minoan Myth, London: Pimlico, 2000, 178.
83.	Sir Arthur Evans, cited in MacGillivray, Minotaur, loc. cit., 183.
84.	Sir Arthur Evans, ibid.
85. Cf. MacGillivray, Minotaur, loc. cit., 202.
86.	Cf. ibid.
87.	New York Times (1900), quoted in Horwitz, Knossos, loc. cit.
88.	Horwitz, Find of a Lifetime, loc. cit., 226.
"• Theodor Adorno, Max Horkheimer: Dialectic Enlightenment, New York: Herder and Herder, 1972 (1944).
Labyrinth
Around 1900, the corridor became an emancipated room and, to a certain degree, socially acceptable. The differentiation of the corridors, as well as the room-cells, in the English country house led to highly complex entities in which the wish to establish order with the help of connecting elements often led to exactly the opposite - labyrinthine architecture. To be sure, even Kerr warned of the dangers of the labyrinthine constructions: "The Corridors and Passages of a house ... are the Skeletons of its Plan; because the relations of the rooms to each other are in fact the relations of its doors; and accordingly, every one can call to mind instances where these thoroughfares and this relation of doors are so contrived that one appears to understand their system instinctively, and others, on the contrary, where one is always at a loss."80 But the good intentions did not help. Countless houses were built at the end of the 19th century under the motto of the "moral house," that recall the labyrinth - the opus magnum of Daidalos, the mythical 'first' architect. Just as the labyrinth in Crete can be seen the Puritan-minded occupants became "voluntary prisoners" in their cell-rooms that could be accessed by exactly one door.
The estate Youlbury Boars Hill in Oxfordshire exemplifies such a scenario. Built in 1894 and torn down during the Second World War, Youlbury was implicitly maze-like as a grand, palatial residence with 28 bedrooms and nine bathrooms with many corridors lying between them (figs. 38-39).81 Concrete labyrinth motives also appear explicitly in the interior design of the house: behind the entrance door was a long hall, the floor of which was covered with an angular labyrinthine pattern - like in churches from the Middle Ages, only displaying a Classical Greek minotaur instead. The master of Youlbury was Sir Arthur Evans, the archeologist who would later discover and unearth Knossos. Many guests at the home remember the labyrinth games: "One by one the children would thread their way through the black maze on the floor of the entrance hall until they reached the minotaur, where Evans was waiting to catch them with a roar and toss them up into the air.''82
Sir Arthur Evan's Youlbury could be seen as a structural anticipation of his subsequent Cretan excavation success. The excavations began on March 23, 1900, almost symbolically marking the boom of the labyrinthine country house of the 19th century. On April 5, 1900, Evans wrote: "A great day! Early in the morning the gradual surface uncovering of the Corridor to E. of Megaron near its S. end revealed two pieces of Myc. Fresco."83 On April 18, Evans reported: "Here we have a whole series of narrow passages (or chambers) some ending blindly. The whole plan very labyrinthine."84 He continued: "We are just entering as an overdeveloped prison for Minotaurus at first and later also the architect, many English country houses had a similar effect on their inhabitants. With their highly specified and endless passageways, the dwellings became a place where Minos' (Kalokairinos, S.T.) excavations & in the first of his corridors running N. bits of tablets begin to occur - which shows how careless the dig was."85 By 1902, the "West Portico" was excavated, which was connected to two passageways: one leading directly to the "Corridor of Procession" and the other to a separate chamber, assumed by Evans to be for "royal use."86 The "Corridor of Procession" was so called because human feet and other body parts were painted on the walls.87 It ended in a "Central Court" (fig. 40). The New York Times asked at the time: "Should we in the 20th century be allowed to witness how a figure of ancient mythology rode into reality? Are we catching a glimpse of a Homerian god in the flesh?"88
Evans truly believed Daidalos to be the architect of Knossos: "But the old ground plan of the palace still stands four square, partially roofed over in places, as first conceived by its great architect..."89 The 19th century, with its belief in progress and its love for myths, found its longed-for architect in Daidalos.
PAGE 58
Fig. 41 The
of the Welbeck Abbey estate, Nottinghamshire: a network of tunnels hidden beneath the surface.
Welbeck Abbey: apotheosis of the 19th century corridor.
Fig. 43
5th Duke of Portland's bedroom door with shielded mail slots for privacy: one for incoming mail, one for outgoing.
PAGE 59
90.	Hermann Kern, Labyrinthe.
Erscheinungsformen und Deutungen. 5000 Jahre Gegenwart eines Urbildes, München: Prestel 1982, 14.
91.	Cf. Girouard, Das feine Leben auf dem Lande, loc. eit, 321.
92. Cf. David 1 Bradbury, Weibeck Abbey, Mansfield: Wheel Publications, 1986.
93. Derek Adlam, Tunnel Vision. The Enigmatic 5th Duke of Portland, Welbeck: Harley Gallery, 2013, 9.
94. Adlam, Tunnel Vision, loc. cit., 10.
95. Ibid.
The evolution of the English country house came to its end in a cross-fade of Victorianism and Knossos. At the same time, Sir Arthur Evans' archeological work triggered a réévaluation of the corridor that went beyond gentrification.
In the mythic magnum opus of Daidalos, the "first architect," he beheld a collection of corridors, elevating the corridor to a status of "ancient architecture" as opposed to its notorious reputation as "un-architecture."
3.	Welbeck Abbey and the 5th Duke of Portland: at home in the Corridor-Cell Complex
The ideologies of both the "improving" prison and the moral house led to an obsessive controlling of the corridor. In both cases, the multiplication of corridors led to their relative emptiness - only segregated groups of prisoners were moved in the corridors of the Blackburn prisons, while the corridors in Bearwood were reserved for specific groups of servants. Ironically, the corridor architecture of the Victorian country house in England, which was supposed to serve the cause of better orientation, often led to an involuntary dominance of the labyrinth - a dialectic of enlightenment90 in nuce. The overabundance of corridors brought about an unintended lack of clarity in structures, giving a home to the "Diversion Principle."91
The corridor went out of control in a controlled fashion. The most extreme manifestation is the underground corridor network built for the 5th Duke of Portland on his estate of Welbeck Abbey in Sherwood Forest near Nottingham towards the end of the 19th century (figs. 41-42).
Many rumors have circulated about the Duke, but most of them remain unconfirmed. William Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck (1800-1879), the 5th Duke's name, is said to have spent most of his life inside his house, specifically in a five-room suite with pink walls in the West wing of Welbeck Abbey, each of the five rooms being equipped sink for washing; the Duke required that a fresh roasted chicken be available at any time, day or night; if a house maid were by chance to meet the Duke in any of the countless corridors of Welbeck, she was forbidden to look into his eyes, but required to turn her face away and press it into the wall;92 if he left his house to take a walk in the extensive park, it was only at night, most often accompanied by a servant, who carried a lantern 30-40 meters in front of him; he only left the house when well concealed, mostly under the protection of an opened umbrella, two large overcoats, a very high top hat and a double ruff, even in the best of weather.93
It is fact that Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck lived in seclusion. The door to the first room of his legendary suite was fitted with two mail slots (fig. 43), one for incoming and one for outgoing mail, each one shielded, so as to prevent any of his servants from peeking through into his chambers. He gave orders primarily in written form, to avoid face-to-face encounters. Around 1860, the 5th Duke began an extensive building program on his estate, which dates back to at least 1140 when it was mentioned as a Premonstratensian abbey; the Duke's renovations were made largely over the work of Robert Smythson in the 17th century. An entire floor was added to the south wing of the main house,94 a large kitchen garden (nine hectares) was established and an enormous new riding house completed (fig. 44): "The new Riding House was 396 feet [150 meters] long, 108 feet [44 meters] wide and 50 feet [20 meters] high. At the time it was the second largest riding house in the world, exceeded only by the huge Manège adjacent to the Kremlin in Moscow."95 Derek Adlam, the curator of the Welbeck estate, points out the technically advanced construction methods employed by the Duke: "Built in the 1870s, its stone facades and tile roofs conceal a curved vault of glass and iron similar to those covering the huge spans still to be seen in mid-nineteenth century railway stations that
PAGE 60
Fig. 47
Servant's corridor behind the plant corridor.
Fig. 46
Welbeck's plant corridor.
Fig. 45
Tunnel No.1, 500 meters long, connecting the lodge and the south lodge at Welbeck.
Fig. 44
Riding school, Welbeck Abbey.
PAGE 61
civabeth Butler: "Account of My Life as a 96- fc"fl Maid at Welbeck 1869-1879" (1931), in: /¡¿tern Tunnel Vision, loc. cit., 23f.
97 Cf Bradbury, Welbeck Abbey, loc. cit., 8.
were inspired by Joseph Paxton's Crystal Palace of 1851.1,96 A former domestic servant, Elizabeth Butler, recollected that the 5th Duke's zeal for the newest technology was not confined to architecture: "He got the first traction engines I ever saw, and steam ploughs also, and I remember the traction engines being used for the hay, but they did not answer very well as the heavy wheels sank into the grounds and they had to fetch the horses to move the trucks about the fields, whole the engines took them to stack yards,"97
It is also a fact that Cavendish-Scott-Bentlnck instructed his builders - some of them Irish laborers who built the London Underground - to construct an enormous underground network of pathways under the 17,000 acres (69 km2) of landscaped grounds. There are different accounts of the entire length of the tunnels, but in total it reached around ten kilometers. In the system of connecting passageways was "Tunnel No. 1," about 500 meters long, which led to a two kilometer pathway connecting the lodge and the south lodge (fig. 45), where the Duke's carriage would emerge, taking him to Retford Station, from where he would take the train down to London. Tunnel No. 1 is wide enough for two carriages, with gas lamps installed that were lit during the night for overhead illumination.98 In addition, the Duke had a 910 meter-long "Plant Corridor" built leading from the main house to the riding house. The corridor is wide enough for several people to walk side by side in (fig. 46). Running parallel to the Plant Corridor was a somewhat longer, narrower, rougher-hewn tunnel leading to the riding house, which the Duke had built for the servants, to ensure his own solitude in the finer tunnel (fig. 47). There are many smaller tunnels also worth mentioning: a grotto corridor (fig. 48), a corridor-like fruit arcade (fig. 49), corridors with narrow-gauge rails on which warm food could be brought on trolleys to the main house. Also worth noting is the "Horse Corridor" (fig. 50) decorated with antler racks, leading to an underground ballroom, the largest private room in England of its time - 160 feet (50 meters) long and 63 feet (20 meters) high (fig. 51).99 All these works were funded by the Duke's properties in London around Portland Square - he owned most of the West End.
100, Adlam, Tunnel Vision, loc. cit., 8.
101. L. lacks, cited in Bradbury, Welbeck Abbey, loc. cit., 25.
102. L. lacks, cited In Bradbury, Welbeck Abbey, he. cit., 25.
Rumors and opinions about Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck abound, labeling him everything from insane to merely eccentric. As an explanation for his reclusiveness, it can be ruled out that the 5th Duke suffered from a disfigured face, since the recollections of Elizabeth Butler do not suggest this. However, it can be assumed that he suffered from some sort of skin condition, probably psoriasis: "If one wonders what the cause of his chronic-ill-health might have been, there is evidence in one of the Duke's letters of a skin condition which might have compelled him to seek seclusion. Possibly this was a severe form of psoriasis which in later life was accompanied by disabling arthritis. He wrote that he obtained relief by sleeping between wet sheets, and by bleeding with a lance"100 - classic modes of relief from the disease. This could perhaps explain a certain withdrawal from public life, but not an unequaled private network of underground tunnels. The latter, in the opinion of Adlam, had more to do with the Duke's obsession with technology: "Unquestionably the Duke enjoyed the process of building and all its associated administrative organization. He must have enjoyed the copious, obsessively detailed correspondence maintained with his agents and managers, even though personal contact was limited only to a few trusted individuals."101 With this knowledge, it is hardly surprising to note the extremely high quality of the underground architectural pathways: "There is not the slightest suspicion of draught in these rooms, they are thoroughly heated by steam pipes, are perfectly free from damp, and the means of lighting employed is most successful."102
The renovations of the 5th Duke of Portland at Welbeck Abbey could be viewed as the culmination of a type of corridor segregation pioneered in the building of prisons at the beginning of the 19th century and further developed in the construction of country homes at the end of the 19th century. Welbeck
98 Cf. Bradbury, Welbeck Abbey, loc. cit., 27.
99. Adlam, Tunnel Vision, loc. cit., 12.
PAGE 62
Fig. 51
The ballroom: the largest spanned single room in England.
Fig. 48
Grotto tunnel.
Fig. 50
Corridor leading to the ballroom.
rig. 49
Welbeck fruit arcade.
PAGE 63
is the uber-example of Chase and Levenson's theory of the theatricalization of domesticity at the end of the 19th century. The ideology of the moral house, so scrupulously mindful of the allocation of different social classes in its pathway architecture, was embraced so wholeheartedly by the 5th Duke that it became the drive for a type of landscape architecture, reclaiming the underground area as terrain with technical excellence. The superstructure of an arcadia whose roof is level with the ground succeeded, to use Marxist terms, in disguising the socio-economic circumstances of the rank and file. The corridor-cell complex reached its greatest domestic dimensions to date: the corridors reserved strictly for the 5,h Duke became a voluntarily occupied cell, which stretched out into his own latifundia.
And thus, a development of the early 20th century was anticipated, namely the introduction of the term corridor into the exterior. This linguistic development came about as a result of the First World War, an event that also shook the typology of the English country house at its foundation. The Treaty of Versailles declared a "Polish Corridor," also known as the "Danzig Corridor," thus conferring the architectural term to describe an interior room to an exterior space. The consequences of this new definition continue still today. When one types "corridor" into a search engine only a very small proportion of the results relate to architecture. "Corridor" can refer to territorial or geopolitical correlations; the term is also used increasingly to describe non-spatial relationships.
PAGE 64
WELBECK ABBEY PHOTOS: HANS WERLEMANN
In November 2014, a rare visit is allowed to Welbeck's mythologized corridors and tunnels, closed to the public.* Over two days of walking the passageways and talking with the curator of the estate, Derek Adlam, and the estate manager, Robert Mayo, the visitors develop several barely substantiated theories (some of them competing) for the 5th Duke of Portland's world of corridors...**
Hideout: the obsessive work of a recluse suffering from a skin disease, attempting to live out of sight and out of sunlight, traveling his enormous estate mainly underground... Engineering masterpiece / folly: an expression of the Duke's passion for planning and construction (possibly inherited from his father, who introduced the steam train to Scotland)... the network is constructed with thousands of workers, some of whom are locals, some of whom are Irish laborers responsible for building parts of the London Underground...
Rural mirror image of the city: the project is funded by rents the Duke collects on his London properties: he owns most of the West End...
Event machine: the extreme bifurcation of the front-stage and back-stage corridor, for nobility and servants respectively, to create a venue capable of hosting and entertaining Europe's monarchies and noblemen. This plan is dashed by the death of the Duke, the outbreak of the First World War, and later on by the economic impossibility of maintaining and properly using the corridors. But the Duke's descended hosts, in 1913, the Archduke Franz Ferdinand, who is nearly shot in a hunting party when someone slips in the snow and accidentally discharges their rifle...
*Welbeck Abbey has been the private family home of the Cavendish-Bentinck family since 1607. Guided tours of Welbeck Abbey's State Rooms take place during August and September each year, offering a unique opportunity to view fine and decorative arts from the internationally renowned Portland Collection in its historic setting. Call 0844 888 9991 or visit www.harleygallery.co.uk to book. Please note that these tours DO NOT include the Underground Ballroom or any tunnels.
** These theories are those of the editors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Welbeck Abbey estate, its owner, or its staff.

— Derek Adlam, curator of Welbeck Abbey, author of Tunnel Vision: The Enigmatic 5th Duke of Portlan in conversation with the visitors.


¿S:£y-


> father in technology, he's well informed, he's up to date,
he uses modern technology, he is rational, he has employed u

managers, he must have had the ability to choose good admini
tors, and those administrators must have been good at

iout He was very good with these people. Why did he do it?
We have no idea at all. We have no idea. He loved doing it.
m	i ; ■	i P¡

fully, never went into debt. But why did he do it?

PAGE 82
WAR OF CORRIDORS
The outbreak of the First World War radically changes the corridor, triggering the beginning of the end of the aristocratic country pile and its perversely complex and segregated corridors, and the social stratification that it mirrored, the war also introduced corridors at new scales and with new meanings and uses: the width of a marching line of soldiers is typically 22-inches / 56 cm, the measure that will become standard in architecture for egress corridors.* The war is fought through a system of semi-subterranean corridors, the dreaded trenches, inhabited for so long that rooms are built branching off from muddy passageways - a militarized version of the corridors of prisons, asylums, and mansions. By the end of the war, the notion of the corridor expands to a vast geographical passage through contested territory - the corridor as a metaphor is born, heralding its demise in architecture and in the esteem of architects...
‘Richard W. Bukowski, NIST Technical Note 1623: Emergency Egress from Buildings Part 1: History and Current Regulations for Egress Systems Design (NIST Building and Fire Research Laboratory, 2008).
ca. 1916 Marching corridor: US troops enter France.
ca. 1916 First aid corridor: US troops in the trenches.
PAGE 83
March 13,1915 Life in the trenches: the "corridor," occupied again. Top right caption, from The War Illustrated: "After dinner in the trenches, nicknamed 'Pall Mall' and 'Piccadilly.' A peaceful pipe round the glowing brazier during a lull In firing."
"A German trench picture-postcard photograph from Champagne: An enemy officer's comfortably furnished underground bed-room. ... The officers' dug-outs - or, rather, subterranean maisonettes would be a better term - we are told, were sometimes panelled and wainscotted."
Postwar: the geographic corridor. If the First World War is the first truly corridoric war - typified by the digging of trenches for battle - by the Second World War the alliance between the term "corridor" and conflict has become fully cemented in the cultural conscious. The so-called Danzig (or Polish) Corridor, described in German Nationalist propaganda of the 1920s, is the strip of land through German-claimed territories linking Poland with the Baltic Sea. The use of "corridor," with its kinetic associations, rather than "region," to describe the land is controversial in Poland, which claims a more static notion of dwelling on the site.
PAGE 84
CORRIDORS AS SHELTER
1939 Ramsgate Tunnel
1940 London's Kingsway Tunnels
Ramsgate, UK
The underground tunnel follows the road system of the city.
Length: 6.5 km Average depth: 20 meters Seating capacity: 35,000 Entrances: 23 Width: 1.82 m Height: 2.13 m
the town: a city under
A.R.P. DEEP TUNNEL SHELTER—RAMSGATE
Additional Copia. 3d. poat fra.J	[8.	Slr„u Rj
TOTAL LENGTH A.IM yd.. (Appx. 4 mil«.)
AVERAGE DEPTH 47 fL to floor. (40 ft. Cover)
SEATING CAPACITY	JS000.
ENTRANCES	..... H.
WIDTH ML	HEIGHT 7fL
For sale: a vast tunnel complex in central London Former tenants include Britain's secret service th famous hot line between America and the Soviet6 Union during the cold war and 400 tons of government documents. The asking price is $7 4 million.
Julia Werdigier, "Mile of London Tunnels for Sale, History Included," New York Times, November 27, 2008.
Recreation.
PAGE 85
coRR|DORS of fear
c ilowing the Second World War, the image of Hiroshima and the threat of instantaneous urban j truction contributes to a dystopian field of Cold War urban planning whose primary study is the ° j for escape. An masterplan proposed by MIT professor Norbert Wiener and published in Life fcj/jazine illustrates a rational solution to the possibility of urban obliteration: urban centers, meant fr working but not living, connected by a generous system of radial highways with multiple spokes, oviding fast escape to suburbia via a so-called "Life Belt " - a resuscitation, for the nuclear age, of Ebenezer Howard's Garden City from the previous century.
December 18, 1950 "How US Cities Can Prepare for Atomic War: Life belts around cities would provide a place for bombed-out refugees to go - MIT professors suggest a bold plan to prevent panic and limit destruction," Life.
The oorridic form of Victorian planning in Ebenezer Howard's Garden City (1898) returns as dystopian strategy in the Life Belt.
PAGE 86
CORRIDORS OF WAR
The change in paradigms from nationalized to denationalized warfare leaves a gigantic building in its wake - the Pentagon in Arlington, near Washington D.C. It is built with the purpose of winning nothing less than the Second World War. Its completion marks the emergence of the first atomic super power. The Pentagon is not only the largest building in the world but also its design and construction are unsurpassed in the speed in which they were carried out.
On September 11, 1941, not even two months after the War Department announces their intention to build, construction work begins. There is no ceremony, no photographs. Architect George Edwin Bergstrom's workforce consists of 110 architects, 54 structural engineers, 43 mechanical engineers,
18 electrical engineers, 13 drainage experts and a number of other specialists. The extent of organizational problems, and pressure on individuals is immense. Two architects die of heart attacks, two construction workers die in accidents involving concrete, one worker is supposed to have been discovered cast in cement, the other is said to have fallen in a ditch full of concrete which had not yet set.
At the end of construction an extraordinary layout of corridors had been produced. In spite of the fact that the total length of corridors amounts to 17.5 miles (28.2 kilometres) one only needs a maximum of seven minutes to reach one point from another. This plan initially has its drawbacks as far as orientation is concerned. Life magazine compares Pentagon staff with rats in a behavioral scientist's labyrinth. Architectural Forum is more convinced and writes in 1943: "Here is the picture of a future architecture in which building will be linked to their users by smooth-flowing traffic networks."
An extremely efficient and stalwart manager, Leslie Grove is promoted following his organization of the Pentagon's construction site to military director of the Manhattan Project - the formidable and top-secret research project which eventually produces the atom bomb.
The Pentagon marks the final hypostasis of centrality before decentralizing tendencies in military thinking take the floor. The development of ARPAnet, the precursor to the internet which cleverly links scattered headquarters with leading US universities, would have been inconceivable without the nuclear threat.
The substitution of the one large center with many small centers starts with the most important war room in the Pentagon. During the First World War the US War Departments are to a large extent stationed in France, in the Second World War however, the majority of Allied military operations are increasingly supervised from Washington. Worldwide operations pivot around the so-called Signal Center on the fifth floor of the inner Pentagon ring. The largest communications facility of its time, this elegant room, with its fluorescent surfaces, is able to transmit five million words per day. The Signal Center is the ultimate "center in the periphery." And the last of its kind.
Adapted from Stephan Truby, Exit-Architecture: Design between War and Peace (New York/Vienna: Springer, 2008).
PAGE 87
1942 Unfinished Pentagon corridor, on guard.
1976 NATO Corridor, 2nd Floor corridor 4-5.
1997 US Air Force Airman 1st Class Cindy Bowman (right) talks to President Bill Clinton (center) and Secretary of Defense William S.
Cohen (left) as they walk down the corridor to the Pentagon's Flail of Heroes on January 29, 1997. The Hall of Heroes honors recipients of the Medal of Honor.
71997 African American Corridor.
2006 Chaplain Corridor, 5th Floor.
2008 ANZUS Corridor, 2nd Floor Corridor 8-9.
2011 George C. Marshall Corridor.
The Pentagon contains 17.5 miles (28.2km) of corridors over an area of
620,000	square meters, or an estimated 15 per cent of the floor space of the world's largest office building.
2010 NORAD (North American Aerospace Defense Command) Corridor.
2003 Career Civilian Corridor, 2nd Floor Corridor 2-3.
PAGE 88
CORRIDOR
CORRIDOR AND SOCIAL HOUSING
The increasing scale of modernist social housing in the 20th century is inextricably tied to the use of the corridor, often in new arrangements that attempt to break the anonymity of the endless double-loaded corridor. In some cases, the corridor - like the balcony - is charged with the responsibility of solving social problems... the failure of these ambitions becomes an indictment of the corridor and further ammunition for its erasure from architecture...
1972 Robin Hood Gardens, London, Alison and Peter Smithson: wide, single-loaded corridor as "street in the sky."
1928-1932 Narkomfin Building, Moscow, Moisei Ginzburg: Wide, single-loaded corridor.
1952 Pedregulho Housing, Rio de Daneiro, Affonso Reidy: 260-meter single-loaded corridor, with porous screen wall.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 89
1972 Corviale Project, Rome, Mario Fiorentino: 958-meter, 9-floor corridor separates two parallel structures; the fourth floor, meant as a street in the sky, is quickly taken over by squatters.
porridors occur every third floor thanks to interlocking units; where there are corridors •ugh, they are long...
PAGE 90
NARKOMFIN REVISITED
1930 Mosei Ginzburg's Narkomfin "street deck" corridor, shortly after completion.
1968 Holding up..
2003 Decay...
"The Narkomfin Building was a laboratory of [the Union of Contemporary Architects'] special researches.
It incorporated a variety of 'F-Type,' the minimum, one-family units, with large 'K-type' units with three rooms on two levels. The section of the building as a whole was an ingenious invention using three-over-two arrangements. Thus living rooms on one side of the building could be ample in height and well lit, while bedrooms and bathrooms could be smaller, more economic in their use of space, and contained on the other side of the building. But this functional arrangement had further properties: the 3:2 system allowed access decks to be threaded along the entire length of the building at every third level, and apartments to be jigsawed together so that views and light in both sides could be enjoyed. These 'street decks' were more than mere functional access corridors, however; they could be seen as symbolic elements expressing communal aspirations. In the Narkomfin Building they were actually heated to encourage interaction all through the year."
— William 1 R. Curtis, Modem Architecture Since 1900 (Phaidon 1996, 209).
J
2011 Wayfinding.
2018 Resurrection-in-progress.
LIFE AND DEATH AND 'LIFE' OF À CORRIDOR In a number of successive visits, I've witnessed the progressive deterioration and eventual resurrection of a uniquely "utopian" corridor in Moscow. Sunlit, it gave access to an unusual amount of different duplexes inside the slab of the Narkomfin building, mutating at some point into a bridge connecting the slab to a block of communal facilities - kitchen, creche, etc. In 1968 it was relatively intact, in 2QQ3JlM(as clearly showing the strain of the Yeltsin years, in 2011 it had become a ruin - that, by 2018, had be^p restored, crudely, to aitÉlsr nrew' condition.
PAGE 92
THE PRUITT-IGOE MYTH: FROM GALLERY TO GAUNTLET
1949	United States Housing Act funds slum clearance and public housing projects, stipulating that local housing authorities fund building maintenance from rent (guaranteeing death spiral when occupancy drops).
1950	St. Louis receives federal commitment for public housing on 57-acre slum clearance site. City commissions Leinweber, Yamasaki & Hellmuth to design 2,700 units to house 15,000 tenants (a higher density than the slum). First proposal, for a mix of high-rise, mid-rise and walk-ups, rejected: it exceeds federal government's maximum cost per unit. Public Housing Administration intervenes: project must consist of 33 identical 11-storey buildings.
1951	Architectural Record hails the nascent project: skip-stop elevators will arrive at "galleries" every three floors. Also know as "vertical hallways," they are communal spaces with laundry rooms, storage rooms, and garbage chutes adjacent. City eliminates budget for children's play areas, landscaping, and ground floor bathrooms.
1954 Completed. Savings have been made on hardware: windows blow out in high winds, doorknobs come off in tenant's hands. Intended to be segregated (Pruitt for African Americans, Igoe for whites), the Supreme Court forces desegregation, but Pruitt-lgoe is almost exclusively occupied by African Americans from the start. Leinweber, Yamasaki & Hellmuth liquidate their practice, Pruit-lgoe their only project. Hellmuth becomes the H in HOK.
1957 Occupancy rate peaks at 91 percent.
1965 Federal grant for social programs and rent assistance to counteract rapid decay. Architectural Record retracts earlier commendation in article titled "The case history of failure": "The galleries are anything but cheerful social enclaves. The tenants call them 'gauntlets' through which they must pass to reach their doors." Occupancy rate: 60 percent.
1969	With no maintenance being carried out, nine month rent strike begins.
1970	Lee Rainwater's Behind Ghetto Walls argues that violence and vandalism in Pruitt-lgoe are result of systemic neglect, poverty, and racial discrimination and that architecture is neither the cause nor the solution. View does not gain momentum.
ca. 1951 Fall guys: architects Leinweber, Yamasaki & Hellmuth unveil the 33 idential slabs forced on them by the Public Housing Administration.
ca. 1963 Saarinen's Gateway Arch takes its place in the distance behind Pruitt-lgoe, now nine years old and ten years away from demolition.
1972 Demolition begins.
1971	600 people left in 17 buildings, the other 16 are boarded up.
1972	Experimental demolition on three buildings to ascertain if explosives or wrecking ball is more efficient. Demolitions featured in Architectural Forum, AIA Journal, Architecture Plus, Architects' Journal (calling Pruitt-lgoe "the modern movement's most grandiloquent failure") and Life, Time, and the Washington Post. Oscar Newman's Defensible Space argues Pruitt-lgoe's collapse is result of residents lacking sense of "ownership" over corridors and other "indefensible" public spaces.
1973	Department of Housing and Urban Development confirms demolition of remaining buildings.
1976	Demolition complete.
1977	"Modern architecture died in St Louis, Missouri on Duly 15, 1972, at 3.32pm (or thereabouts)." — Charles Dencks, The Language of Postmodern Architecture.
Skip-stop elevators stop every third floor at "galleries," communal spaces with amentleis (space for prams, drying, laundry, storage) and stairs leading off to apartments.
Source: Katharine G. Bristol, "The Pruitt-lgoe Myth." Journal of Architectural Education, vol. 44, 1991.
ca.1953 Preconstruction vision of the communal "galleries."
1954 Pristine.
1972 Oscar Newman's Defensible Space "explodes just about every long-accepted rule on the way we build," according to Time, an unfortunate metaphor given what is happening to Prultt-lgoe at the time of the book's publication.
Newman's behavioral and environmental critique
places the blame for Pruitt-lgoe's demise on
its architectural design rather than underlying
political and economic factors, and is even
"a subtle form of blaming the victim," writes
Katharine Bristol in "The Pruitt-lgoe Myth" (Journal
of Architectural Education, 1991). "The idea of
defensible space is based on the assumption that 1960s Patrolled.
certain 'populations' unavoidably bring with them
behavioral problems that have to be designed
against. This kind of argument does not question
why public housing projects tend to be plagued
by violent crime in the first place."
"Each building was given communal corridors on every third floor to house a laundry, a communal room, and a garbage room that contained a garbage chute. Occupied by single-parent, welfare families, the design proved a disaster. Because all the grounds were common and disassociated from the units, residents could not Identify with them ... The corridors, lobbies, elevators, and stairs were dangerous places to walk. They became covered with graffiti and littered with garbage and human waste. ... Landings shared by only two families were well maintained, whereas corridors shared by 20 families, and lobbies, elevators, and stairs shared by 150 families were e disaster - they evoked no feelings of identity 1970 Abandoned, or control." (Oscar Newman, Defensible Space:
Crime Prevention Through Urban Design, MacMillan, 1972.)
PAGE 94
CORRIDOR CITIES
Traced over its host city and enabled by the corridor, interior urban networks permit cities - often in extreme climatic or geographical settings - to expand across and through new ground planes, under the earth, escalating across multiple levels, winding through buildings, complexes, malls, stations...
1970s-80s Peachtree Center, Atlanta (from "Interior Urbanism/Portman Space," an exhibition by Charles Rice and Alina McConnochie, 2010.)
Underground, Houston
Underground tunnel system
95 downtown blocks
Annual temperature range: 43°C / -2°C
Skyway, Minneapolis
Elevated, privately-owned system of bridges 59 downtown blocks
Annual temperature range: 28.6°C / -13.6°C
RESO / La Ville Souterrainian, Montreal
Multiple-level underground system
60 separate complexes
Annual temperature range: 26.6/ -12.4C
*
Central Mid Levels Escalators, Hong Kong
System of escalators Steep terrain
Annual temperature range: 32.8°C / 10.3°C
Shinjuku (Tokyo), Japan
Grade-separated shopping district Connection to metro and train networks Annual temperature range: 24.5°C / 2°C
PAGE 95
!908-1968 Singer Building, New York City.
1930 Manhattan Company, New York City.
1973-2001 World Trade Center, New York City. 2001 Designed to withstand the impact of a Boeing 707 aircraft but not the two 767s and 20,000 gallons of jet fuel that hit them. 2,996 deaths.
2004 Taipei 101 , Taiwan.
^04 Bomb threat evacuation
SKYSCRAPER CORRIDORS
The skyscraper, seemingly a non-corridor building type thanks to its open plans, still requires corridors for emergency evacuation. A survey of some of the world's tallest buildings since 1908 reveals the tenacity of the corridor, hiding in the small "backstage" area behind the triumphant open plan that it enables...
1909 Metropolitan Life Tower (Clock Tower), New 1913 Woolworth Building, New York City. York City.
1930 Chrysler Building, New York City.	1931 Empire State Building, New York.
1945 Airplane crash between the 78th and 80th floor; 14 deaths and 26 injuries.
1997 Fire 71-77th floors; firefighters take elevators to the 57th floor and walked 17 floors up ... workers on the 67th through the 71st floors are evacuated.
1974 Willis (Sears) Tower, Chicago.	1998 Petronas Towers, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
2001 Bomb Threat Evacuation 2005 Power Blackout Evacuation
2009 Burj Khalifa, Dubai.
PAGE 96
DEMENTIA CORRIDOR
The Kriterienkatalog Demenzfreundliche Architektur (Criteria for Dementia Friendly Architecture), a dissertation published after its submission at the Technical University of Dresden, describes a host of disorienting corridor layouts in facilities for dementia patients, and suggests solutions. With a sensitivity to the phenomenological effects of spatial arrangements and apparently benign objects akin to that of feng shui, Gesine Marquardt identifies a disturbing array of latent problems with corridors, seemingly an element that can only exacerbate anxiety...
Gesine Marquardt, "Kriterienkataiog
Demenzfreundliche Architektur", Dissertatio an der Fakultät Architekt1 der Technischen UniverJi-Dresden, 2006. "al
"The problem of the intersecting corridors [or going around the corner]: The fact that the floor is turning to the left is very difficult to see. The visual relationship between the two floors through the atrium can't be understood by the demented because they can't cope with the complexity of the spatial composition. In the given situation this could be solved by adding a catchy visual marker in the floor."
"The problem of the bent corridor: In this situation only part of the corridor is visible, which means that spaces like the dining and living room can be out of visual reach. It increases the difficulty of determining ones position as a beginning and end point are absent."
"Adding an object in the corridor: The tree in the center of the living room provides an interesting and memorable object which can be used as a reference point for orientation. Additionally the opening to the floor below can connect two living rooms visually and acoustically."
"Corridor ends as turning points: The end point of a corridor becomes a turning point... with an added sofa / cabinet / bookcase ... Light flows in from through windows at the sides, avoiding light from the front. Corridor ends with a closed wall which can be colored or with signage which is clearly readable from a distance."
"Living room entrances: The emergency door placed at the side is hardly part of the visual orientation and flow of movement. The alignment with windows in the frame doesn't help either. The end of the corridor is highly visible and can be used to provide clear direction."
"Guidance in Corridors: a straight corridor with highly visible chair rail helps inhabitants find their direction. Specific function can be positioned to protrude or to be recessed."
"Interruption in the sequence of rooms: The interruption in the room sequence is supported by adding different functions: across the dining- and living room there is a recessed balcony creating an expanded corridor. From there a visual and acoustic connection is made with the central area."
"Problems of Entrances: In the image on the left it is very hard to differentiate a door from a window, which makes finding the entrance to the kitchen more difficult. In the image on the right, the two are more clearly differentiated. The chair rail gives an intuitive support to finding the right direction, leading the inhabitant to the door."
"Problems in Spatial conception: If in the traffic trajectory a dining and living section is programmed, one solution can be to add a wooden louvered partition to create a spatial and acoustic barrier."
PAGE 97
dutch
nursing home corridors
L°ao Anton Pieck-hofje Nursing Home,
|at1ds: group-living for 36 elderly dimentia Net^s ¡n small scale architecture meant to patien jio(JS]ng a wandering circuit for patients fesern houses of individual units.
connects
TENTACLES + LOOP 1959 Nieuw Toutenburg Nursing Home, Noordburgum, Netherlands: 1.5 kilometers of corridors link 17 small houses (176 psychogeriatric elderly). Within each house, a looped corridor serves rooms.
STREETS
1978 de Bleerink Nursing Home, Netherlands:
The nursing home (housing 186 residents) imitates a small village. Corridors, like streets, lead from communal facilities (village square) to the wards / wandering circuits.
"it is concluded that [mental hospital corridors] interfere with normal verbal communication due to their characteristic acoustical properties. Optical phenomena common to these passageways obscure the perception of the human figure and face, and distort distance perception. Paradoxical visual cues produced by one tunnel created interrelated, cross-sensory illusions involving room size, distance, walking speed and time. Observations of patient behavior suggest the effect of narrow corridors upon anxiety is via the penetration of the personal space envelope."
— Mayer Spivack, "Sensory Distortion in Tunnels and Corridors,"
Hospital and Community Psychiatry vol. 18, no. 1 (1967).
PAGE 98
CORRIDOR
CORRIDOR SYNTAX By Kevin McLeod
By building an impossible and illogical hotel for his film The Shining (1980), Stanley Kubrick transforms both architecture and cinema into polymorphic languages in motion. Along with only a few daring directors, he invents the complex visual language Movie (with a capital 'M') out of cinema. A medium born within Paleolithic caves in pictograms, in drawn sequential narratives, re-emerging through motion in the last century.
In creating a new framework for visual language, a glyphic one in motion (glyph simply means the images are sunlit-shadowed), Kubrick unlocks the concept of meaning. His tool for the task is ingenious, an invention he named the mode-jerk. A signature weapon of continuity, the mode-jerk controls patterns in visuals or wordplay that can be switched without audience awareness. In a movie occurring mostly in a single locale, switching patterns without alerting viewers is difficult to manage, so the audience is lulled by the mundane. As passageways linking one behavior to another, the corridors of The Overlook exhibit the basic grammar of mode-jerks, corridors framed as syntactical parts that connect increasingly impossible spatial conditions. Action is shown instead of told, with corridors offering conjunctive access across barriers of meaning, behaving as words do while evading the flat trappings of semantic: [Subject] [Verb] [Object] : [room] [corridor] [actor]. The crucial aspect is that Western notions of figure-ground dichotomies are bypassed. Audiences experience space as crude sentences made from frames, some in motion, others fixed. The meaning each sequence creates increasingly varies as mode-jerks continue distortion.
The artificially bland information hotels generically engineer into a dreamlike continuity for travellers is used by Kubrick to input trickery of the supernatural mirrored realms (or multiverse), the inner-outer of past and future, correlations happening both in your brain and on the movie screen. Past these mode-jerks, Kubrick reconciles distortion, offering frames for overlap, mirroring, doubling, or beyond. Meaning is construed silently. You might vocalize your thoughts later, but here in the dark it's just image, sound and perception. And the result is he destroys myth, a basic component of large-scale narrative. All of myth, embedded deep within Western concepts apply to both the mundaneness of the modern world, and Kubrick's visual doublespeak that creates new syntaxes in visual cognition, obliterating myth by overloading it into every frame. These functions arrive through space itself, an easily animated and shifting set (the shooting location). As we will see in the coming pages, overlap and perspective combine for distinct sequences that evolve our interpretation and sense of the world to a place beyond meaning. The combined effect is magnetic: Kubrick convinces
'Psychologist Julian Hochberg asserts 3D comes naturally to visual perception while 2D (drawing on surfaces or creating images on screens) is a process we teach ourselves: pictorialization - making a kind of 3D from 2D, a fundament of our visual system and a crucial step in consciousness. We essentially unlearn 3D to grasp the potential of 2D, especially m illusions of depth. Hochberg explores this mathematically, early steps towards a computational model of vision. Da Vinci and Kubrick achieve symbolic and distorting imagery in their 2D, which embeds 3D as an illusion: "The results also emphasize the need for a distinction between familiar size (or 'meaning) and relative size, or size difference of similar objects." Also: "how we combine our own glances ... the psychologist is not the first to be concerned with this question, the filmmaker has been here before him."
CORRIDOR
PAGE 99
Entrainment: the synching of neural patterns Wlth external stimulus.
audiences to see the films again. Storytelling demanding multiple views via puzzling lures encoded at the edges of perception. Mode-jerks operating nearly invisibly recast corridors as modifiers of nearby rooms, where actors experience similar things very differently. Kubrick's goal is clear: to craft storytelling that exhibits, at minimum, two meanings. By painting two meanings onto pivotal gestures, many more follow as gestures pile up. Planned multiplying meanings (not constructed ambiguity) are evidence that meaning is an illusion. Kubrick shines light past the glass ceiling of semantics, through pictorialization,1 a storytelling framework that employs deep reference and representation while defying meaning.
ROOM 237
The corridor transforms how we interpret events inside Room 237. The carpet colors refer to the hallway's entrances: where doors are brown, knobs are gold and key-tags are red (fig. 5). Here in the corridor's second scene, a mode-jerk occurs. The moment the ball arrives to Danny, the carpet pattern flips 180 degrees (fig. 4; compare with fig. 11). This reorients him: Danny enters a mirror, moving from 'then' to 'now,' from the first approach riding his tricycle to this one, walking vs. entering. Kubrick stages the same toy car game at opposite ends of the corridor and cuts from one to the other (figs. 1-4). An instantaneous reversal. The audience is hooked here physically when definitions of the corridor imperceptibly change, expand. An entrainment2 by mode jerk that goes by without being noticed, in some unknown place in the cortex. Kubrick's radical inventions are the impossibilities of Escher brought to life in 3D from 2D, (once edited, becoming 4D from 3D), 'seen' without a trace of seeing. Room 237 is entered through a mirrored corridor, conjuring the notion there are two 237s. Optically, the phantom suites reconnect in their bathrooms via their vanity mirrors, where one's bathtub holds the beauty that greets Hack Torrance and in the other is the decayed woman that menaces Jack and Danny. In one mirror Jack kisses the beauty (fig. 7), in the other the decayed woman (fig. 8), giving the mirror a window-like quality that distorts Jack's singularity. The two realms meet in the bathrooms' centers, facets only equated in a physical mirror, itself showing us sharp differences in reflection.
Fig. 9 Hochberg illustrates how perspective and overlap combine in 2D to simulate 3D (techniques invented by Brunelleschi and Da Vinci). Depth cues are embedded both in overlap and contrast between relative and different sizes (Hochberg, 1972).
Fig. 10 Hochberg's Typical unit pattern used In testing motion-picture stimuli. Notice its similarity to the form and function of the corridor, motion-tracking that Kubrick repeatedly illustrates in his films.
Here to maximal effect (Hochberg & Brooks, 1978).
PAGE 100
MOTION-GLYPHS IN ACTION:
THE CORRIDOR CONNECTING TO EXTERIOR PATHS
Kubrick overlaps, unifies and contrasts paths. Compare the establishing shot of Danny playing with his toy cars (fig. 11; 0:57:09) against an early scene driving up the mountain (fig. 12; 0:02:01). Both frames contain sun-imagery (the yellow tennis ball that rolls to Danny; the lens flare's camera obscura sun image); scaled cars; polygons (the lens refraction; the carpet pattern). The yellow-lined Going to the Sun Road, a formerly key path in Native American Blackfoot religion, paved in the 1920s for public access to Glacier National Park, contrasts the corridor, its carpet pattern composited from the Apollo NASA program's launch-pad array (fig. 13). Later Danny stands, wearing a sweater, another kind of textile, depicting a Saturn V launch rocket on blue background (fig. 4, Apollo 11 USA). Kubrick has subliminally named this passageway comparatively: Going to the Moon Road. Both are spiritual realms conquered by the US illustrated with cross-contrasting systems, pictogram-matic and photographic.
2 OVERLOOKS
11
SON
TENNIS BALL/ SUN OBJECT
WOVEN POLYGONAL PATTERN DERIVED FROM APOLLO PROGRAM LAUNCH PADS
12
FLARE'S DOUBLE SUN
TEXT (CREDITS) SENT SKYWARD
BLUE WOVEN SWEATER WITH APOLLO PROGRAM TEXT & ICONOGRAPHY
TOY CARS
PICTOGRAMMATICALLY RENDERED PLACE:
GOING TO THE MOON ROAD
ACTUAL PLACE:
GOING TO THE SUN ROAD BLACKFOOT TRIBAL PATH PAVED BY US GOVERNMENT
PARKED CAR
POLYGONAL LENS FLARE
J
CORRIDOR
PAGE 101
dEpth«b<teriors
The powder blue pattern of the twins' dresses reappears (fig. 23), on walls approaching the Torrance family's apartment (fig. 16), which is entered through an unnumbered door. A distant exit sign pointing right (to another corridor), refers to an accessway that cannot exist. Nor can the door facing us in the distance have a room behind it. The impossibilities are verified in the inspection of the apartment (fig. 15), which reveals a long-walled skylit bedroom and windowed bathroom where an exit corridor should be. Instead, it's the window Danny later escapes through (fig. 17). When Danny slides °ut this window and down a snowdrift, we see he leaves from a window in the building's center, rendering the apartment's sky lit side windows ^possible. The complexity shown inside the Overlook Hotel is no match for the exterior's 'different world' revealed at night - a logic of continuity framed ^continuously. Continuum is repeatedly denied.
14
2.	IMPOSSIBLE WINDOWS
3.	DOOR TO NOWHERE
PAGE 102
Temple motif: the skyward viewed maze that Danny and Wendy navigate, the floor that leads to the two girls, and the staircase of the Colorado Lounge (viewed downward) - all are pyramidal temple forms at different scales and perspectives.
TWO MAZES - MAZES ARE CORRIDORS CREATING PUZZLES3
Jack stares down into the model (a miniature overlook), while we instead see an aerial view 90 degrees off (fig. 21): the complexity outside, where we are shown the only optical effect shot of the film, a vast, photorealistic overlook that mimics Jack's viewing scale but shifts our orientation, where the temple motif appears. Wendy and Danny walk 'atop' this seemingly flattened temple-form-as-maze, linking temple domination to other sequences: Wendy's bat-wielding reverse-climb up the 'temple' staircase (fig. 19), and Danny's maze-run are inversions from this view. Like the disorienting map that covers the maze's entrance and shifts it to the right (fig. 26), we inhabit the maze overlook, further distorting our awareness of its entrance. By cutting from Jack to what seems to be Jack's gaze, a view that is clearly not of the previous model, Kubrick inserts a paradox, an uneasy shift we can only read unconsciously.
Interim shots of the twins at the end of the corridor place them atop a pyramidal temple made of wood and blue carpet (via perspective), linking to the above temple threads. The framing converts the scene into a sacred / sacrificial ritual. As with intercuts of the first elevator shot and its gushing blood, the girls' blood splatter makes a connection of both action and color. The dresses' blue hue returns as Jack lights up the maze that will trap him (fig. 25). Here, the hotel's final gateway to the maze uses more embedding: a temple form is drawn in the floor, capped by real snow (this is a ritual occurring in the Rockies, or in native idiom The Shining Mountains). A woven mat provides transition to the snow and is a subtle reference to the maze outside (mats and carpets are ubiquitous sacred forms in Meso and North American cosmologies), turning this frame into a pictogram of Jack's impending death (can you spot the twin portraits that overlook the scene?).
REVERSAL: DOWN TO GO 'UP'. TEMPLE MOTIF IS FOUND ONLY DOWNWARDS IN THE COLORADO LOUNGE.
TEMPLE IMAGE IN MAZE FOUND BY 30HNNY53
20
21
22
23
24
25
PAGE 103
| "Maze-treaders, whose vision ahead and behind is severely constricted and fragmented, suffer confusion, whereas maze-viewers who see the Pattern whole, from above or in diagram, are dazzled by its complex artistry. What you see depends on where you stand, and thus, at one end the same time, labyrinths are single (there is one Physical structure) and double: they simultaneously incorporate order and disorder, clarity and confusion, unity and multiplicity, artistry and chaos. They may be perceived as a path (a 'near but circuitous path to a goal) or as a pattern w complete symmetrical design)... Our Perception of labyrinths is thus intrinsically unstable: change your perspective and the agjrinth seems to change." it "enelope Reed Doob, The Idea of the Labyrinth Cornell, 1992).
CORRIDOR
MAZE CENTER & TERMINAL BATHROOMS
The maze's center is book-ended by double arch insets, a mirror-portal to Room 237's bathroom. The maze even includes an inset space behind one of the arches, mimicking the bathroom's tub, sink and toilet alcoves. Images call attention to the white that fill both 'skies' (figs. 27-28).
Wendy and Danny walk out of hedge-forms later rendered in ceramic green in 237's bathroom, where a similar older-younger pairing accosts Hack (the beauty and the decayed woman). Bathrooms are termination points in the film, a psychical-anthropological syntax coming from and leading back to the underworld. In each, color-field and fluid are drained from Hack: the spilled drink (fig. 29), the kiss's saliva (fig. 7), and finally blood from Wendy's knife.
Feint: Mode-jerks occurring in termination points fold meanings. The Torrance apartment's terminal point is its bathroom, yet just outside it is a visual link. A disappearing oval painting of a lake among trees (fig. 30) connects one side of the scene (in the bedroom's mirror) to the opening of the film; the other side, absent the painting (fig. 31), disconnects the beginning of the film from the bathroom where Danny will later escape.
PAGE 104
YELLOW LIGHT INCANDESCENT
32
MAN HOLDS RIFLE
DIAMONDS ON FAR WALL & FLOOR (DIAMONDS "SHINE")
WHITE LIGHT SPECTRAL/IMPOSSIBLE WINDOW & FIXTURES
INDIAN FORM HOLDS COUP STICK AND ATTACHED SCALP
CORRIDOR/LOBBY/ULLMAN OFFICE
Camera follows into a fluorescent ante-room where - separated by a doorway - appear modern art (left) and snowcapped stills of the mountain in summertime and wintertime (right) (fig. 33). The left image is an abstraction of a Native American warrior and has no straight lines. The photos on the right transport us to the present outdoors and the future daylight of Jack's frozen end (fig. 35) whose corpse is colored in a tone similar to a b&w photograph's grays (fig. 36).
GREEN LIGHT FLUORESCENT
SKYLIT HOTEL LANDSCAPES
BLUE LIGHT SKYLIGHT
PAGE 105
hT hue and glyph-making
'te| entrance hall tracking shot Is coded in a type of hue-syntax.
1^e c through four light qualities on its way to the final room, into a
PaS, ^ue made from both natural and man-made sources. K1 lhl';^L'
s,n * octs the cool blue-white of the outside with the lobby's -0ntrabl= _	_ _____. ,______________________■ ■_
Pa , made from both natural and man-made sources. Kubrick asts the cool blue-white of the outside with the lobby's Hescence, a movement from the sky to the inner yellows and reds
, hotel, color-wise the hotel's inner power source (fig. 32). The °' era passes through a green hued anteroom, fluorescent light,
°h re just beyond is a spectral, colorless hue, matched by both ceiling ^ d exterior light, impossible in comparison with the three previous 3 lor states. (Skylight isn't two color temperatures - blue and colorless C,n a single exposure; ceiling fixtures and skylight can't be the same hue ) la a s'n9^e sh°T Kubrick silently illustrates how humans are tured and converted into monochromatic ghosts, demonstrating hotel is supernatural. The hue syntax bends here, crossing into Llllman's office. Bending laws of physics. A transition facilitated by a hallway-
Accompanying these segmented hues are transforming oppositions between left and right, staging a visual war between hemispheres, culminating in 'Jack's' photo that ends the film (fig. 36). His naming n0w in quotes, because if we use the Charles / Delbert Grady mode-jerk as a guide, the version of him in the photograph now has a different first name. (Mode-jerk: This previous caretaker is named by the hotel manager "Charles" but when meeting Jack in person, he calls himself "Delbert.")
Jack is oriented with hanging outdoor imagery (where he just came from and the future where it snows). Contrast the color imagery framing the door with the spectral windows behind Ullman, and you get a definitive path, with the office itself a zone between color and black and white. Knowing the lobby's depth renders the window impossible, hinting it's a gateway. The 'window,' asymmetrically framed left of the doorway, is a conjuring of the hotel's. Something metaphysical; impossible yet plausible in our unconscious. So mundane it seems real. Ullman, and his secretary Susie, are framed just left of center. A left sided interior of the hotel is dominated by the painted doubled-image of a Native American. There, a dangling black appendage mimics a collected scalp (lower right in painting); the scalp is attached to a color-banded coup stick for capturing spirits (framed to reflect the man moments earlier awaiting the elevator, who's just oriented left, holding a rifle). Once we move into the office, the left frame reveals a map very subtly reflecting Susie and Ullman (fig. 37). Notice Ullman and Susie's nearly monochromatic appearance compared to the ante-room's colorful hanging art. Ullman's deep-red tie lends him the appearance of a cutthroat death, surrounded in dark blue. The tie's deep red hue recalls the warrior-image outside his door and in serial this same red hue pours from the elevator minutes later, also from the left side. The office's doorway is bordered like the photo of Jack that ends the film, ln the same way as the color landscapes on the right are. In contrast the warrior's frame shines. Even the doorway shines.
ta tighter scales, the office window's monochromatic frames resemble °ut of focus black and white photographs, further connections to -tack's final imprisonment. Jack has entered an endless series of mirrors that absorb him. Spectral redheads (Ullman and Susie) guide Jack at the entrance of a color-reducing series of transitions ending in black and white.
Figs. 37 & 38: the 'Motion-Glyph' language Is what cinema seems to be built out of - strategies in motion picture stimuli. One aspect, Kubrick's subtly asymmetric framing without true center-point, Is not unique (here's a frame from Hotel Imperial, 1927)4, what's different about Kubrick is his movement through these frames. Pyramidal space Is compressed in "depth through obliqueness" constructing 3D from 2D through "a system of converging beams." (Rudolf Amheim, Art and Visual Perception, University of California Press, 1954.) Here, It's traversed, the vanishing points always tracking, rarely stationary.
4 The 'continuity set' is born in Hollywood. "Spring passed into summer and still production on Hotel Imperial was nowhere near completion. Both [Mauritz] Stiller and [Erich] Pommer were perfectionists determined to make their American reputations with this picture. Until that time, most sets consisted of separate rooms constructed as they were needed. This meant a lack of script continuity when shooting. You filmed all the scenes that took place in one set at the same time, whether or not they occurred sequentially in the script. For Hotel Imperial, they built a permanent setting made of eight rooms and the hotel lobby. This was called a composite set and in it were able to use a "flying camera." Technically this meant we could follow the characters from one room to another to heighten the dramatic effects and permit the action to flow with a minimum loss in continuity. It was a system that was to revolutionize Hollywood film production, but, as we were among the first to use it, we naturally had to take extra time to experiment and get rid of the mechanical difficulties."
— Pola Negri, Memoirs of a Star (Doubleday, 1970), 280.
PAGE 106
FENG SHUI:
MITIGATING THE CORRIDOR
"Narrow corridors with no doors or windows will only allow the chi to move rapidly from one end of the corridor to another. This means energy moves faster then we'd like, and we must find a way to slow it down."
— Teodor Vasile, Feng Shui master.
In Feng Shui, maintaining the smooth movement of Qi (energy), is the most important aspect of architecture and interior design. Long and narrow corridors (or hallways) are regarded as bad spaces with their relentless linearity and often their sharpness, which causes them to act as conduits for fast moving sha chi, or "poison arrows" as well as gathering places for si chi, a low, decaying energy. Especially, the double-loaded corridor (with doors on both sides), which is rare in Chinese architecture, is regarded as bad space. If such a corridor is unavoidable, mitigating steps can be taken: hanging mobiles or mirrors on walls or the ceiling, in order to make the Qi zigzag as it moves through, or putting plant pots on floor. These methods of 'curing space' betray the negative perception of the long and the narrow; similar perceptions hold sway in the West, since the corridor was declared retrograde during modernism...
Bad: long and narrow corridor
Better: corridor with lantern, mirrors, and plant in the corner.
Slowing down the chi: feng shui crystals hung from the ceiling in large hallways stop chi from escaping too rapidly.
PAGE 107
Mirrored corridor, to create a zigzag effect for the chi...
Lantern in corridor.
Plant pots in corridor.
PAGE 108
FIRST EXIT CORRIDOR
In 1277, Pope Nicholas III builds an exit structure on an existing fortified city wall: the Corridôre di Borgo is an 800-meter escape route connecting the Vatican to the Castel Sant'Angello via an aqueduct-like structure and a ramping, spiral corridor, it enables the evacuation of several Popes during traumatic events like in the Sack of Rome in 1527. The architectural appendage, an isolated egress system, foreshadows the late corridor's function as a means of escape... (Stephan Trüby, Exit-Architecture: Design between War and Peace trans. by Robert Payne (New York: Springer Wein, 2008); Mark Darzombek, "Corridor Spaces," Critical Inquiry vol. 36, no. 4(2010): 728-770.)
Papal exit: the width of the corridor is designed for the passage of a single body - the pope's.
PAGE 109
1720-1778 The
Corridore di Borgo, the pope's exit corridor, leading to Castel Sant'Angello: a dramatic urban assemblage worthy of depiction by Piranesi.
1527 Sack of Rome, Martin van Heemskerck: emergency exit system employed.
PAGE 110
CODED CORRIDOR
In the 19th century, New York City's proliferating tenements start growing taller than fire department ladders. After a fire in 1860 traps and kills ten people on the upper floors of a building, New York's architects create the first comprehensive building code by combining existing and new regulations. The city's first exit laws apply only to tenement housing, prescribing either one protected exit stairway or two exit points. In 1899 a fire destroys the Windsor Hotel, its wide corridors filling with smoke, trapping guests in their rooms. Without any alternative escape route, 14 people perish in the fire, and 52 are injured. Fearing that primary circulation corridors are too vulnerable in emergencies, legislators enforce additional exit routes separate from primary circulation routes. The standard corridor width of 44 inches (112 cm) width and 7.5 feet (2.3 meters) height is law by 1935, and is designed to support two lines of people - a path of fleeing occupants, and the counter-flow of firefighters. Present day New York City building code requires a separate, specialized evacuation route. Coded exit corridors may not supply, return, exhaust, or ventilate air. (Sara Wermiel, "No Exit: The Rise and Demise of the Outside Fire Escape," Technology and Culture, vol. 44, no. 2 (2003), 258-284; and Richard W. Bukowski, NIST Technical Note 1623: Emergency Egress from Buildings Part 1: History and Current Regulations for Egress Systems Design (NIST Building and Fire Research Laboratory, 2008).
1899 Fire in the Windsor Hotel, New York, kills 14 and prompts new legislation requiring additional exit routes separate from the main circulation corridors.
EGRESS WIDTH
1913 22-inch (56 cm) minimum stair width and maximum occupant load of 14 people per floor recommended by New York State Department of Labor; National Fire Protection Association's Committee on Fireproof Construction recommends 44-inch (112 cm) exit stair.
1927 The recommendations become regulations under the NFPA Building Exits Code (NFPA 101-T), later known as the Life Safety Code.
1935 44-inch (112 cm) width corridor exit system enforced by National Bureau of Standards (NBS; present day National Institute of Standards and Technology, NISC), published in Design and Construction of Building Exits.
1935-1980s US codes adopt the NBS report and NFPA 101.
mid-1980s 22-inch exit stair width abandoned; 44-inch (112 cm) standard retained. Present day egress design correlates width (determined by occupant loads) with discharge rates.
1997 44-inch (112 cm) minimum corridor width enforced globally by International Code Council (ICC).
CORRIDOR
PAGE 111
INTERNATIONAL definition of a corridor
"Corridor: An enclosed exit access component that defines and provides a path of egress travel. Means of Egress: A continuous and unobstructed path of vertical and horizontal egress travel from any occupied portion of a building or structure to a public way. A means of egress consists of three separate and distinct parts: the exit access, the exit and the exit discharge."
—International Code Council, Building Code, chapter 10: "Means of Egress" (201).
CORRIDORS FOR SPEED
By the 20th century, architecture abandons the comprehensive version of the corridor, which attempts to reconcile conflicting functions - circulation (speed), and program (place). Once optimized for speed - primarily in the form of the exit route - the corridor can no longer constitute a "place." Modern legislators, reflecting on trauma and anticipating disaster, emphasize egress efficiency in building design. The corridore re-enters architectural practice as a set of rules, definitions, and dimensions, coded to be exited, not occupied. Because the corridor has historically been an instrument of speed, its transition to device-hood is not a degradation but an update, adapting to the escalating speeds of contemporary evacuation. Memorialized as building code, the corridor makes a return to architecture after a period of neglect...
PAGE 112
THE FORM OF CODE
The exit corridor is in effect a continuous, extruded doorway.
According to the International Building Code:
-	Passage must be continuous and unobstructed (for example, by rooms) from the point of entry to the point of discharge.
-	Spanning the space between two exits, the corridor must be at least half the length of the overall diagonal dimension of the building.
-	Dead-ends can only reach 20 feet / 6 meters.
-	Signs, spaced every 100 feet / 30 meters guarantee the visibility of exit routes and points.
2006 22 inch / 56 cm: standard body width used to create the coded corridor of 44 inches / 112 unit, wide enough for two lines of occupants. ("Anthropometric data for adults," NFPA 101 the Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association.)
CORRIDOR
PAGE 113
•TATIONS of the exit corridor
P®* n to the International Building Code,
According Megns of EgresSj SECT|ON 1018
gSSSDOfis (2012).
MAXIMUM CORRIDOR LENGTHS
According to various international codes.
29.9m / 5.8m / 2.58m
41,9m /6.3m /1.15m 49.6m/10.3m/1.69m
51.3m/14.7m/3.0m 56.1m / 10.2m / 1.58m
59.5m/ 15.2m/ 1.43m 64.3m/6.3m/1.58m 65.3m /6.2m/ 1.58m
■
Australia 2007 Guyana 2005
NFPA101 Life Safety Code - 2006
Hong Kong 2011 South Africa 2011
India 2005 Saudi Arabia 2007

■
IBC 2012
Criteria
10th floor of a hotel building with maximum occupancy of 100 people Room size = 5.6m x 5.6m & 5.5m x 6.5m
Corridor
PAGE 114
CORRIDOR
INVENTING THE CORRIDOR
A selection of US patents making the corridor into a device...
U.S. Patent Jun.5, 1984 Sheet 1 of 3	4,452,178
1984 DRIVE CORRIDOR FOR SLAUGHTER	1997 CORRIDOR FOR ACCESS TO AIRPLANES, 2007 RADIATION ATTENUATION CORRIDOR
CATTLE, Gerrit J. Nijhuis.	Jean-Claude Petit.	Tewfik J. Bichay.
2004 PASSENGER BOARDING BRIDGE WITH LATERALLY ADJUSTABLE CAB PORTION,
Neil Hutton.
1954 FLUID INFLATABLE CORRIDOR, R.L. Miller.
1997 OFFICE WORKPLACE WITH SHARED CORRIDOR, Fred Reiber.
2010 EMERGENCY LIGHTING SYSTEM, James R. Hutchinson.
e
Ç/5
"C
--
8f
PAGE 116
CORRIDOR
THE QUANTIFIED CORRIDOR
In the 21st century, researchers use space syntax and topological graphs to analyze the efficiency of corridors and escape routes, reducing the corridor to a set of lines, points, and coordinates. The experience of a corridor is no longer subjective: in computer models, performance and efficiency can be definitively proven.
By correlating corridor depth and exit nodes, engineers assess not just the speed and dimensions of a body, but the mental reactions of a fleeing occupant. In the language of space syntax, corridors create way-finding problems that the occupant must solve; by quantifying "choice," one can assess the efficiency of egress routes, and account for complexity.
The task of escape syntax is to convert optimal way-finding conditions into plausible architectural forms:
1.25	1
0.17	0
0.47	0
2003 Network diagra represent egress antj5 access possibilities in corridor-driven f|0or plans. Topological graphs model depth and relative asymmet to calculate the '
complexity of corrid0r types. (Gillian E. Livesey and Anthony Donegan, "Addressing Normalisation in the a Pursuit of Comparable Integration," in Proceedings of the 4th International Space Syntax Symposium 2003.)
2003 By simulating and assessing route complexity, researchers calculate evacuation times for different corridor types. (Livesey and Donegan, 2003.)
"Despite the merits of rectangular dissections as models of smaller plans, there is an increasing proportion of 'theoretical possibilities' for larger dissections which nevertheless become rather unlike the plans of buildings, and hence begin to lose their practical interest. Such dissections consist, certainly, of rectangular components corresponding to rooms, packed together in different configurations. But these configurations are not at all probable architecturally, in ways which are hard to pinpoint precisely, but are no less real for that. It is something to do with such facts as that real buildings tend to have limited depth, because of the needs of daylight and natural ventilation, so that when large they become organised into regular patterns of wings and courts. Or that rooms are set along relatively simple and coherent circulation systems consisting of a few branching corridors which extend along the buildings' whole length. There are many dissections which are made up, by contrast, of a deep maze like agglomeration of overlapping rectangles, many of them completely internal and through which any linking pattern of circulation routes would be circuitous and confusing. If we could capture properties like these in explicit geometrical measures, then we might be able to limit the study of dissections, for example, to a much reduced class of arrangements which would all be 'building-like' in some well defined sense."
— Philip Steadman, Architectural Morphology (Pion, 1983).
2005 Evacuation showing not only routes, but popul through rooms ar corridors, revealir of users...
CORRIDOR
PAGE 117
ISÎKÎS-
op0 lacking m sp viors The research E#that, although «'stance from the
^pointmay be within
f results still may
be sufficient to guarantee safety. (Alper I, Gokhan Ulken and Erincik Edgu, A
Space Syntax Based
r,odel in Evacuation of Hospitals," Proceedings of the 5th International Space Syntax Symposium, 200b.)
PAGE 118
ORRIDOR
Entrance Virtual Queue
2010 Assigning variables for arrival rates, service rates, corridor dimensions, spacing between doors, occupant speed, occupant size, and waiting times, Khaled Nasser creates equations to predict the flow densities of different areas of the corridor. "Level of service," a qualitative measure of the corridor's occupant flows during normal operating conditions, can be mathematically correlated with the efficiency of evacuation in the event of an emergency. Escape criteria mathematically informs the design and program of a corridors, producing an "optimally" sized space that considers both activities and egress. (Khaled Nassar, "Queuing Model for Assessing the Efficiency of Building Corridors," Journal of Architectural Engineering, March 2010.)
CORRIDOR
PAGE 119
Considered every At
PAGE 120
CORRIDOR
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE 2012 DESCRIPTION OF A CORRIDOR
SECTION 1018 CORRIDORS
1018.1	Construction. Corridors shall be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table
1018.1.	The corridor walls required to be fire-resistance rated shall comply with Section 709 for fire partitions.
Exceptions:
1.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in an occupancy in Group E where each room that is used for instruction has at least one door opening directly to the exterior and rooms for assembly purposes have at least one-half of the required means of egress doors opening directly to the exterior. Exterior doors specified in this exception are required to be at ground level.
2.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors contained within a dwelling or sleeping unit in an occupancy in Group R.
3.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in open parking garages.
4.	A fire-resistance rating is not required for corridors in an occupancy in Group B which is a space requiring only a single means of egress complying with Section 1015.1.
TABLE 1018.1 CORRIDOR FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING
OCCUPANCY
OCCUPANT LOAD SERVED BY CORRIDOR REQUIRED FIRE-RESISTANCE RATING (hours)
Without sprinkler system With sprinkler systemc
a.	For requirements for occupancies in
Group I-2, see Sections 407.2 and 407.3~
b.	For a reduction in the fire-resistance rat ing for occupancies in Group I-3, see Sec tion 408.8.
c.	Buildings equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 903.3.1.1 or 903.3.1.2 where allowed.
1018.2	Corridor width. The minimum corridor width shall be as determined in Sectio
1005.1,	but not less than 44 inches (1118 mm).
Exceptions:
1.	Twenty-four inches (610 mm)-For access to and utilization of electrical, mechanical c plumbing systems or equipment.
2.	Thirty-six inches (914 mm)-With a requi occupant capacity of less than 50.
3.	Thirty-six inches (914 mm)-Within a dwe! ing unit.
4.	Seventy-two inches (1829 mm)-ln Grou with a corridor having a required capacity 100 or more.
5.	Seventy-two inches (1829 mm)-ln corn-dors and areas serving gurney traffic in occupancies where patients receive outpatien medical care, which causes the patient to b not capable of self-preservation.
6.	Ninety-six inches (2438 mm)-ln Group I-in areas where required for bed movement
1018.3	Corridor obstruction. The required width of corridors shall be unobstructed.
Exception:
Doors complying with Section 1005.2.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 121
T(000 square feet (93 m2) or less in area, utilization of corridors for conveying return air is permitted.
4.	Incidental air movement from pressurized rooms within health care facilities, provided that the corridor is not the primary source of supply or return to the room.
1018.5.1 Corridor ceiling. Use of the space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above as a return air plenum is permitted for one or more of the following conditions:
1.	The corridor is not required to be of fire-resistance-rated construction;
2.	The corridor is separated from the plenum by fire-resistance-rated construction;
3.	The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut down upon activation of the air-handling unit smoke detectors required by the International Mechanical Code;
4.	The air-handling system serving the corridor is shut down upon detection of sprinkler waterflow where the building is equipped ¡throughout with an automatic sprinkler system; or
5.	The space between the corridor ceiling and the floor or roof structure above the corridor is used as a component of an approved engineered smoke control system.
1018.6 Corridor continuity. Fire-resistancerated corridors shall be continuous from the point of entry to an exit, and shall not be interrupted by intervening rooms.
Exception:
Foyers, lobbies or reception rooms constructed as required for corridors shall not be construed as intervening rooms.
Dead ends. Where more than one exit access doorway is required, the ;cess shall be arranged such that there dead ends in corridors more than 20 96 mm) in length.
ons:
ccupancies in Group 1-3 of Occupan-dition 2, 3 or 4 (see Section 308.4), ad end in a corridor shall not exceed (15 240 mm).
ccupancies in Groups B, E, F, 1-1, M,
2 R-4, S and U, where the building oped throughout with an automatic er system in accordance with Section
1.1,	the length of the dead-end corri-lall not exceed 50 feet (15 240 mm), iad-end corridor shall not be limited jth where the length of the dead-end >r is less than 2.5 times the least width dead-end corridor.
5 Air movement in corridors. Corridors not serve as supply, return, exhaust, or ventilation air ducts.
otions:
e of a corridor as a source of makeup air naust systems in rooms that open direct-o such corridors, including toilet rooms, ooms, dressing rooms, smoking lounges nitor closets, shall be permitted, provid-at each such corridor is directly supplied •utdoor air at a rate greater than the rate keup air taken from the corridor, nere located within a dwelling unit, the f corridors for conveying return air shall e prohibited.
lere located within tenant spaces of
PAGE 122
CORRIDOR CODE #1
According to the 2012 International Building Code, chapter 10: Means of Egress, Section 1018.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 123

Illumination level
The means of egress illumination level shall not be less than 1 footcandle (11 lux) at the walking surface.
Automatic sprinkler
An automatic sprinkler system shall be Installed throughout buildings containing Group H-5 occupancies [Including corridors and service corridors].
1017.4 Air movement in corridors
Corridors shall not serve as supply, return, exhaust, relief or ventilation air ducts.
Headroom
Protruding objects are permitted to extend below the minimum ceiling height required by Section 1003.2 provided a minimum headroom of 80 Inches (2032 mm) shall be provided for any walking surface, including walks, corridors, aisles and passageways. Not more than 50 percent of the ceiling area of a means of egress shall be reduced in height by protruding objects.
Emergency alarms
Emergency alarms for the detection and notification of an emergency condition in Group H [incuding corridors and service corridors] occupancies shall be provided as set forth herein.
Construction
Corridors shall be fire-resistance rated in accordance with Table 1017.1. The corridor walls required to be fire-resistance rated shall comply with Section 708 for fire partitions.

PAGE 124
CORRIDOR CODE #2
According to the 2012 International Building Code, chapter 10: Means of Egress, Section 1018.
Gas Detection
Where gases are transported in piping placed within the space defined by the walls of a corridor and the floor or roof above the corridor, a continuous gas detection system shall be provided where piping is located and in the corridor.
415.10.3.2 Mechanical ventilation
Service corridors shall be mechanically ventilated as required by Section 415.10.1.6 or at not less than six air changes per hour, whichever is greater.
I
■
(rtf'-
Exit or exit access doorways required
There shall be not less than two exits, and not more than one-half of the required means of egress shall require travel into a fabrication area. Doors from service corridors shall swing in the direction of egress travel and shall be self-closing.
415.10.1.2 Separation
Corridors shall comply with Chapter 10 and shall be separated from fabrication areas as specified in section 415.10.1.2. Corridors shall not contain HPM and shall not be used for transporting such materials except through closed piping systems as provided in Section 415.10.6.4.
415.10.3.1 Use conditions
Service corridors shall be separated from corridors as required by Section 415.10.1.2. Service corridors shall not be used as a required corridor.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 125
Emergency alarm system
An emergency alarm system shall be provided in service corridors, with no fewer than one alarm device in each service corridor.
415.10.5.7 Doors.
Doors in a fire barrier wall, including doors to corridors, shall be self-closing fire door assemblies having a fire protection rating of not less than 3/4 hour.
The distance of travel from any point in a service corridor to an exit, exit access corridor or door into a fabrication area shall be not greater than 75 feet (22 860 mm).
Dead ends shall be not greater than 4 feet (1219 mm) in length.
415.10.3.4 Minimum width
The clear width of a service corridor shall be not less than 5 feet (1524 mm), or 33 inches (838 mm) wider than the widest cart or truck used in the service corridor, whichever is greater.
Smoke Detector
Fire Hose
Fire Resistance Door
Evacuation Map
Fire Extinguisher
Emergency Light
Fire Alarm '
mmm
PAGE 126
ANATOMY OF A CORRIDOR
The corridor of Building 23, the faculty of Civil Engineering and Geosciences, at the Technical University of Delft, Netherlands -broken down into its component parts.
Corridor components: 4,541 components that make a 200-meter double loaded corridor
9.2m-
200 m
CORRIDOR
PAGE 127
Elements of architecture
Door	Floor
Exit sign
Elements of corridor
Smoke detector
Equipment
Wifi router
X
10
Fire resistant door
Fire extinguisher
Emergency light
Emergency light
Fire alarm
Camera
Fire hose
0
Speaker
X 8
X 10
Evacuation map X 16
Halogen light
fC = :l) X96
Fluorescent light x 52
Cable tray
x 260
PAGE 128
RANDOM EVACUATION MAPS
Moscow	Hong Kong International Australia	North Train Station, Exit sign with braille China
Airport	Valencia	Palo Alto, California
CORRIDOR
PAGE 129
Saudi Arabia	MoMA, Manhattan TRIUMF, Canada	Budapest	Germany	Psychiatric clinic in
Augsburg
PAGE 130
TRANSFER CORRIDORS
"Stairwell separation [via transfer corridors] ranged from 70 ft (Including the Impact region in WTC 1) to 200 ft (Including the impact region In WTC 2)... One of the stairwells In WTC 2 (Stairwell A on the Northwest side) was passable in the region of aircraft impact for some period of time after WTC 2 was attacked."
—	"Findings On The World Trade Center Fire and Collapse," National Institute of Standards and Technology,
(National Fire Protection Association presentation), 2005.
"As I descended the stairs ... once or twice I had to exit the staircase through a door and go down a corridor in order to reconnect to the same stairwell. I found this to be extremely disconcerting. Everyone who did this, stopped before they exited the staircase to make sure they were doing the right thing. This slowed us down and there was concern that the door would lock behind us."
—	Interview 1000053 (NIST 2004).
While the opening Al-Qaeda strike on the World Trade Center went according to plan, the follow-up attack on its twin sister to the south almost didn't. The pilot of United Airlines 175, Marwan al-Shehhi, likely followed directives offering alternative targets in case both towers had been destroyed domino fashion. His Boeing 767 UA175 sped over New Jersey, avoiding the Hudson route used by American Airlines 11, approaching the site from the south over New York Harbor. Seeing a wounded WTC1 still standing, the pilot may have decided to improve any chances for instantaneous demolition by both increasing his airspeed and aiming for lower floors. He may have been aware of the structural elements within the tower. Throttling up to 590mph though caused him to nearly miss, the banking plane slammed into WTC2 only after a steep, last-second correction.
WTC1 had been hit in an area of wide offices and central core elements (floors 92-99), causing a rapidly moving firestorm. In contrast, UA175 tore into WTC2's upper mechanical and sky lobby 'sandwich' (77-84), moving in a downward trajectory, funneling much of the plane's fireball out the building's northeast corner. And while the first plane had torn apart all three of the north tower's emergency staircases, trapping all above the impact zone, one of the south tower's emergency staircases remained passable, due to a design flaw that, via transfer corridors, redirected two of the core stairs (staircases A and C) away from the building's center to separate corners, causing confusion under intensely stressful conditions.
All three stairways were pressurized in emergencies to reduce smoke. In staircases A and C in both towers, stairs would abruptly end just above sky lobbies, at closed, unlocked smoke doors opening to transfer corridors, leading the user, via signage, to another door, opening to stairs continuing down (a third door allowed exit from the transfer corridor onto the main floor).
Staircases A and C were redirected around the two sky lobbies in each tower, one at the 44th floor, another on 78. These floors were 14 feet high, two feet higher than
2005 One illustration serves for both of Minoru Yam twin towers (1972) in this post-collapse diagram by the National Institute for Standards and Technology Horizontal transfer corridors are required on floors v mechanical / sky lobby conditions interrupt the des< of the exit stairs.
CORRIDOR
PAGE 131
standard floors. Sky lobbies functioned primarily as exchanges between express and local elevators, though other amenities existed: all included windowed escalators leading to lobby like conditions on floors above (the 'Skydive' restaurant, services for agencies, newsstands). A powerplant and HVAC technical floor sat just below each sky lobby, fitting in a space 26 feet high. It was this 40-foot high duplication of lobby, basement and roof conditions that required transfer corridors for threading stairs through floors of dense machinery and open space.
Once through these bypass stairwells, escapees came to another abrupt stair ending, where transfer corridors led back to the building core, to the standard descent. Anybody above the 83rd floor in either tower choosing staircases A or C needed to go through four transfer corridors on their way down, in a variety of configurations and lengths. Confusing under ideal fire-drill conditions, in the building's final hour, life and death decisions were made in them, some in darkness (helped by glow strips), some in emergency lighting, others in intensive smoke conditions. At best they created bottlenecks, with evacuees pausing to ensure they had made no mistakes in their escape, with most continuing downward. At worst, misinterpreting the logic of the transfer corridors, evacuees returned the way they came, searching for other ways down they'd never find. Or these corridors became death traps themselves, lacking the staircases' pressurized smoke evacuation system.
Staircase A left the center of WTC2 at the 82nd floor, via a corridor running 40 feet north and 15 feet west to a staircase that narrowly avoided the demolition area.
The imperfect descent of staircase A allowed at least 18 people in the south tower above and within the impact zone to escape.1 The WTC's flawed
Floor 76: staircases A, B and C transfer back inside the core.
Floor 42: staircases A and C transfer back Inside the core.
Floor 48: staircases A and C transfer from core to outer stair.
Floor 82: staircase A and C transfer from core to stair closer to tower's edge.
PAGE 132
CORRIDOR
bypasses came with an inadvertent survivability lesson: concentrate escape routes and you risk their destruction.
Civilian fire warden Brian Clark, an employee of Euro Brokers on the 84th floor, flashlight in hand, randomly selected staircase A, and though facing a descent into smoke and fire conditions, Clark and a few more evacuees chose to risk it, continuing down the staircase and transfer corridors to survival. Key to Clark's escape may have been his distraction by Stanley Praimnath, a survivor of the attack screaming for help from the other side of a partially collapsed wall on the directly hit 81st floor. Clark and his co-workers had been debating which direction to head when they heard Praimnath's voice.
Fearing the smoke and heat of Staircase A, the final survivor of WTC2, Ron DiFrancesco, decided to leave coworker Clark on 81, ascending with a group as far as the 91st floor. Discovering locked doors there - for containing smoke - he turned around.
A beneficiary of the transfer corridor's design flaw, DiFrancesco was almost its victim.
Now alone, entering the 82nd floor's transfer corridor for a third time, he encountered a dozen people in the passage dead, dying or laying down, avoiding life-threatening smoke conditions, and he joined them to rest. A realization struck him ("a voice") and he rose and fled the corridor to the staircase, where he made it past flames blocking the path, shielding himself with loosened drywall, making it to street-level just as the tower fell. Blasted out of the way by WTC2's collapse, he awoke six days later with burns and lacerations.
— Kevin McLeod
1. Brian Clark and Ron DiFrancesco enter Staircase A at the 84th floor.
2. They take the transfer corridor on the 82nd floor, which fortuitously directs them away from the impact zone below.
IMPACT ZONE
4. DiFrancesco gets to the 91st floor, encounters mass of people and locked doors, turns around and heads back down.
5. DiFrancesco pauses In the transfer corridor on the 82nd floor, where people are laying down or dying. He joins them to rest before a "voice" prompts him to get up and continue down.
3. They stop at the 81st floor to help free Stanley Praimnath. Concerned about intensiftying smoke, DiFrancesco and others decide to go back up towards the roof. Praimnath and Clark continue down together
CORRIDOR
PAGE 133
Ktl| FLOOR, WTC2 AS UA175 HITS: 0RIAN CLARK'S ACCOUNT
»It wasn't a huge explosion. It was something muffled, no eSi no smoke, but the room fell apart as the plane kind f torqued the building. Ceiling tiles fell from the ceiling, air onditioning ducts fell, door frames fell out of the wall."1 1 2
„ had we gone three or four yards straight ahead to the east, we would have come to Stairway B. I have no idea what condition it was in because we didn't know what had ^gppened, we didn't know where this plane had hit, we didn't know if it was a plane, we didn't know anything other than suddenly we were in chaos and our building had been hit I could have turned right three yards to Stairway C, closer to the impact point. I had no idea what condition that stairway was in. Miraculously, at random I turned left to Stairway A, which on the floor plate is the farthest from where the impact really was.
"The first five floors were difficult, because in certain areas dry wall had been blown off the wall and was lying propped up against the railing. We had to move it, shove it to the
side."3
"Somewhere around the 77th floor, the stairway walls were cracked, and you could look through the cracks and see flames. They were just quietly licking up, not a roaring inferno. And there was some smoke there, but again I think the stairs were pressurized, pushing the air out so we had less smoke in the stairway than you might imagine."4
"Now, the stairways didn't go straight down. There was one particular area around the 78th floor, I think, where you actually came to some strange twists. So we had to figure that out in the darkness, but we made some fortunate decisions. Around the 74th floor, I would say, we broke into what I call fresh air. The lights were on. It was normal conditions."5
1.	Dim Dyer, Kevin Flynn, 102 Minutes: The Definitive Account of the Fight to Survive inside the Twin Towers (Times Books, 2005).
2.	Richard Bernstein, Out of the Blue (Times, 2002), 222.
3.	Nova, PBS, April 30, 2002.
4.	"Accounts From the South Tower," New York Times, May 26, 2002
5.	Nova.
1996 World Trade Center fire escape drill instructional video, made by the Prevention and Life Safety Division of the Port Authority of New York & New jersey. In an emergency evacuation, the fire department could activate the smoke purge system, drawing smoke and fumes from tenant areas and simultaneously pumping fresh air into corridors enabling occupants to travel to the stairway. The system does not function though in the transfer corridors on floors 82, 76, 48 and 42.
PAGE 134
FORMALIZING THE ESCAPE ROUTE
Five out of seven of the initial wave of proposals for the new World Trade Center contain a sky bridge, ostensibly as a spectacular circulation device and symbol of unity, but also as aid to evacuation and to provide peace of mind...
2002 Life Safety Diagram by Peter Eisenman, Charles Gwathmey, Steven Holl and Richard Meier.
PAGE 135
2002 Team United Architects:
"The interconnection of the five towers provides for unique commercial and public space. For example, at 800 feet in the air, approximately the 60th floor, a multi-level "City in the Sky" connects the towers with gardens, educational centers, shopping, cafes, a sports center, a broadcast center and a conference center.... This single building built in five phases will not only be the tallest building in the world, it will also be one of the safest. Each of the sloping towers contains multiple independent stairways, connected every 30 floors by areas of refuge. From any point in every building there are many ways for people to exit, having the option of going down, and of moving horizontally into an adjacent building."
2002 Peter Eisenman, Charles Gwathmey, Steven FHoll and Richard Meier: "The two buildings comprised of five vertical sections and interconnecting horizontal floors, represent a new typology in the tradition of innovative skyscraper design. In their quiet abstraction, the buildings suggest screens of presence and absence, encouraging reflection and imagination. The cantilevered ends extend outward, like the fingers of the ground plan, reaching toward the city and each other. Nearly touching at the northeast corner of the site, they resemble the interlaced fingers of protective hands.'
2002 Team THINK:
Trie entire site is a monument to the tragedy of 9/11 consisting of an lnterconnected series of five buildings that creates a cathedral-like ®nclosure across the entire 16 acre site."
2002 Foster and Partners:
"Its two halves kiss at three points, creating public observation platforms, exhibits, cafes and other amenities."
PAGE 136
CORRIDOR
LANDSCAPE CORRIDORS
Relegated to the backstage of architecture, the corridor grows in scale as a metaphor. Applied to increasingly large and diffuse zones or activities, almost anything can be a corridor...
Northeast Railroad Corridor: Amtrak's routemap.
2010-2013
"Supergreen" corridor: The nine freight corridors through Europe, mapped by the EU's Freight Transport Logistics Action Plan.
2012 "Moose sex" corridor: a project by the Nature Conservancy of Canada to help the endangered moose move in and out of Nova Scotia - where it can propagate itself - via the Chignecto Isthmus land bridge, now a designated wildlife corridor...
Lexicon of growth: the 10 economic development "corridors" of the Mekong region.
PAGE 137
AIRB0RNE CORRIDORS
The corridor of fear follows us airborne...
The airplane aisle is one of the most congested and socially awkward corridors: as passengers find seats and extract items from carry-on, they're scrutinized by a seated audience in front and pressured from behind to hurry up - while squeezed into an ever-narrower corridor by airlines trying to max out their seating capacity. That's the quotidian experience of the airplane corridor. During increasing flashes of violence and air-rage, it's more extreme: an airborne gauntlet.
The elevated gauntlet - a corridor overtaken by criminal forces, turning daily movements from front door to elevator into stressful rites of survival - emerged in modernist towers in places like Pruitt-lgoe (see page 1334). In the wake of totemic-psychic event 9/11, the gauntlet has emerged in the commercial airplane, only now as a projection of media; entertainment behaving as 'news.' The inescapable airborne corridor is accessed, via the airport, through police state levels of control and surveillance - what makes it a gauntlet isn't criminality but the law itself. Within, passengers role-play in experimental prison narratives, where non-linear explosions of air-rage hit walls of bystander complacency (an audience glued to their seats) and government/corporate over/mismanagement. While a handful of people behave volatilely, most passengers offer self-control, obeying the tacit rules of climates of fear.
Observe a lack assistance for passengers like Dr. Dao (below-right).
The result is a steady stream of reality material making its way to screens, the audience-subject dichotomy following us into our homes, offices, anyplace now where portable screens go, the frame colonizing our psyche. Is the gauntlet real? Statistically not, but behavioral implications hint problems will magnify: "if the plane has a first-class section, there's almost a four-fold increase in the odds of a coach passenger having air-rage. Force coach passengers to walk through first class during boarding and you more than double the chances further." (K.A. DeCellesa & M. I. Norton, "Physical and Situational Inequality on Airplanes Predicts Air Rage," PNAS 113 (2016), cited by Robert Sapolsky in Behave: The Biology of Humans at Our Best and Worst, Vintage, 2017.)
—Kevin McLeod
Oct 9, 2001 State of terror: four weeks after 9/11, on American Airlines Flight 1238, Edward Coburn of Fresno, California, shouts: "The pilots are going for the Sears Tower!" and storms the cockpit. His arrest appears to be one of the first notable digitally captured on-board events.
2006 In-flight Age of Anxiety begins: United 93, directed by Paul Greengrass.
2014 Walk the Plane: a man charged with groping women during a flight is led off US Air flight 728. Once the rite of the ever-waiting press, the 'walk of shame' of accused perpetrators now occurs down the airplane aisle for the standby lenses of smartphones.
2017 " I'm sorry sir, we're overbooked." Dr. David Dao is forcibly removed from United flight 1134 by Chicago Police officers. As in Kafka, the orders of the airline are final and must be followed to the letter of the law. The state must maintain all order within the travel corridor.
PAGE 138
CORRIDOR KILLZONE
1974's Maze War pitted two players, represented as floating eyes, against each other. With tile-based movement limited to going forward and backwards and turning 90 degrees, Maze War's corridors provided the minimum viable space in which players could orient themselves. Simple line graphics clearly communicated walls ahead, as well as additional corridors branching to the left and right.
Released in 1993, Doom was a global phenomenon, popularizing the first-person shooter and spawning an entire industry of so-called "Doom clones" before the generic term "first-person shooter" came to take its place. The release of Doom began a technological arms race, moving designers further away from the necessity of corridors as a visual limitation and into the pursuit of realism.
Christopher Grant of the gaming website polygon.com notes six crucial moments in the evolution of the video
Though System Shock 2 and its spiritual successor BioShock are largely corridor-based, their environments are important characters in the world, providing narrative support - a derelict space ship, an underwater utopia -for their unnatural structures.
While many modern shooters, typified by the Call of Duty series, may have visually abandoned the confines of the maze with its requisite corridors, their linear design provides a narrative corridor for players, whose progress is contained by the game's cinematic ambitions. While appearing more photorealistic, these environments can be far more limiting to the player, replacing depth for detail.
fiamo pAmHnr
In 1991, id Software released Wolfenstein 3D, offering players a chance to move freely and shoot pixelated Nazis in a maze-llke series of corridors. Its success and Influence only seem quaint when compared to the developer's next project: Doom.
The first-person perspective was later adopted for role-playing games like Akalabeth: World of Doom, created by a teenage Richard Garriott in 1979, years before his creation of Ultima, and 1987's Phantasy Star, both of which employed a first-person view for their maze-like dungeon sequences.
PAGE 139
FORCED MOVEMENT
Robert Yang, professor at New York University's Game Center, on the logic of the corridor in video games as a memory-saving and scenographic device, and one which allows a clear set of choices to present themselves...
AMO Is there an ever-increasing complexity in video game corridors? (or is that complexity now reducing?)
Robert Yang Some of the earliest video game corridors emerged from the technical limitations of early computers. Representing a huge world with endless interconnected chambers requires a lot of memory to store all that data. Instead, what if the player essentially stood in one place the whole time, and the game just scrolled the surrounding landscape past the player? This "forced movement" is both constant and an illusion. Today, computers can process the data for entire floorplans for dozens of cities on multiple continents. Such games with "free movement" allow players to stop, crawl, saunter, strut, zig-zag, or sprint down corridors. Many relatively recent video games - especially the "endless runner" genre of games like Canabalt, Temple Run, Subway Surfers, or Flappy Bird -combine forced movement with aspects of free movement along a corridor. Because movement and progression are now subject to player choices, corridors suddenly become tools for player expression.
AMO Does the video game corridor in the end actually tether gamers to some notion of physical / architectural reality... so the world they inhabit cannot spin off into total fantasy?
RY Video game architecture differs greatly from real-world architecture in that digital pixels and polygons need not support the load of a building, and virtual light algorithms can spontaneously erupt in mid-air, and invisible masses of air might prove more concrete than a concrete wall. What looks like a vast open field could, structurally, function as a corridor with invisible walls and fences that funnel players toward a specific destination. Despite their freedom from the physics of materials, most video games cling to real-world representation as a way to communicate environmental affordances and help embody the player inside the world. This "tether" is necessary to help ground the digital fantasy. Fantasy is only fantastical when juxtaposed against the mundane; dragons and laser swords must co-exist in worlds with storage crates and rocks, otherwise they're no longer dragons or laser swords. Similarly, grandiose floating castles must co-exist with oblong sewer tunnels.
AMO What is it about the phenomenology of the corridor that makes it so ripe for video games... why do we have to kill in the corridor?
RY Tactically speaking in many combat-oriented games, the corridor allows for a very specific structured level design encounter; the player knows that enemies must approach from one end, and presumably the player can always retreat by backtracking down the other end. More open floorplans, with more than two choices, might suffer from a lack of focus (where is the enemy coming from?) or a lack of perceived affordance (which direction allows retreat?) or lack of state feedback (was this the right way or the wrong way?) In this way, a corridor is a useful binary to simplify situations, while also allowing the player to pace their own experience. The player can easily distinguish their available avenues, whether to fight or to run, and express their intent straightforwardly. There is little ambiguity about choices, so the player can focus on the expression of those choices. Perhaps the video game corridor compresses space so that it can expand time.
PAGE 140
CORRIDOR
EXACERBATED EXIT SIGN
The paranoia of the exit corridor, exacerbated by artist Alena Meier...
"In dem sehr langen und schmalen Flur, der eine klassische Kunstbetrachtung eigentlich unmöglich macht, ist das flurbestimmende Element, das Fluchtweg-männleln, anamorphotisch auf die Wand gebracht. So wird dir Bewegung durch den Flur selbst zum Thema."
—Alena Meier
2002 Fluchtweg (Dispersion auf Wand); Escape route (dispersion on wall), by Alena Meiers at GASAG-Hauptgebäude, Berlin.
|NTEgrated signage
CORRIDOR
PAGE 141
2013 Carpet manufacturers Desso team up with Philips to make LED lighting integrated into the floor, potentially making the entire corridor an exit sign...
PAGE 142
CORRIDOR
UNDERWATER CORRIDOR
At a moment of maximum unpopularity in architecture, the corridor makes an unexpected comeback in a new form: the world's first transparent underwater aquarium corridor, made of curved acrylic panels capable of withstanding massive pressures, and 110 meters long, opens in 1985 at Kelly Tarlton's Underwater World in New Zealand. Over the next decades, the underwater corridor proliferates, becoming a generic feature of wonder at aquariums around the world and fundamentally changing our perspective on "nature"... a paradoxical twist on the classic notion of the corridor, transformed from the space of narrow perspective to a lens on a never-seen-before new world... we hardly notice that we are falling in love again with the dreaded corridor...

24 aquariums corridor around the world, superimposed.
PAGE 143
ca. 1490 Ascent of the Blessed, Hieronymus Bosch: often used by researchers in order to explain historic cases of NDE, in which a tunnel with bright light at the end is a common feature. Vaner Kooi posits that Hieronymus Bosch himself must have had an NDE.
ca. 1494 In Death and the Miser, Bosch depicts another corridor into another afterlife, tormented by various demons but with light penetrating through a heavenly window...
FINAL EXIT
Among the elements of architecture, j,e corridor is the last one we will ■	31 percent of people who have
Up NDE (Near Death Experience) report passing through a tunnel or c0rridor with bright light at the end. jhe phenomenon occurs globally, regardless of religion or culture: moving through narrow, dark, and longitudinal channels such as a "dark tubular calyx" or along a road is a common memory of an NDE, and one that is frequently depicted in art. The corridor as a passage from earthly life to the afterlife reveals the deeply embedded notion of the one-way escape route, used only in the most extreme circumstances...
PAGE 144 bibliography
Alexander, Christopher. A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, Construction. Oxford University Press, 1977.
Berglund, Lars. The Secret of Luo Shu: Numerology in Chinese Art and Architecture. Department of Art History, Lund University, 1990.
Brown, John. Horae Subsecivae. New Edition. London: Black, 1897.
Bristol, Katharine G. "The Pruitt-lgoe Myth." Journal of Architectural Education, vol. 44, 1991.
Bukowski, Richard W. NIST Technical Note 1623: Emergency Egress from Buildings,
Part 1: History and Current Regulations for Egress Systems Design. Maryland: NIST Building and Fire Research Laboratory,
2008.
Byron, George. Corsair III. XIX. 90. 1st edition, London: Printed by Thomas Davison, 1814.
"Chinese Etymology." www. chineseetymology.org (accessed September 21, 2013.)
Clary, Renee M. and Dames H. Wandersee. 2005. "Through the Looking Glass: The History of Aquarium Views and their Potential to Improve Learning in Science Classrooms." Science & Education 14,
2009.	579-596.
"Echo: Continuation of Heavenly Creation in the Noisy Time," Urban China 27,2008.
16.
"Etymologisch Woordenboek van het Nederlands. " (accessed Dune 5, 2013) www.etymologiebank.nl.
Evans, Robin. "Figures, Doors, and Passages", Translations from Drawing to Building. Vol. 2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1997.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Pantheon Books, 1977.
Girourard, Mark. A Country House Companion. Yale University Press, 1987.
Gotch, D. Alfred. The Growth of the English House. London : B. T. Batsford, 1909.
IBC (International Building Code), International Code Council, 2012.
Darzombek, Mark. "Corridor Spaces," Critical Inquiry vol. 36 no. 4, 2010. 728-770.
Livesey, Gillian E. and Anthony Donegan, "Addressing Normalisation in the Pursuit of Comparable Integration," Proceedings of the 4th International Space Syntax Symposium, 2003.
Marquardt, Gesine. Kriterienkatalog Demenzfreundliche Architektur. Logos Verlag, 2007.
Meikleham, Dave. "Gaming's Most Creepiest Corridors That Want To Kill You Dead I GamesRadar." Gaming's most creepiest corridors that want to kill you dead, www.gamesradar.com/gamings-most-creepiest-corridors-that-want-to-kill-you-dead/ (accessed May 21, 2014).
Nassar, Khaled. "Queuing Model for Assessing the Efficiency of Building Corridors," Journal of Architectural Engineering ASCE, March, 2010.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, Averill, Dason D. et al. Federal Building and Fire Safety Investigation of the World Trade Center Disaster: Occupant Behavior, Egress, and Emergency Communications. Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office, 2005.
NFPA 101 the Life Safety Code, National Fire Protection Association, 2006.
Nightingale, Florence. Notes on Hospitals: Scutari Barracks. London: Longman,
Roberts and Green, 1863.
"OED Online." Dune 2013. Oxford University Press, (accessed Duly 26, 2013) www.oed.com.ezp-prod1.hul.harvard.edu/ view/Entry/41962?redirectedFrom=corridor.
Rosenthal, Dack. "Housing Study: High Rise=High Crime," The New York Times, October 26, 1972.
Scrivener, Leslie. "Survivors of 9/11 have found new purpose, but the scars remain." thestar.com. September 10, 2011. www. thestar.com/news/world/2011 /09/10/ survivors_of_911_have_found_new_ purpose_but_the_scars_remain.html (accessed October 25, 2017).
Steadman, Philip. Architectural Morphology: An Introduction to the Geometry of Building Plans. Pion, 1983.
Stevens, Dohn. A New Spanish And English Dictionary: Collected from the Best
Spanish Authors, Both Ancient and MoWo London, 1706.	^
Truby, Stephan. Exit-Architecture, Design Between War and Peace. Wien: Springer 2008.
Unlu, Alper, Gokhan Ulken and Erincik Edgu "A Space Syntax Based Model in d Evacuation of Hospitals," Proceedings of the 5th International Space Syntax Symposium, 2005.
Valpy, Francis Edward Dackson. An Etymological Dictionary of the Latin Language. Baldwin and Company, 1828.
Van der Kooi, C. "Hieronymus Bosch and Ergotism," WMJ: Official Publication of the
State Medical Society of Wisconsin 111 4
2012.
Van der Sluijs, M. A. "Three Ancient Reports of Near-Death Experiences: Bremmer Revisited," Journal of Near-Death Studies 27. 4, 2009. 223-253.
Van Lommel, Pirn. "Near-Death Experience, Consciousness, and the Brain: A New Concept about the Continuity of our Consciousness Based on Recent Scientific Research on Near-Death Experience in Survivors of Cardiac Arrest." World Futures 62,2006.134-151.
Various authors. "Inside the South Tower: Eyewitness Accounts." https://sites.google. com/site/911stories/insidethesouthtower% 3Aeyewitnessaccounts (accessed October 26, 2017).
Werdigier, Dulia. "Mile of London Tunnels for Sale, History Included." The New York Times, November 27, 2008. www.nytimes. com/2008/11/28/business/ worldbusiness/28tunnel.html (accessed March 21, 2014).
Wermiel, Sara. "No Exit - The Rise and Demise of the Outside Fire Escape," Technology and Culture vol. 44, no. 2, 2003. 258-28.
PAGE 145
(he corridor-cell complex
stephan *rUby
i! m Dere^ Tur,nel Vision. The Enigmatic W^huke of Portland. Welbeck: Harley
Gallery. 2013- 9.
• Visentini, Margherita. Die italienische if?1 Qguten des 15. und 16. Jahrhunderts. Stu^tgarl: OVA, 1997. 25.
Rradbury, David J. Welbeck Abbey. ¡vtensfißld- Wheel Publications, 1986.
Ihssagli. Mario. Oriental Architecture / 1: K” Indonesia, Indochina (History of World Architecture). Electa / Rizzoli, 1989.
Rufler, Elizabeth. "Account of My Life as a Laundry Maid at Welbeck 1869—1879" ri931), in: Derek Adlam, Tunnel Vision. The ijjgmatic 5th Duke of Portland. Welbeck: Harley Gallery, 2013. 9.
Chase, Karen, and Michael Levenson. The Spectacle of Intimacy. A Public Life for the Victorian Family. New Jersey: Princeton Architectural Press, 2000. 8.
Deleuze, Gilles. "Postscript on the Societies of Control," October Vol. 59, Winter, 1992. 3-7.
Evans, Robin. Translations from Drawing to Building and Other Essays. London: AA Publications, 1997. 74.
Foucault, Michel: Discipline and Punish.
The Birth of the Prison. Vintage Books; 2nd edition, 1995. 143.
Foucault, Michel. "Of Other Spaces, Heterotopias," Architecture, Mouvement, Continuité5, 1984. 46-49.
Franklin, Jill. The Gentleman's Country House and its Plan 1835-1914. London/ Boston/Flenley: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1981.86.
Girouard, Mark. Das feine Leben auf dem Lande. Campus Verlag GmbH, 1994.
Heins, Volker. Max Weber zur Einführung. Hamburg: Junius, 1990. 64.
Horwitz, Sylvia L. Knossos. Sir Arthur Evans auf den Spuren des Königs Minos. Bergisch Gladbach: Gustanv Lübbe, 1983. 122.
Johnston, Norman. Forms of Constraint:
A History of Prison Architecture. Urbana/ Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 2000. 17.
Kahan, Paul. Eastern State Penitentiary.
A History. Charleston: The History Press, 2008. 40.
Koolhaas, Rem. "Exodus, or the Voluntary Prisoners of Architecture," (1972) in Rem Koolhass, Bruce Mau, S,M,L,XL. New York: Monacelli Press, 1995.
Lewin, Kurt. Feldtheorie in den Sozialwissenschaften. Bern/Stuttgart:
Verlag Hans Huber, 1963.
MacGillivray, Joseph Alexander. Minotaur: Sir Arthur Evans and the Archeology of the Minoan Myth. London: Pimlico, 2000. 178.
Muthesius, Hermann. The English House. Rizzoli, 1987. 9.
Nutz, Thomas. Strafanstalt als Besserungsmaschine: Reformdiskurs und Gefängniswissenschaft 1775-1848. München: Oldenbourg, 2001.63.
Sloterdijk, Peter. Sphären III. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2004.
Storm, Theodor. Pole Poppenspäler, 1874 (accessed June 12, 2013) www.wattpad. com/12663-pole-poppenspäler-novelle-1874?p=18, 24.06.2010.
Teyssot, Georges: "The Disease of the Domicile," Assemblage 6, June. The MIT Press, 1988.
Vidler, Anthony. "The Third Typology," 1977, in: K. Michael Hays (ed.) Architecture Theory Since 1968, Cambridge: MIT Press, 1998. 289.
Wallenstein, Sven-Olov. Biopolitics and the Emergence of Modem Architecture. New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2009.
15.
Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One's Own. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1929.
corridor syntax kevin mcleod
Cassirer, Ernst. Myth of the State. Yale University Press, 1946.
Hochberg, Julian. "The Representation of Things and People" in Art, Perception and Reality, eds. E.H. Gombrich, Julian Hochberg, Max Black. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1972.
Hochberg, Julian and Brooks. "Film Cutting and Visual Momentum," in Eye Movements and the Higher Psychological Functions, John W. Senders, Dennis F. Fisher, Richard A. Monty. Erlbaum Associates, 1978.
Kirk, G.S. Myth: Its Meaning and Functions in Ancient and Other Cultures. University of California Press, 1971.
Maca, Allan L., Jonathan Reyman, William Folan, eds. Prophet, Pariah, and Pioneer: Walter W. Taylor and Dissension in American Archaeology. University Press of Colorado,
2010.
Negri, Pola. Memoirs of a Star. Doubleday, 1970.
Rushkoff, Douglas. Personal communication.
Witherspoon, Gary. Language and Art in the Navajo Universe. University of Michigan Press, 1977.
PAGE 146
image sources and courtesy
P2 "Bundeshaus West Korridor" by Sandstein, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Cccc3333; "Technische Universität Berlin" by Alex 1011, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Corredor del Centro Cultural Clavijero 236" by VeoKenxiz, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Plasy, Czech town - monastery, corridor" by Caroig, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Long Royal York Hallway" by FlickrLickr, licensed under CC-BY-2.0;
"Hotel Helix, Washington D. C." by Timothy Vollmer, licensed under CC-BY-2.0; Ak169808; "Incheon Airport6" by Jnpet, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Bundesarchiv, Bild 137-022928 / CC-BY-SA; "KaedRegionalHospitaH" by Alexis Doucet, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "FushimilnarL Taisha_Corridor-of-Torii" by Selefant, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Ronald Reagan Convention Center corridor" by Ed Siasoco, licensed under CC-BY-2.0; "Indianapolis Airport" by utahwildflowers, licensed under CC-BY-2.0; Copyright Duzhou (talk)Duzhou; 2008 Author: Frank Vincentz Permission: GFDL (self made); "Corridor, Computer Music Center at Columbia University, 2007" by kafka3prez, licensed under CC-BY-2.0; Library of Congress, Prints & Photographs Division, NY-6033; Valtion taidemuseo / Kuvataiteen keskusarkisto / Joel Rosenberg Finnish National Gallery / Central Art Archives /
Joel Rosenberg; "Uffizi Hallway" by Sailko, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Bernd Nürnberger; John Oxley Library, State Library of Queensland; Caitlin Childs; "Corredor 2" by Andrevruas, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Arizona Biltmore Hallway" by Visitor7, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Photograph by Mike Peel (www.mikepeel.net), licensed under CC-BY-SA-4.0; "Rippon Lea hallway" by Citizen D, licensed under CC-BY-3.0.
P11 "buildingEXODUS" model in National Institute of Standards and Technology, Jason D. Averill et al, Federal Building and Fire Safety Investigation of the World Trade Center Disaster: Occupant Behavior,
Egress, and Emergency Communication, (Washington, D.C.: US Government Printing Office, 2005).
P12 Stephan Petermann.
P13 REUTERS/BUNDESREGIERUNG/ GUIDO BERGMANN/POOL.
P14-15 Museum of Donga University;
/ http://blog.daum.net/orora62/909; http:// blog.daum.net/bae6607; Cultural Heritage Administration of Korea.
P16 © picsonthemove.
P17 Kunal Mukherjee.
P20 Lowry, Glenn D. "Humayun's Tomb: Form, Function, and Meaning in Early Mughal Architecture." Muqarnas 4 (1987): 133-148; © 2010 Center for South Asian Art and Archaeology.
P21 Al-Harithy, Howayda. "The Concept of Space in Mamluk Architecture." Muqarnas 18 (2001): 73-93; Felicity Ratte; Columbia University; Yazhini Travel Scholarship; Vasuki Subbu.
P22 Cultural Heritage Administration of Korea.
P23 Andreas Praefcke.
P24 Kirby, John B. From Castle to Teahouse: Japanese architecture of the Momoyama period. 1st ed. Tokyo: C.E. Tuttle Co., 1962; Kyoto University.
P25 youtube.com/watch?v=y8EYrUvQtWk; alublisqalaqii.blogspot.nl.
P26 Chang, Chao. China, Tao in der Architektur. Basel u.a.: Birkhauser, 1987; xingxingsheshe68.blog. 163.com; ©2014
s&mft i «msfn.
P27 Kerr, Robert. The gentleman's house; or, How to plan English residences, from the parsonage to the palace; with tables of accommodation and cost, and a series of selected plans. 2d ed. London: J. Murray, 1865; amazing space™; Evans, Robin, 1944-1997. "Figures, Doors, and Passage," Translations from Drawing to Building. Vol.
2. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
P28 Chang, Chao. China, Tao in der Architektur. Basel u.a.: Birkhauser, 1987; © Cantontradefair.com; © picsonthemove; «PSIHilS» 20094s-££ (&248H).
P 29-33 Eastern State Penitentiary; Thompson, J.D. The Hospital: A social and architectural history. New Haven: Yale University Press, 1975.
P36 Bryson, Bill. At Home: A short history of private life. New York: Doubleday, 2010.
P37 Girouard, Mark. Elizabethan Architecture: its rise and fall, 1540-1640. New Haven: Yale University Press for The Paul Mellon Centre for Studies in British Art, 2009; Christopher Alexander.
P38 Facultad de Arquitectura UNAM.
P44 Schinkel Centre for Architecture, Conservation and Urban Studies / Technical University Berlin.
P46 Eastern State Penitentiary; Skyddsvarnets arkiv.
P48 Mary Evans Picture Library.
P54 Arborfield Local History Society; Evans, Robin. "Figures, Doors, and Passages," Translations from Drawing to Building. Vol. 2. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press (1944).
P56 © Ian Swindale.
P58 © Last Refuge Ltd; Hans Werlemann
P60 A P Nicholson; The Harley Gallery; Bassetlaw Museum Photographic Archive.
P62-63 Private collection or Welbeck Estate
P64-81 Hans Werlemann.
P82 The History Place™.
P83 Historiclmages.
P84 Ramsgate History; British Telecom.
P85 TIME & LIFE Pictures; DoD photo by Robert D. Ward. / 970129-D-9880W-058_ j screen.jpg /
P86-87 TIME & LIFE Pictures; USA Department of Defence; © Color-Ad; North American Aerospace Defence Command.
P88 "Robin Hood Gardens Streets in the Sky" by Steve Cadman, licensed under CC-BY-2.0; Anastasia Tarassova; Casabella; Corviale.it © mondo a colori; Fondation Le Corbusier.
P92 veredes.es; watchtower-security.com; By U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development - U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Public Domain, https://commons.wikimedia.Org/w/index. php?curid=6875789; Katharine Bristol,
"The Pruitt-lgoe Myth," Journal of Architectural Education, 1991 (courtesy Roger Montgomery); State Historical Society of Missouri / Research Center, St. Louis.
P93 Newman, Oscar. Defensible space: Crime prevention through urban design. New York: Macmillan, 1972; architect's drawing, defensiblespace.com; The Pruitt-lgoe Myth (dir. Chad Friedrichs, 2011); Horizon, "The Writing on the Wall," BBC, 1974.
P94 lina McConnochie / © Architecture Media Pty Ltd.
penn State Libraries Pictures Election; 40wallstreet.com;
° tbuildings-com; © iam-architect.com; pe||i; © The Executive Centre;
S C. ^artens-
Marquardt, Gesine. "Kriterienkatalog n menzfreundliche Architektur" Berlin:
¡Jos Verlag, 2007.
pg7 van der Voordt, Theo IM. "Housing nd care variants for older people with dementia: Current trends in the Netherlands," American Journal of Alzheimer's Disease, March/April 1997.
p98-105 The Shining. Directed by Stanley Kubrick. Burbank, CA: Warner Home Video, 2001.; Hotel Imperial. Directed by Mauritz Stiller. Paramount Pictures, 1927; still from the film Room 237 ©The Room 237 Group LLC.
P106-107 SüYtttl: ‘PÄiSitlilfä; © Hedonisthk; AngelK32 / flickr.com/photos/ angelkwan32/; GEOMANCY.NET.
p 108-109 Stephen 1 Danko; © 2014 Google Map data © 2014 Google.
P110 © Poughkeepsie Journal.
P112 National Fire Protection Association.
P116-117 Gillian E. Livesey and Anthony Donegan; Alper Unläu, Gäokhan Ulken and Erincik Edgäu: "A Space Syntax Model in Evaculation of Hospitals" (Istanbul Technical University).
P118-119 Nassar, Khaled, "Queuing Model for Assessing the Efficiency of Building Corridors," Journal of Architectural Engineering © ASCE, March (2010).
P128 "Exit sign in Russia" by Georg Pik, licensed under CC-BY-1.0; © BrokenSphere; "Exit sign in the North Train Station,
Valencia" by Dorieo, licensed under CC-BY-3.0.
P129 "Crown Prince Hotel fire case escape route map floorplan Aug-2010" by Winghoomai, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Heung Yee Kuk Building fire evacuatino escape direction map Sept-2012" by Langsmu260, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Exitsigninsaudiarabia" by Kskhh, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; "Manhattan New York City 2009 PD 20091203 320" by Sterilgutassistentin, licensed under CC-BY-3.0; Adam Foster / Canadian Science; Budapest Astoria metro" by Andrzej Otr^bski, licensed under CC-BY-3.0;
Bernhard Bäuerle aka Bee of ACE.
P130-131 "buildingEXODUS" model in National Institute of Standards and Technology, Jason D. Averill et al, Federal Building and Fire Safety Investigation of the World Trade Center Disaster: Occupant Behavior, Egress, and Emergency Communication, (Washington, D.C.:
US Government Printing Office, 2005).
P132 Adapted from illustration by Kevin Hand in "Stairwell A: The Only Way Out," New York, August 27, 2011.
P133 © 1996 Port Authority of NY & NJ.
P134 Wood, Antony, and Philip Oldfield. "Bridging the Gap: An Analysis of Proposed Evacuation Links at Height in the World Trade Center Design Competition Entries." Architectural Science Review 50, no. 2 (2007): 173-180.
P135 Stephens, Suzanne, Ian Luna, and Ron Broadhurst. Imagining Ground Zero: Official and unofficial proposals for the World Trade Center site. New York:
Rizzoli, 2004.
P136 © ERIA; Klaus Leidor; Lencer; SITO; Imagery ©2014 Landsat, Data SIO, NOAA, US Navy, NGA, GEBCO, Map data ©2014 Google, www.supergreenproject.eu.
P137 Malaysian Air; "New scare diverts US flight," BBC, October 11, 2001; United 93, dir. Paul Greengrass, Universal Pictures, 2006; still from CBS; youtube.com.
P138-139 TwitchPlaysPokemonMapper by hawthorneluke / github.com/hawthorneluke/ TwitchPlaysPokemonMapper; Capstone Software; Irrational Games and Looking Glass Studios; Andrew Gardner / APG Software; © 2001-2014 Cyber Creations Inc.
P140 Alena Meier.
P141 Philips / DESSO.
FIRE PLACE
Over millenia, the fireplace evolved from temporary and movable to fixed and integrated within architecture -firebox and chimney - making each dwelling a voracious consumer of energy...
FIREPLACE
PAGE 1
contributor sébastien marot
fire place
...one of the key revolutions in architecture has been the ultimate domestication of the once Promethean quality of fire... as our mastery of fire improved, the fireplace became less important... its former tasks - to heat, to cook; to provide light and a social focal point - have been divided up among multiple discrete devices, and dispersed through systems hidden in architecture, leading eventually to power stations (enormous fireplaces)... the fireplace in its original form is functionally extinct in the West, while mastery of our energy sources has become an existential issue... in much of south-east Asia and Africa, the fireplace still dominates the house, Posing a more immediate physical threat, in its original, highly toxic, flame-and-smoke form...
PAGE 2
FIREPLACE
In Hesiod's version of the Prometheus story (late 800s BC), Zeus revokes the use of fire from humans after they use it only to offer burnt bones as a sacrifice, rather than meat, which they keep for themselves. The Titan Prometheus then steals fire back for man. In retaliation, Zeus sends Pandora, the "first woman," who carries with her a jar, from which were released "evils, harsh pain and troublesome diseases which give men death." The only redeeming contents of the jar is "foresight," which, combined with the fire Prometheus stole, is a recipe for relentless human progress.
In Aeschylus's version, Prometheus is chained to a rock as punishment for stealing fire. Prometheus says he brought to humanity not only fire but also writing, mathematics, agriculture, medicine, astronomy, metallurgy, architecture - and blind hope. Further ingredients of progress.
In Plato's dialogues, Protagoras asserts that the gods created humans and animals, but left it to Prometheus and his brother Epimetheus to give humans defining abilities. No physical traits were left - the animals had them all - so Prometheus gave humans fire and industrious arts. Civilization and progress is thus inextricably linked with transgression and punishment, all of which is mediated by the exploitation of fire...
J
1637 Peter Paul Rubens, Prometheus with the Firebrand.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 3
PROMETHEAN & APOCALYPTIC ELEMENT
The technology that arguably sparked the progression of early humans and later civilizations -the fireplace - has now more or less disappeared as a discrete object or place within architecture, and we have hardly noticed this erasure. Whereas, according to Gottfried Semper, the first cultures were supposedly formed by gathering around fires, and whereas fireplaces were the focal point of dwelling (literally the focus, in the Latin etymology), now this center cannot hold. The former tasks of the fireplace - heating, cooking, lighting, a gathering place and dispersal point for media and culture - these tasks have been divided up among multiple devices, and spread like tentacles through systems that penetrate every hidden space of architecture.
Around 1160 AD, in Conisbrough Castle, England, the fireplace migrated for perhaps the first time from the center of the living space and became embedded in a thickened wall. Following this revelation - that architecture and combustion could be integrated - a series of fireplace innovations unfold throughout the centuries, peaking first during the Enlightenment, when various scientific "smoke doctors" began the serious study of radiation and convection. Reyner Banham speculated that what forced the greatest minds of the US to design ever more efficient and powerful fireplaces (and then stoves) was the poor insulation qualities of America's prevalent balloon frame housing.
At the same time, the Anglo-Saxon world became obsessed with the fireplace as the ur-symbol of family, community, even nation.
The fireplace's functions began to diverge in the 19th century, taken over by individual, non-architectural devices. Cooking was taken care of by the metal stove; heating became flameless, automated, relegated to a basement boiler and carried by pipes and radiators; lighting was taken care of by the bulb or strip; media and storytelling by the radio, the television, now the personal screen in its various forms. Scattered around the house, we now each have a veritable fireplace that mesmerizes our minds as it warms our palms.
The evolution of the fireplace from an existential and architectural fountainhead into a complex system of thermal (and mental) comfort enables the proliferation of macroclimatic spaces, each expected to be thermally homogenous, a bubble. Architecture gets bigger, and demands for accurate climate control increase accordingly.
Once necessary for survival, the fireplace is now, in the West, a nostalgic luxury, redundant but cherished - providing an extra boost of heat in the centrally-heated home, a ritual (laying the fire), and a sense of community. But in Africa and much of Asia, the fireplace is still predominant in domestic architecture, where it is a major contributor to terminal illnesses.
In the face of the edicts of sustainability to master and maximize the efficiency of our energy use -where every joule and every leakage must be accounted for and ideally compensated through a renewable source - the honest and visible entropy of a burning fireplace becomes appealing again. It's just there, you can see what feeds it, you know it will die, and that's fine.
Broken free from domestic scales in the form of the coal power plant, these giant fireplaces serving millions of homes are a principal culprit of global warming. If a stable and reliable fireplace was once crucial to the survival and flourishing of human cultures, the future of civilization might depend on accelerating the extinction of the fireplace, in all its forms...
PAGE 4
FIREPLACE
"SITE OF ALL SITES"
"What is essential to the hearth ... is the fire in the manifoldness of its essence, which essentially prevails as lighting, illuminating, warming, nourishing, purifying, refining, glowing. The word ... is derived from a root meaning 'to radiate' and 'to burn.' In all the temples of the gods and in all sites of human habitation, this fire has its secure locale and, as this locale, gathers around it all that properly occurs and is bestowed. Through this fire, the hearth is the enduring ground and determinative middle - the site of all sites, as it were, the homestead pure and simple, toward which everything presences alongside and together with everything else and thus first is."
1934 Martin Heidegger discusses the phenomenological dimension of the fireplace (from his lecture series, "Holderlin's Hymn The Ister"). The fireplace is at once primal and the spark of human progress - which is already well on the way to rendering the hearth's charms obsolete by the time of Heidegger's
Chimney of Heidegger's hut at Todtanuberg, Bavaria: external evidence of the fireplace within, enabler of phenomenological investigation, reinforcer of dwelling.
lecture...
Heidegger warming himself at a stove - already a technologically advanced form of the fireplace.
FIREPLACE
PAGES
... from heidegger' site of all sites to nintendo's digital fireplace in 80 years...
"Now don't start daydreaming!
Soon you'll have to add more firewood."
2010 On-screen prompt in the midst of Nintendo Wii game Fireplacing, a digital version of the comforting fireplace, stoked through an infra-red wand, for homes that have long since exiled the flame from sight, down to a basement boiler, and to the distant power station beyond...
PAGE 6
FIREPLACE
GENEALOGY OF BIFURCATION
From the caveman to the toaster, the task of managing fire is the pre-eminent catalyst of technological and therefore cultural evolution. Progressing through history, the fireplace's various functions branch off into discrete devices, so while the fireplace seems to have virtually disappeared by the mid 20th century, in fact, combustion is ubiquitous, disguised in multiple offshoots and derivatives...
smoking
candle
FIRFPI AP.F
PAHF 7
PAGE 8	FIREPLACE
THE GROWING "FIREPLACE"
The modernization of the fireplace reveals two radically opposing tendencies: as its functions disintegrate into multiple devices (oven, TV...), its warming function is centralized and systematized. The energy required for both is exiled further and further from the home, culminating in the nuclear power plant.
With larger spaces enclosed by architecture, and higher expectations of thermal homogeneity, the fireplace evolves from temporary bonfire to building-wide HVAC system...
ca. 1.5 million BC Fire
10,000 BC Primitive hut
Central chimney
CHIMNEY
PAGE 10
FIREPLACE
HEARTH VS. FIREPLACE
Contemporary usage prefers the relatively modern-sounding, literal "fireplace" to the increasingly archaic, rustic-sounding "hearth" - a slow diminution in language that matches the eradication of the element in reality. The hearth is associated, and often synonymous, with home and family at various points in history in Greek, Arabic, Turkish, Hindi, and still today in old fashioned English. Other associations affirm the centrality of the hearth in various cultures and languages: it can mean heart, intimacy, focus, fire, earth. Hearth originates from the Germanic hertho or burning place, or herd meaning floor, ground, fireplace. From Roman Latin, hearth is also associated with atrium, the notion of a "place where smoke from the hearth escapes" (through a hole in the roof or courtyard). In the anatomical sense, hearth also refers to "either of the upper cavities of the heart."
fireplace
A place for a fire, esp. the partially enclosed space at the base of the chimney appropriated to the fire; a hearth.
hearth /har8/
The part of the floor of a room where a domestic fire is made or located, typically (in modern houses) below a chimney against a wall and often forming a focus in the room; the floor beneath the grate of a fire.
Also: the area, often paved or tiled, in front of a fireplace.
"hearth, n.1". OED Online.
June 2013.
SKöimÄi
1671 "Let us blow up that of the spirit, in the hearth of our hearts, for elevating our thoughts, and raising our minds upward."
William Annand, Mysterium pietatis: or, The mysterie of godlinesse, 204.
chimney
fireplace
English
15th century chiminee
Middle English, fireplace or hearth
LATE APPEARANCE OF "FIREPLACE
1702 "An Engine of a three Inch-bore ... ,c„u|| a Fire-place of not above twenty Inches deep T. Savery, Miner's Friend, 34.
1710 "I have no fire-place in my bed-chamber" Jonathan Swift, "Journal to Stella."
FIREPLACE
PAGE 11
- »-phe Testicles are ... the Feu-161S of pre-hearth, where the Lares or P'aCl„iH-Gods of the body, do solace h°a disport themselues." an^e||<iah Crooke, A description of the
b>ody°fman■
CENTER OF COMMUNITY
ca. 1000 "Ond Fligelaces heorôgeneatas." "and we are Hygelac's own hearth-fellows". — Beowulf.
900 AD heord
Old English, meaning hearth.
hyrr -------------------
Icelandic, meaning fire.
1400 "A cheyer by-fore he chemne, |cer charcole brenned, Wat grayed for sirGawan."
"A chair was placed for $ir Gawain before the chimney where a fire of charcoal was burning."
— Sir Gawain and the Green Knight.
ca. 1200 herth / herd
Old Saxon, also principal residence of a family.
ca. 600 hauri
Gothic, meaning coal.
karsts __________
Latvian, meaning hot, fervent.
èd
Old Frisian, meaning peat.
6th c. BC carbö
Classical Latin, meaning charcoal.
> [¡gmm
Her! 1300	---------
Middle high German, meaning hearth and house.
eit c. 1000	—
Old High German, meaning hearth and pyre.

hert, heert, heerd, haert
Middle Dutch, meaning hearth and family inheritance.
intimita
Italian, meaning intimate, also relates to a place that is far away from the outside word, such as the "focolare domestico" (hearth) or "casa" (house).
8th century ---------------
caminata
Medieval Latin "room with a fireplace," short for camera caminata.

1685 "Sunbeams refracted or rented by a burning-glass to a focus." —fiobert Boyle, "An Essay of the -•eat Effects of even Languid and ."eeded Motion."
1574 "The Hearth wherin tier is kept. Focus."
— Dohn Baret, An aluearie or triple dictionarie, in Englishe, Latin, and French.
______________________ aedes
Classical Latin, hearth, also house.
1100 erda	C(i0C>£
Old High German,	, ...
meaning
earth.
caminus 6th c. BC
Latin, meaning forge, furnace.
KQ|JIVOÇ
Greek, pronounced kaminos, meaning forge and furnace.
fogus
Latin, meaning fire.
choola
English (India)-
Latin roots
w
Hindi, pronounced chulha, meaning cooking place, fireplace.
1813 "A marble corridore filled up with Choolas, or cooking-places, composed of mud, cow-dung, and unburnt bricks."
— Sames Forbes, Oriental memoirs.
chulli
' Sanskrit
[¡¡¡mji
Hindi, pronounced ghar-bar, means home and hearth.
— Hardev Bahri, Learners' Hindi-English dictionary = Siksarthi Hindi-Angrejhi sabdakosa (Delhi: Rajapala, 1989).
300 AD focarium focus
Latin, meaning hearth, fireplace and altar.
gema
Greek, pronounced es-tia, meaning hearth, epi + estia (upon + hearth) = home.
"Seneca remarked that an atrium 'crammed with smoke-blackened images' was a sign of old nobility."
— Frank Sear, Roman Architecture (Cornell University Press, 1983), 33.
300 BC atrium--------------
Latin, meaning a courtyard, a large oblong square surrounded by arched galleries.
300 BC ater
PAGE 12
FIREPLACE
Khotytevo	• Us,. lztK
yGesher Benot Ya'aqov */ 800 ka
Chesowd 1.5-1.4 M
HOMINID + FIRE
Tracking the earliest evidence of deliberately set fires around the world...
CONTROLLING FIRE
1.7 million years ago a radical development in hominid history took place - cooking. Huddled around a fire, early hominids laid strips of meat, carrots and potatoes onto a makeshift grill and initiated humanity's most important evolutionary bifurcation. Biological anthropologist Richard Wrangham argues in Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human (Profile, 2009) that cooking made possible the largest increase in brain size in human evolution. With the control of fire, Homo Erectus is able to consume higher quantities of calories at lower caloric costs of digestion. Rather than spending all day chewing, precious calories could be devoted to other activities like hunting and traveling. Humans could now develop expensive organs like the brain and digestive tract, which require a lot of energy. Brain size and body weight may have increased by 60 percent. The control of fire altered the division of labor between males and females to a mating system based not on sex, but food, where females focused on gathering and cooking
COOKING APE
2011 Kanzi, a 31 year-old bonobo at the great Ape Trust in Des Moines, Iowa, can make fire and cook meals.
"Kanzi makes fire because he wants to. He used to watch the film 'Quest for Fire' when he was very young, which was about early man struggling to control fire. He watched it spellbound over and over hundreds of times."
(Daily Mail, 30 December 2011.)

ka (kiloannus)
unit of time equal to one thousand years (ago)
Ma (megaannus)
unit of time equal to one million years (ago)
f \Zhoukoudian P 770 ka

Swartkrans 1.5-1.0 Ma
2.5-1.0 Ma	1.0 Ma -125 ka	125 ka - present
_ , Atapuerca Bolmor -—
228 ka
> 2.5 Ma
Wonderwerk 1.7 Ma
□
□
n
while males ventured out to hunt.
E/VRLY PLEISTOCENE	MIDDLE PLEISTOCENE
Hommids regutariy use We, but the source and level of	Habitual use and control of fire is recorded in caves across Europe.
controf vs debated among archeologists.	The fireplace becomes a key indicator for social groupings.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 13
Jl

770 ka
Zhoukoudian cave (China)'
Much debated until new evidence emerging in March 2014 confirms controlled use of fire.
770 BC Ash from the Zhoukoudian Cave, China: "test results clearly indicate the presence of elemental C, elemental K, and siliceous aggregates in the insoluble phases of the ash ... providing strong evidence of the in situ use of fire by Homo erectus pekinensis." Phys.org, "New analyses verify the use of fire by Peking Man," 11 March,
800 ka
Gesher Benot Ya'aqov (Israel)
Charred plants and flint fragments occur in localized concentrations suggestive of hearths.
800 ka
Cueva Negra (Spain)-----------------—
Burnt rock and charred bone signal the earliest known use of controlled fire in Europe.
300 ka
Qesem cave (Israel)
Largest hearth found from the pleistocene. At 4m2, its repeated use and central location suggest advanced spatial/social organization.
1.7 Ma
Wonderwerk cave (South Africa) ■
Composed primarily of light plant material (grasses, brushes and leaves) fires located 30 meters from the mouth of the 140-meter long system indicate early hominid control of fire.
1.5-1.4 Ma
Chesowanja (Kenya)
Chunks of red (burnt) clay up to 7cm are found with bone fragments at an open-air site. Tests reveal the clay had been heated to 400°C - the heat of a campfire.
1.5-1.0 Ma
Swartkrans cave (South Africa)
Burned bone fragments found near the mouth of the cave suggest hominid butchering techniques and the use of fire for cooking.
2014.
A 228 ka
Jim Bolomor cave (Spain)
Early fireplace found in southern Europe, confirmed in 2012 peer-reviewed paper (see following pages).
PAGE 14
FIREPLACE
COOKING HOMINID: BOLOMOR CAVE, SPAIN
A karst rockshelter 100 meters above sea level in the Valldigna valley, not far from the Mediterranean, with the Iberian mountain range to the north and the Prebetic range to the south, first crumbled open 500,000 years ago, offering itself up for the experimental controlled use of fire. The cave, now called Bolomor, excavated since 1989, is found to contain some of the earliest known hearths in southern Europe, with an age of 228 Ky (or 228,000 years ago). The fireplaces, or hearths - defined by the Bolomor team of researchers in 2012 as sites of "controlled and reiterative" use of fire - were made by Neanderthals, who also left evidence of butchering and cooking turtles, rabbits and birds along with evidence of stone tool industry and fragmented human teeth and bones. Bolomor Cave's deposits include at least 14 separate hearths, recovered from various stratigraphic levels...
-o'
Mediterranean Sea
Bolomor Cave
Valencia)
Bolomor Cave: embedded in a mountainside near Tavernas de la Valldigna, 60 kilometers south of Valencia.
"Hombre de Bolomor," rendering of Neanderthal inhabitant of the cave, drawn in 1997 by tosep Fernandez's excavation team.
Bay of
FIREPLACE
PAGE 15
Bolomor Cave: 1 million years ago, closed.
SETTING THE STAGE
Through erosion, deposition, and climatic changes, a cave opens up on a mountainside in the Iberian peninsula, creating a fleeting stage for the controlled use of fire, only to close again, to be rediscovered in the 19th century...

200,000 years ago: first fires...
100,000 years ago: closed again by sediment build up.
PAGE 16
FIREPLACE
Plan of all fireplaces from different periods, superimposed, "generally positioned facing the valley ... hominids sat behind them, with the walls of the cave at their backs. They have an information landscape on the horizon and an inner "closed" space where they conduct their domestic activities."
STRATIGRAPHY OF BOLOMOR CAVE
Fireplaces are found as far down as level XIII, phase II of Bolomor's inhabitation, 228,000 years ago; now buried by up to five meters of sediment.
Excavated section.
Fireplaces confirmed on four levels, each from a different period of inhabitation, separated by thousands of years and meters of sediment.
Levels
0 cm
200
250
350
400
450
550
600
650
700
XIV
Phases
c _ Batam* f
121 *1-18 ky
5 162 +/. 23 Ky < 180 Ky
Bolomor Phase III
4
Bolomor Phase II
b
•	228 *1- 53 Ky
C	V
—233 ♦/- 36 Ky
Bolomor Phase I
b £«t '
XVI
. jifr 625+/-125Kv
xvii b
Stalagmite
FIREPLACE
PAGE 17
JOSEP FERNANDEZ, FIREPLACE EXCAVATOR
fire
and
language
In 1982, losep Fernandez Peris, a doctor of Prehistory and Archeology at the University of Valencia, rediscovered the significance of Cova del Bolomor after more than 100 years of neglect. In 2004, Fernandez was on the team of excavators who discovered and deciphered in the cave the oldest known fireplaces in Europe at the time (published in Quaternary International in 2012). For the hominids who occupied the cave over different periods, the ability to control fire was most likely critical for the development of articulated language and social hierarchy. Yet the Bolomor fireplaces are not the warm focal points, crucial for the mere survival of the species, that come to mind when we think of "cavemen" and "fire"...
FIRE VS. FIREPLACE
AMO How do you decipher the difference between a fireplace and a naturally occurring fire? In other words, what, officially, is a fireplace? losep Fernandez Traditionally, the evidence that determined the controlled use of fire was based on the presence of bones, lithic industry and burnt sediments. Nowadays it is known that several natural phenomena can also produce microscopic traces similar to those produced by intentional thermal action, so evidence of ashes is not enough to confirm the presence of a hearth. A hearth is usually divided in at least three layers: a top layer of grey ash, a second heat-altered layer presenting a reddish tone, and a bottom layer with no heat alterations, which is therefore the same color as the main soil. Additionally, these layers must present burnt vegetal remnants transformed into coal, and there must be archaeological material located nearby - bones, lithic material, burnt sediments - with a complex spatial distribution that indicates a relation with the hearth.
A naturally-occurring fire would not be surrounded by such evidence, nor would it have a controlled morphology - a stone perimeter, or a carved out hollows. The presence of several of these indications in one archaeological site and in the same timeframe serves as a demonstration of the controlled use of fire.
AMO What is the timeframe of the Bolomor fireplaces?
3F Used over a time period of 350,000-100,000 years ago, Bolomor is the only known archaeological site in Europe where hearths, and activity areas associated
^Subsequent to this interview, in 2016, older evidence of the controlled use of fire, from 800kya, is discovered at Cueva Negra, Murcia, about 200km southwest of
fact. The evidence in Bolomor allows us to approach with certainty the features of anthropic activity necessary for producing fire and using it in everyday life tasks.
* Stratigraphy = branch of geology studying of arrangement and succession of layers (strata) accumulated over extended periods of time.
with them, have been identified across a wide stratigraphic* sequence dating more than 200,000 years.** The oldest combustion structures in the site have been documented in level XIII, dating back 228,000 years. These are the earliest clearly identified hearths in southern Europe. Having found an archaeological site with a significant amount of hearths, with wide-ranging time-frames, suggests a closer approach to the origins of controlled fire - an exceptional
1976 Cave fireplace typology by Catherine Perlés, in "Le Feu," Préhistorique française. Types found at Bolomor:
Dallage de pierre": pavement.
dissymétrique": assymetrical bowl.
AMO What are the design characteristics of the fireplaces?
]F The main particularity of the two structures found on level XIII - with a distance of 1.12 meters between their foci - is that they both had some kind of preparatory work before being put to use. Although the study is incomplete, the excavation and the topographic analysis reveals that one of them was sitting over a base of limestone rocks - or dallage de pierre (Perlés, 1976) - ranging in size from 5 to 15 cm. These rocks appear to contain heat-altered sediment and are in direct contact with the carbonaceous sediment layer. Another hearth
PAGE 18
FIREPLACE
228,000 years ago Hearths, post-excavation, are made into a cast so loose objects - stones, bones - can be removed and analyzed; then the (real) section of hearth is further scraped away in hopes of finding older evidence further down. While the composition of soil is then lost forever, the cast is filled in, and the original stones and bones placed back.

FIREPLACE
PAGE 19
nted a different disposition, with a concave base Crocks bordering the laterals, and one in the base of the 3 ressi°n- The hearths presenting these features and deP |0gjes - cuvette dissymétrique, cuvette à event (Perlés, _ bave been documented in different archaeological ^Elxts in more recent periods, notably in Pech Pech-de-|| or Pincevent (Bordes 1972; Leroi-Gourhan & ji|on 1972). These kinds of concave hearths usually elevated laterals, sometimes bordered with rocks, wjde, elongated, shallow laterals.
aMO Were the fireplaces typically in the center {the cave, near the entrance, or more secluded?
ipThe hearths in Bolomor tend to be under the cornice or roof protected by it, but also allowing the evacuation of smoke. Hearths were generally positioned facing the valley and hominids sat behind them, with the walls of the cave at their backs. They have an information landscape on the horizon and an inner "closed" space where they conduct their domestic activities.
FIRE'S ADAPTIVE ADVANTAGE
in the sense of singularity but rather an ensemble of hearths. In the first part of the Paleolithic age, the modern concept of hearth that one associates with home, dwelling or house must be discarded.
AMO If cooking was primary, what role did heating play?
DF The presence of processed meat and animal and vegetable fats indicates that the hearths had a major culinary function. Curiously, the hearths in Bolomor are not exclusively related to the coldest periods of the Paleolithic, but also most frequently to the temperate periods, when the cave occupation was longer and more intense; for instance the IVth period. The thermal functions of the hearths in the Mediterranean areas would have been secondary. Once fire is controlled and regularly used, it's then used all over Europe regardless of the climatic period. Here in the Pleistocene, the term "light a fire because it's cold" or "I am in a cold region or in winter..." is less determining than "I have social and economic needs and therefore need to establish a camp," which are the principles to establish a "home."
AMO What was the primary function of the fireplaces, and what advantages did they bring?
jFThe controlled use of fire during the Paleolithic period allowed hominids to develop a series of adaptive advantages, with significant improvements in survival and livelihood strategies. As a producer of heat, fire combatted disease and shielded the hominids from the nocturnal roaming of big carnivores. In the case of Bolomor, the hearths present bone remains, which suggests a primal culinary use. The cooking process enriched the nutritional qualities of some foods, removing parasites, toxins, and allowing preservation through smoking. It also enhanced the ability to digest other foods, to the point where it has been suggested that the thermic treatment of foods contributed to the transformation of the hominids' digestive enzymes. It also triggered the development of hunting strategies as well as allowing the production of more sophisticated tools. Fire was important not only because of its heating, cooking and lighting properties, but as a socializing device. It was a core for activities and a spatial distributer. In this way it facilitated the development of an articulated language. At Bolomor, we can be certain that we are facing hearths with the following characteristics:
1.	Strategic location in the cave.
2.	One-cycle hearths, meaning just one combustion: no re-usage in the same spot.
3.	Subcircular morphologies and diameters ranging from 120 to 130 cm, meaning they could have had multiple functions: cooking, lighting, heating, etc. Out of all these functions, it is logical to think that the culinary function Played the main social role.
P-There is no existence of a determined "central hearth"
FIRE, SPACE, AND SOCIAL STRUCTURE
AMO What do we know about the way these fireplaces structured society and the space of the cave?
3F The hearths are much more than a mere technological device applied in the search for results or goals. The preparation, creation and maintenance of this device promoted a series of coordinated tasks in the group, and therefore, a precise organization and hierarchy. The hearth is, in that sense, a device of social cohesion. As a light source, fire is a focus and a catalyst of social activity. This means that activities that previously took place without any apparent organization, like meat processing, tool-making, even sleeping started to happen in relation to the fire.
This more organized distribution of space also applied to cleaning activities: animal bones were thrown into the fire in order to sanitize the spaces, and "dump zones" created outside the cave. A distinction thus appeared between habitable and junk spaces. Some of them started to have an even more special use such as sleeping areas, food processing areas, or tool-making areas.
AMO Can you explain the connection between the presence of controlled fire and the emergence of articulated language?
3F Many researchers believe that the meetings around fires led to the development of an articulated language. Nevertheless, this remains an unproved hypothesis.
The paleontropologic evidence places the appearance of articulated language before the controlled use of fire: the discovery of hyoid bones in archaic hominids suggests that speech was inherent to the homo- species. But early
PAGE 20
FIREPLACE
on, speech could have been very basic and fire might have contributed to the development of abstract concepts and to a higher complexity in language use. The control of fire, due to its role as a social catalyst, helped bond community members and might have been a major contributor to this development.
AMO Do you know if men or women were the keepers of the hearth?
3F The sexual division of labor in prehistory, particularly in the Middle Pleistocene, is a slippery issue to resolve.
We can only rely on ethnography, which has been commonly used as a valid tool to support the interpretation of archaeological sites. There are ethnographic studies indicating a distribution of tasks, as well as differences in roles depending on sex, age, or even the physical-motor characteristics of the members in the group. For example, Hadza women are in charge of collecting berries and extracting root vegetables, while men form hunting parties. Regarding keeping the hearth, these studies show that both men and women can perform the ignition, but it is women who are primarily responsible for their maintenance, and they are the ones who dwell for a little longer in the camps.
AMO Did the use of fire allow the neanderthals who used the cave to settle?
JF Although fire was not crucial in order to occupy Bolomor, it did contribute to the development of a much more residential character, structuring space and concentrating activities surrounding it. Fire technology and its generalization transformed places of habitat into important social centers of knowledge transmission.
When the hours of light were extended by the light of the fireplace, productive activity increased, time could be spent making work plans, distributing tasks, and favoring in general communication and the exchange of ideas.
Multiple fireplaces also found on level XI, ca. 150,000 years old.
AMO Did the fireplaces of the Bolomor play any spiritual or cultural function as well as a practical one?
IF Proof of their spiritual or ritual use has not been found, as it has for later hearths elsewhere. All hearths, independently from their chronology, have a cultural function since they represent the currents of the culture that created them. Not very much is known about the symbolic thought of the human groups that inhabited Bolomor or other sites from the same era. Even though fire and its shadows projected in the dark might exalt the imagination, the practical function in this case appears to be the most certain.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 21
ca.15 BC "The men of old were born like the wild beasts, In woods, caves, and groves, and lived on savage fare. As time went on, the thickly crowded trees in a certain place, tossed by storms and winds, and rubbing their branches against one another, caught fire, and so the inhabitants of the place were put to flight, being terrified by the furious flame. After it subsided, they drew near, and observing that they were very comfortable standing before the warm fire, they put on togs and, while thus keeping it alive, brought up other people to It, showing them by signs how much comfort they got from it. In that gathering of men, at a time when utterance of sound was purely individual, from daily habits they fixed upon articulate words just as these had happened to come; then, from indicating by name things in common use, the result was that in this chance way they began to talk, and thus originated conversation with one another.... it was the discovery of fire that originally gave rise to the coming together of men, to the deliberative assembly, and to social intercourse. And so, as they kept coming together in greater numbers into °ne place, finding themselves naturally gifted ueyond the other animals in not being obliged to walk with faces to the ground, but upright and gazing upon the splendour of the starry firmament, and also In being able to do with ease whatever they chose with their hands and fingers, they °®9an in that first assembly to construct shelters." ~~ Vitruvius, De architectura.
PREPARING AND REUSING THE FIREPLACE
AMO To what extent were the Bolomor hearths prepared and reused?
JF We are speaking about short-duration hearths used only once, and with no superimposition. There was no rekindling of the fire in the same spot.
The very first hearths were simply placed on the soil without any preparation. In some cases the use of stone slabs is visible as a base and/or in the laterals as a way of insulating the fire and maintaining the heat. In the next occupation of the cave, possibly thousands of years later, new hearths would be made, usually in the same spots or zones as the previous ones due to functional and spatial advantages, but not because of the pre-existence of a hearth in that space.
AMO When the cave was used again, is there anything to indicate that it had remained in the cultural memory, or that it was used cyclically?
Or do you think the new group of neanderthals stumbled across it by chance?
]F Bolomor is periodically re-occupied since its opening about 400,000 years ago, until the sediments significantly reduced the usable area inside it around
100,000	years ago. With over 200,000 years of occupation, it is hard to think about the durability of fixed ancestral traditions. In this sense, we prefer to think about a combination of the cultural behavior of certain groups and the strategic position of the cave, periodically rediscovered, in a slightly elevated promontory overlooking a territory of plains.
AMO Would there be more than one hearth in use at one time?
JF Due to the short duration of some of the occupation periods, it is very possible that the multiple hearths we found were fired at the same time.
Each could have developed identical or complementary functions according to the group needs.
CIVILIZATION AND FIRE
AMO You said that we have to discard our preconceptions about the modern associations of the hearth when looking at Bolomor. Can you elaborate the differences? There are a lot of similarities: the hearth was a gathering place, organizing social functions and facilitating communication - all the things the hearth was later valued for.
JF The difference is based on the fact that nowadays our concept of the hearth is that of stability and therefore, a long period of settlement. During the Pleistocene, we rarely find encampments of a long duration.
AMO What is your feeling about the primacy of the hearth in human civilization, and by extension architecture?
JF For me, fire production is the first great productive revolution in humanity: the 'Fire Revolution' precedes by hundreds of millennia the 'Neolithic Revolution,' which introduced agriculture and animal husbandry. The wisely-directed fire turned men into the holder of a devastating technology against adverse elements. Throughout human history, fire has been decisive for its technological and cultural development; therefore, in symbolic and religious matters it has also acquired a relevant role. Intentionally made combustion structures might be considered the first architectural elements in human history.
PAGE 22
FIREPLACE
FENG-SHUI AND THE FIRE
Cave-to-pit-to-hut: a dubious evolution of dwellings, determined by the fireplace and the principles of feng shui, according to Ding Yi, Lu Yu, Yong Hong	Geomancy
and the selection of architecture placement in ancient China (Hebei: 1996).
IS 1-3 fi'X
® 1-6 HMM&X
horizontal cave
cave in transitional period
bag-shaped vertical cave
FIREPLACE
PAGE 23
half cave housing with a chamber at the front and a bedroom at the back
cave wall with wooden frame and mud surfacing, the door is still on top of the house
half cave housing with vertical walls and shallow digging
interior structure of housing
PAGE 24
FIREPLACE
ARCHETYPE: FIREPLACE REGARDLESS OF CLIMATE
"Man is a creation of desire, not a creation of need."
— Gaston Bachelard, Psychoanalysis of Fire (1938).
Fireplaces are present and honored everywhere, in extremely hot as well as extremely cold climates, indicating that utilitarian needs may not be their primary function...
Heating degree days is a concept introduced in the 19th century by British engineer Sir Richard Strachey (1817-1908) in his assessment of the optimum conditions for growing crops. The term is first applied to the built environment in the 1920s. It is used to calculate relative heating requirements in different climates in order to reach a "comfort" temperature - today, normally 18°C.
If on a certain day at a certain location the temperature is 16°C from 00:00 to 12:00 and 17°C from 12:00 to 23:59, then the heating degree day figure is calculated as (2 degrees x 0.5 days) + (1 degree x 0.5 days) = 1.5 heating degree days.
The annual heating degree days figure is the sum of Individual heating degree days. The lower the figure, the hotter the climate.
Great Plains, Midwest US Heating degree days: 3234 People: Native Americans Dwelling: Tipi
Fireplace located in the center, with altar behind (c.f. the Sami Lavuu of Northern Norway).
Fireplace: Open, surrounded by stones.
Chimney: Smoke hole covered by smoke flaps lifted with poles.
Dirt-covered subterranean sweat house: Used for spiritual regeneration. Fire-heated stones dropped into water to make steam.
(a)	back scratcher
(b)	sticks for moving heated stones
I (c)^fll^fer for^Mieated I stdR w|
Northern Canada HDD: 8109 People: Inuit ft Dwelling: Igloo
At least one fireplace is located on an extension of the raised platform (iqllq) on which the Inuit family sits and sleeps, elevated from the cold'air of the ground level. The warmer air generated by the fireplace warms the higher strata of the living area.
Fireplace: Stone lamp is filled with a thin layer of animal oil (whale, seal, reindeer) and a line of dense moss along the straight edge is lit for a flame.
Chimney: a small ventilation hole on top of the igloo.
Kabylie, Algeria HDD: 665 People: Berber Dwelling: Kabylie house
The fire here is "male" c.f. Amazon Tokanoan concept of "female" fire (below).
Fireplace:
Open hearth. Chimney: None.

&
Amazon HDD: 0
People: Tukanoan Dwelling: Malocca
Each family in the communal house occupies a room along the wall, occupants sleeping in hammocks slung around cooking hearths.
Fireplace: Open hearth. Cooking fire associated with female sexuality.
Chimney: None.
Mali HDD: 10 People: Dogon Dwelling: Dogon house
Anthropomorphic concept, plan representative of a man lying on his side in act of procreation. Kitchen=head; hearth-stones=eyes; central room=belly; goat houses, stores=limbs; en,,y I water jars=breasts; grind stones=sexu= organs.
Fireplace: Open hearth. Chimney: None.
goat shed

FIREPLACE
PAGE 25
Northern Norway HDD: 4686 People: Sami Dwelling: Lavuu
£^^olace (e) ¡s located at the center of The "r tPunder the smoke escape hole. Space the ^en the entrance (d) and the fireplace betW dered by two logs (b), forming a space is b°fbare ground used for storing firewood.
(w oT hehind the fireplace is covered with fine SPaCg or juniper twigs and is used for kitchen ^household objects (a) and, before Chris-a . a place of religion. The host of the tent ''•(on the left (f) and the wife on the right (h).
Fireplace:
Open hearth.
Chimney:
A smoke hole above the hearth.
^ Botswana HDD: 131 People: Tswana Dwelling: Tswana dwelling
The Tswana live in compound dwellings of several huts housing the sleeping quarters of the parents and the mature sons and daughters. The lolwapa is a well-maintained : open area of beaten earth where daily (activities take place.
It usually has a fireplace for warmth and comfort in winter,
■ while the i cooking fire 's separate.
Fireplace:
Open wood fire.
Chimney:
None (outdoors)
Tohoku, Japan HDD: 2348 People: Japanese Dwelling: Folk house
The irori is a patch of earth at the center of a configuration of tatami mats, used for cooking and heating, is the symbolic and physical center of the four-room folk house, flanked by the niwa (garden), umaya (horse stable), nando (parents' room) and zashiki (guest room).
Jp
..'•NIWA'.-'-
(GARDEN);
Fireplace:
Open hearth. Chimney:
None.
Northern Tanzania HDD: 2
People: Maasai Dwelling: Maasai house
'Snail shell' shaped entrance is characteristic. House layout decided by woman of the house.
Fireplace:
Open hearth.
Chimney:
None.
Fireplace:
Open fire kindled by coconut husks, dried leaves and wood. Chimney: None.
The fire is kept burning in a hearth near the main door to keep away evil spirits. Beneficial side effects include hardening of the thatch and repelling insects. A continuous fire also symbolizes a well-kept household, as in many Melanesian, Polynesian, Micronesian and Southeast Asian societies.
«... .. T FA-SM, ^ male lone _
loql most ¿ariyattione_________'___
private zone iowo ni vole
middle of the house
Fiji
HDD: 0 People: Fijian Dwelling: Vale
Siberia People: Chukchi HDD: 7136 Dwelling: Yaranga
Reindeer skin over wood frame. Fireplace: Open hearth. Chimney: None.
Southeast Asia - Polynesia -Micronesia - Melanesia
In islands with generally zero heating degree days, fireplaces nevertheless retain great significance: houses are centered physically and spiritually on the open-fire hearth, representing the family unit and the survival of the community.
Sulawesi, Indonesia HDD: 0
People: Torajan Dwelling: Tongkonan
In addition to occupying the prominent central position in the house, the fireplace is programmed into the language of the Torajan people with respect to the married couple. (Toby Alice Volkman, Feasts of Honor: Ritual and Change in the Toraja Highlands, Issue 16 of Illinois studies in anthropology, University
111 i i Di'rtrtr' 1 QQC \
Borneo HDD: 0
People: Dayak Dwelling: Longhouse
Dayaks who live in longhouses containing individual apartments treat the fire and light of the fireplace in each house as testimony to the community-mindedness of each member. Members who have unlit fireplaces for more than six days are liable to litigation from neighbors. The burning fires in a row facilitate the view of the community as an aggregate whole.
PAGE 26
FIREPLACE
HESTIA, GODDESS OF ARCHITECTURE
The fireplace appears in the form of a Greek goddess, who teaches men how to build houses around her, and who proves to be more mobile in reality, as a portable piece of technology, than the fixed and central role assigned to her in myth...
"In thee the Gods have fixed their dwelling place, strong, stable basis of the mortal race."
—	Orphic Hymn 84 to Hestia, period unknown (3rd century BC-2nd century AD).
Rarely depicted, with little evidence of priesthoods and temples dedicated to her, often omitted from the list of 12 Olympians, and celebrated in only a single Homeric Hymn,* Hestia - her name synonymous with hearth - is almost invisible1 and yet ubiquitous in Greek mythology and everyday life. Present in every home as a domestic altar, the first and last libations and morsels of food are offered to her, and any offering to other gods goes through her. In front of the hestia, sexual intercourse is prohibited.2 Around her central and comforting presence, the Greek house is meant to be oriented: she is deemed the goddess of architecture.
KEEPING THE FLAME
Courted by Poseidon and Apollo, Hestia determined that she would forever remain a virgin, since in marrying, she would have to renounce the hearth that she is charged with keeping.3 In compensation for sacrificing her chance at marriage, Zeus granted her the guardianship of Mount Olympus, since she would be guaranteed never to leave on frivolous adventures or become embroiled in battles. In Plato's Phaedrus, when ten deities follow Zeus across the heavens, Hestia stays at home to tend the hearth. Through Hestia, the home is rooted to the earth; she is conceived as an immobile unit at the center of the terrestrial sphere,4 but also as a hub linking the Greeks (and later the Romans) with the heavens. In Euripides, Hestia is synonymous with the oikos (the household).
PARADOX
When Hestia does appear in verse and art, it is usually alongside her nephew and her opposite, Hermes, who is associated with adventure, commerce, and communication
-	the exterior world, which seemingly cannot exist without the interior, secured by the hearth. In the story of this most grounded of goddesses, there are immediately paradoxes: Hestia is concerned with domestic preservation but also comes to support the political sphere; she is supposedly the fundamental fixed place in the home, but at the same time she is a portable device...
Hestia, keeper of the flame, synonymous with hearth and home.
*"Hestia, in the high dwellings of all, both deathless gods and men who walk on earth, you have gained an everlasting abode and highest honor: glorious is your portion and your right. For without you mortals hold no banquet, where one does not duly pour sweet wine in offering to Hestia both first and last."
— Homeric Hymn to Hestia, 7th—4th BC.
HEARTH RITUALS
BIRTH: Hestia is central in the three rites of passage for ancient Greeks. Newborns are ritually connected to her in the feast of Amphidromia, carried around the hearth several times by the naked father - an effort at purification and immortalization through proximity to the flames - then, in recognition of the failure to immortalize the child, it is lain on the ground next to the hearth, binding it with the home and the quotidian condition of mankind.5
MARRIAGE: Newly-weds take a flame from the bride's hearth to the groom's.
DEATH: the perideipnon (funeral banquet) takes place at the hearth of the deceased. In Argos, when a man died his family's hearth was extinguished.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 27

K »y]truvius says, that in Winter Parlours it is 1452
to adorn the Ceiling with handsome ridicw0 kgcause it will be presently spoilt by the paintm9' gm0|<e anc| continual Fires; for which const Ancjents used to paint those Ceilings ^8SRlack that it might seem to be done by the Blk itself- - it ¡s probable they generally used Sm able Hearths or Chafing-pans either of Iron, which they carried from Place to BrasS wherever they had Occasion to make a Fire.
erhaps that warlike Race of Men, hardened ^^Epual Incampments, did not make so much W coj [rjre as we do now; and Physicians will not wholesome, to be too much by the Aristotle says, that the Flesh of Animals • s Its Firmness and Solidity from Cold..."
9alLeon Battista Alberti, On the Art of Building.
MOBILE FIREPLACE
While the Hestian myth emphasizes permanence, the reality of ancient Greek hearths reflects a tendency towards technological development and mobility. While early Iron Age houses often prominently feature a fixed hearth, this may be due more to the architectural simplicity of the spaces - a hearth could easily serve the one or two-room spaces - than to veneration of Hestia. As Greek houses grow in size during the later Archaic period (800 BC-480 BC), a fixed hearth could not serve the increasing number of rooms. Only one of the Athenian houses uncovered around the Agora contains a built-in hearth.6 Instead, families rely on portable braziers of terracotta that could be moved from room to room. With the emergence of the courtyard typology and the multiplication of rooms, braziers allowed slaves - unlike Hestia, the woman of the family / hearth did not actually keep the flame - to cook outside or in, depending on the weather and the presence of the family. Immanent with the myth of immutability, the hearth was a device liberated from architecture, an object that could roam, illuminate, and enable exchange - much like Hestia's counterpart, Hermes...
"the Sages call the Earth-Mother Hestia because she remains motionless at the center of the Ether"
Euripides, fragment 938 (Vernant 1983).
The only fixed hearth uncovered in the entire Athenian civic center, at House D on the north slope of the Areiopagos.
1. Stability ca. 2800-2100 BC
Early Helladlc,
Eutresls, Boetia:
House L contains two hestias, each close to the comer of the room.
2. Fixity
ca. 2100-1550 BC
Middle Helladic: in the same settlement, House C contains a slightly raised circular clay hearth nearly in the middle of the main room.
3. Multiplication ca. 500-323 BC
Classical Period, Areiopagos, Athens: with the emergence of the courtyard typology and the proliferation of rooms, a central or single hearth is no longer tenable and is almost entirely absent. Hestia must come instead in the form of portable braziers...
4. Mobility
(Tsakirigis)
M = marble louicrmn fragments T = terracotta loulcrion Ir.ii-im ill-Rlhfli a 5
L = loom weight S = spindle w horl
B = bathtub (25 widely scattered fragments)
Cooking
Cylindrical shape ideal for concentrating heat within the brazier.
Heating
Fire-pan braziers with low conical stands and broad depressions suited to heating surrounding space.
Classical period; 4th century BC The Dema House: "It has long been recognized that many, or even most, Greek houses have no fixed, permanent kitchens or cooking places." (Foxhall). In the Dema House, at least three possible locations are found for a portable braziaJ'hestia...
PAGE 28
FIREPLACE
INSTRUMENT OF ALLIANCES
While hestia is the device that centers the family, it is also the altar upon which alliances are made with other families. Food cooked on the altar of Hestia engenders a religious fellowship among those who eat. As a verb "Hestian" means to receive and accept at table - she exists not only to ensure preservation of the family unit and home, but as a guarantor of hospitality.
POLITICAL SPHERE
In Classical Greece (5th—4th century BC), "[i]t is almost as if... the hearth moves out of the domestic sphere into public and communal life.''7 Hestia migrates from the domestic sphere to the political. In the prytaneum (public hall) in the Agora of Athens and other cities, the communal hearth is never allowed to go out. According to Barbara Tsakirgis: "The attestations of perpetual fire in the public hearths are ... the sources which are mistakenly extended to the private sphere to assume that the domestic hearth-fire was also a permanent feature."8 The public hearth is likely more important than the private hearth... The communal hearth is the center of banquets featuring animal sacrifices and heavy-duty meat eating, where councillors and guests of the city dine at public expense. Beginning in a conservative role, Hestia becomes the spark of progress: New towns are established by lighting a fire with a flame from the "mother" town - a ritual that will be adapted in Nazi Germany's staging of the Olympics in 1936...
PRESERVATION VS. PROGRESS
A further ambiguity in the status of Hestia emerges in the possible slippage or double meaning between hestie (hearth) and histie (colonnade), which can also mean the mast of a ship, and the woman who weaves: not images of passivity and conservation, but rather of dynamism and creativity. Plato connects Hestia with Anagke, the spinner at the center of the universe who controls the orbits of the spheres. Recording Socrates, he calls into question whether the name Hestia is etymologically related to ousia - an immutable, permanent essence - or to osia, which evokes Heraclitus' philosophy that everything is mobile and there is no essence (you never stand in the same river twice).9 In this sense, Hestia could be deemed a principle of impetus and movement, of progress rather than preservation.,,
1.3ean-Pierre Vemant, Myth and Thought Among the Greeks, (New York: Zone Books, 2006), 158.
2.	Patricia 3. Thompson, "Dismantling the Master's House: A Hestian/ hermean Deconstruction of Classic Texts," Hypatia, Vol. 9, No. 4 (Feminist Philosophy of Religion, Autumn, 1994), 47.
3.	Mika Kajava, "Hestia Hearth, Goddess, and Cult," Harvard Studies in Classical Philology, Vol. 102 (2004), 1.
4.	Lin Foxhall, "House clearance: unpacking the 'kitchen' in Classical Greece," British School at Athens Studies, Vol. 15, BUILDING COMMUNITIES: House, Settlementand Society in the Aegean and Beyond (2007), 234. 5 Vernant, 186.
6. Barbara Tsakirgis in "Fire and Smoke: hearths, braziers and chimneys in
Studies, Vol. 15, (2007), 225.
5th century BC Goddess of the city-state: the Prytaneum at Zeus' Sanctuary, Olympia. Hestia's protection of the communal hearth brings her out of the domestic sphere and onto the political stage...
1400-1340 BC The Mycaenium hearth: located in the megaron (throne room) of a palace, and surrounded by four columns, the hearth, no longer just domestic, takes center stage in religious and political ceremonies. An aperture in the roof lets smoke out.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 29
aDAPTING HESTIA:
£hE ROMAN EMPIRE'S VESTAL VIRGINS
Vestal Virgins: for the Romans, keeping the hearth is a communal exercise rather than a lonesome devotion; as with Hestia, chastity means more attention can be paid to the fire. (School of the Vestal Virgins, engraved and printed by lllman Brothers for the Museum of Antiquity, 1880.)
30-8 BC Dlonysls of Halicarnassus, Roman Antiquities:
"66. 1. Numa, upon taking over the rule, did not disturb the individual hearths of the curiae, but erected one common to them all in the space between the Capltoline hill and the Palatine (for these hills had already been united by a single wall Into one city, and the Forum, In which the temple is built, lies between them), and he enacted, In accordance with the ancestral custom of the Latins, that the guarding of the holy things should be committed to virgins."
OLYMPIC TORCH RELAY: ATHENS TO BERLIN
"67. 1. The virgins who serve the goddess were originally four and were chosen by the kings according to the principles established by Numa, but afterwards, from the multiplicity of the sacred rites they perform, their number was Increased of six, and has so remained down to our time.
They live in the temple of the goddess, Into which none who wish are hindered from entering In the daytime, whereas it is not lawful for any man to remain there at night. They were required to remain undefiled by marriage for the space of 30 years, devoting themselves to offering sacrifices and performing the other rites ordained by law. During the first ten years their duty was to learn their functions, in the second ten to perform them, and during the remaining ten to teach others."
1938 Fetish of the flame: Leni Riefenstahl's Olympia helps resurrect the Hestlan myth through the invention of the Olympic torch relay, tracking Its path from a bonfire in the base of a Greek column, through Mitteleuropa, and Into Berlin's Olympic stadium.
2013 Thermal modeling of Caisteal Grugaig broch, by Dr. Theodossopoulos (Lecturer in Architectural Technology at the
fdintjMjfly. Heat from the fireplace gathers around the through the thatch (left), traveling quickly (top right). Bottom right: seen from above.
PAGE 30	FIREPLACE
FIRE + ARCHITECTURE: INEXORABLE INTEGRATION
MOBILITIY
In the absence of permanent architecture, the fireplace -and firemaking tool - is a device carried by Aboriginals from place to place in Australia. A stick is twirled into the hole, causing hot wood shavings to spew out, allowing a fire to be ignited wherever the group is.
CENTRALITY
4000 BC Even the hottest climates utilize the central fireplace within architecture: the island of Marawah, about 100 kilometers west of Abu Dhabi, is found to have 160 ancient fireplaces. "The coast of the UAE was known to Classical authors like Strabo as the land of the Ichthyophagi, the fish-eaters.... Indeed, some older inhabitants of the UAE still know exactly how to use the stone-lined fish baking hearths of a type that we now know was in use at least as early as 4,000 years ago." (Geoffrey King, Academic director of Abu Dhabi Islands Archaeological Survey, quoted in Emirates News Agency, "4,000 Year-Old Fireplaces on Abu Dhabi's Islands,"
May 2, 2000.)
700 BC Brochs Iron-age Scottish roundhouses evolve from thick dry-stacked walls to hollow constructions. Even though the space for a chimney has been created in the walls, the fireplace remains central. (Though a 1971 excavation at Dun Carloway claims to show that the voids in the walls contained fireplaces, which would represent an early migration to the wall).
ca. 100 BC Dun Telve, Glenelg, Sutherland: hollow-wall fortified hut with central fireplace. Smoke fumigates the thatched roof, killing pests, as it seeps outside.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 31
p p|an of St. Gall One of the first architectural fP® ^ents to include the fireplace (fesfu), and the concept d°cU egated thermal comfort. While pilgrims, the poor,
0 S nts anc* laymen congregate at the central fireplace, in uarters of the abbot a caminata installed in the wall * q warmth to those engaged in the opus dei, intellectual
^ ecclesiastical labor.
1000 AD Iron The traditional Japanese farmhouse (minka) has the fireplace in the center of the room, either on the doma (earth-floored area) where the cooking fire would be one focus of family activity, or in one of the tatami rooms, where a small firepit would be slightly sunken in the middle of the floor. When the iron was not in use, a special half-tatami mat would be replaced, hiding remnants of the fire.
"Among the most primitive homes was the dwelling with a single room and dirt floor, with the irori as the dominant center. It is conceivable that as man and culture progressed, additional rooms were built around this vital center.... The area around the irori appears as the primordial dwelling and the four units on either side suggest consequent additions."
— Midori Nishi, Regional Variations in Japanese Farmhouses (1967).
1000 AD Nishapur, Iran Sunken fire-pots are important features of 10th-century Iranian central hearths. To conserve firewood, stone pots double as cooking braziers and are fueled by an elaborate system of underground earthenware pipes through which servants supplied fresh air from bellows to control the intensity of the flame. Boxlike tables called kursi are placed above the fireplace and draped with intricate tapestries to conserve the heat and warm the occupants.
1895 Huddled around a kursi (low table) a family enjoys a meal while benefiting from the warmth of the fireplace, under the blanket.
PAGE 32
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE + FLOOR
The fireplace's first absorption into architecture is in the floor, requiring its elevation to allow access and oxygen. The fireplace is no longer an autonomous object in the middle of a room but starts to become part of a system embedded in the architecture it serves...
100 BC Hypocaust: underfloor central heating,
invented by Sergius Oresta, places the fireplace to the basement in order to create the first radiant architecture. Smoke and hot air is channeled from the fire through underfloor ducts to heat floor slabs.
1.	Marble wall facings
2.	Mosaic floor on cement
3.	Blocks on brick piers
4.	Wall flues
5.	Hot air from furnaces
From: Helen and Richard Leacroft, The Buildings of Ancient Rome, 1969.
1st c. AD Hypocaust at House of the Five Mosaics, Saint-Romain-en-Gal, France.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 33
500 AD Kang: underfloor heating system first used in temple architecture in northern China (Manchuria), later In Beijing regal architecture.
20th century Kang, still In use: heated living / sleeping platform is constructed of brick, adobe, or stone and fueled a subterranean wood-burning stove.
PAGE 34
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE + WALL
Consolidating their conquest of England, the Normans build a series of multistorey castles, the floors of which are of wood (making the traditional central fireplace impractical) and the walls of which are of stone (thick enough to embed a fireplace and a chimney inside). In these conditions, the fireplace migrates to the wall (Roxana McDonald, The Fireplace Book, 1984). Multiple rooms on different levels can share a chimney, giving access to heat for a growing number of private rooms, thus containing the germ of the hearth's later fragmentation. Fireplace + wall is a revolution of similar magnitude to its combination with the floor, though it doesn't produce radiant heat, rather relying on convection: the wall and the chimney are about transporting smoke, the floor is about transporting warmth. Despite the inefficiency of convection compared with radiant heat, the wall becomes the element of choice for the hearth...
1163 At Consisbrough Castle, militaristic demands trigger architectural innovation: the castle's thick walls, necessary for fortification, allow sufficient space for side wall fireplace ar embedded chimney, presenting an alternative the vulnerable hole-in-the-roof model. In turn, 1 facilitates the use of multi-storey fireplaces -meticulously documented in AutoCad by English Heritage.
The fireplace migrates from the center to a hollowed-out area In the base of the wall, with a diagonal path cut through the section of the wall acting as the chimney flue...
Building the fireplace against the side wall recalls the wall flues of Roman Hypocausts. Conisbrough also features fireplaces on different levels, sharing the same flue.

PAGE 36
FIREPLACE
1300s FIREPLACE + CORNER(S)
In the abbot's kitchen of Glastonbury Abbey, four corner fireplaces connect in the octagonal roof. "The circular flues were built into the thickness of the stone angle formed between the octagonal interior and the square exterior plan of the building. Any stray smoke or fumes were extracted through the cylindrical shaft supported on the eight arched ribs of the vault." (Nicholas Hills, The English Fireplace:
Its Architecture and the Working Fire, 1986.)
Famous for its central testu, St. Gall also features corner fireplaces in isolated rooms for high ranking monastic elders. Projecting from the wall, a corbelled lintel provides support for the heavy masonry hood.
Fires for Cooking
FIREPLACE
PAGE 37
1500s Toledo, Spain: elevated on a thickened platform and canopied by a chimney hood, cooking and warming at the Greco house take place entirely inside the confines of a de facto giant fireplace.
1650 In the inglenook of Wycoller Hall, Lancashire, revellers crowd together around a fireplace that can once again be central, since the entire nook is essentially a chimney.
Hefty Inglenook survives the crumbling of the building.
1893 William Morris-designed inglenook at Wightwiok Manor, Wolverhampton.
LACE + PLATFORM = THE INGLENOOK
FI*' . aS area for inhabitation, a room within a room... Fireplac
PAGE 38	FIREPLACE
CHIMNEY = PRIVACY:
THERMAL ISOLATION
An alternative hypothesis: rather than fireplaces and their chimneys migrating to the wall, fireplaces and their chimneys give birth to the wall...
"The chimney fostered the small room. Though heat loss still occurred through the chimney, it was much less than the loss from the open hearth. Moreover, with a chimney the danger of fire from sparks lessened. Rooms could be built smaller and with much lower ceilings, heating the area more evenly. The advantages of the chimney and fireplace as a source of heat were linked with a desire for privacy. Heated rooms enabled one to leave the communal existence of the central hearth. With the chimney, the building could now be subdivided, and men were freed of their reliance on the central hearth to provide warmth. Once the chimney provided a source of heat in individual rooms, the quest for privacy could proceed apace."
— LeRoy Dresbeck, "The Chimney and Social Change in Medieval England," Albion: A Quarterly Journal Concerned with British Studies, Vol. 3, No. 1 (Spring, 1971), 21-32.
Hall House
"Early medieval buildings heated by a central hearth required a high ceiling to prevent sparks from causing fires. Thus, whatever warming might come by sitting around the fire in a circle was partly offset by the upward dissipation of heat Into the large, high-celllnged room," Dresbeck, 21.
Smoke Bay
Confined within an entire structural bay, the proto-chimney warms the entire hall while directing the smoke upward through a louvered passage at the roof.

FIREPLACE
PAGE 39

Smoke Hood
iji® semi-autonomous smoke hood becomes ^'independent structure and in the process begins to establish spatial separation.
Brick Chimney
The chimney announces its autonomy and initiates the compartmentalization of rooms. Isolated environments cling to the masonry mass to accommodate private thermal demands.
Illustrations from Roxana McDonald, The Fireplace Book (The Architectural Press, London, 1984).
PAGE 40
FIREPLACE
ANGLOSAXON OBSESSION
In the blustery, temperate, not inordinately cold climate of England, the fireplace becomes a huge preoccupation over the centuries. Possible explanations: a connoiseur-ish obsession with orders and hierarchies, with the fireplace taking over the role of the column as a signlfier of rank? Elaborate decorative mantelpieces, ostensibly a way of honoring the fire they host, also playing the role of obscuring - apologizing for - the fireplace, an Inherently dirty and dangerous but still necessary part of a parlor? Development of the stove and central heating force the fireplace to compensate In style what it now lacks in utility? Roxanna McDonald documents the developments In styles In The Fireplace Book (1984), augmented by the editors.
1130
Hedingham Castle
Impossible to use in large abbeys with multiple storeys, the central fireplace is absorbed into the thickened structure of the fortified wall where it can multiply through the layered living quarters of the castle.
Saxon
Summary of Historical Developments
Historical period	Architectural features
Central hearth	Wall fireplace	Central
Only central hearth used
Smoke dis|p
hearth
Wall fireplace
Fire risk
Hole at the top
2 Norman	Frontal firedogs for	Part of the structure
1066-02	spits
Flue scooped in wall with side outlets

Curfew
1189 ‘Assize of Buildings' gives regulations for building 'Furnaces and Reredoses’ in London
800-1100 Saxon Central Hearth
At the great Saxon halls, tribes gather livestock and food stores under a massive turf roof to share the warmth of a large central fire. Primitive in comparison to Roman hypocausts, the centrally heated common room is the antecedent to the medieval hall and typifies Saxon mastery in timber construction.
3 Early	Timber structures
English -
Mediaeval	Smoke bay
C12-C15:
Stone structures
C13 corbelled hood on joggled lintel
Cylindrical flue and chimney shaft with top outlet
'Scavengers’ (the mediaeval DS) on oath to ensure that fireplaces are safely built in London
1289 Conwy Castle, Lincolnshire
Early English fireplaces reflect the skill of Gothic stonemasons who carefully carve the jambs and corbels that support massive stone hoods. These early artistic interventions initiate the application of "style," which will dominate the fireplace until its functional demise, and beyond...
Floors are inserted the hall
Vll
1485-1509 Henry VIII 1509-1558 Elizabeth I 1558-1603
Lateral iron dogs are used for supporting logs
The kitchen is brought into the house. Brick and timber are used
The Tudor arch is gradually replaced by a rectangular opening i oma metal »rations
1419 City of London Ordnance requires hearths in London to be of incombustible materials
Pargeted flues
Grouped flues, decorative brickwork chimneys
Introduction of sea-coal. The first ‘smoke doctors’. The size of opening begins to be reduced
General disregard of regulations, numerous fires
1440 Tattershall Castle, Lincolnshire
As the fireplace becomes more lavishly adorned, it garners greater attention, becoming the focal point of large halls at castles and manor houses. Tattershall's fireplace reflects the office held by Its owner in the iconography above the opening. Tiny sachets of coins refer to Lord Cromwell's position as Treasurer.
1500s Hampton Court Palace
Large enough to occupy, Tudor cooking is done inside the living-room fireplace. King Henry Vlll's kitchen houses six fireplaces where giant spits roast full carcasses.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 41
Couvre Feu (curfew)
The evening tolling of the church bell (around 8pm) signals townspeople to extinguish their fires and retire for the night. Highly ornamental, couvre feu (fire covers) are made of thin metal and are intended to prevent sparks from spitting into the living spaces while inhabitants sleep. Alternative motivation posited by some historians: the couvre feu is imposed by William the Conqueror in 1068 to prevent the English from strategizing rebellions by fire at night.
Sur«"'arv ofHistorical Developments—continued
Architectural features
Central hearth	Wall fireplace
Smoke disposal
!oric*l period
Central hearth
Imported artists introduce the first elements of Renaissance
continue
1568 Loseley Park, Surrey
Carved from a solid block of clunk chalk, a combination of Renaissance order and Elizabethan styling, featuring caryatids above the mantel.
The aristocracy construct lavish fireplaces in competition with neighbors, should the Queen stop for a visit.
Andiron (firedog)
Iron supports known as firedogs elevate logs to allow for air circulation and proper combustion while also preventing burning logs from rolling into the room.
Iron dogs and fire bricks
Decorative brick work
1666 Fire of London
Brick available widely	Classical design using
marble, stone and Sea-coal	plaster
1661 John Evelyn’s
Fumijugium
‘Smoke-doctors’
Savot
Winter
Dalesme
Prince Rupert
5 Seventeenth century
(Stuart period) 1603-1714 James 1 1603-1625 Charles I 1625-1649 Commonwealth and Protectorate 1649-1660 Charles II 1660-1685 James II 1685-1689 William III and Mary 1689-1702
1667 Charles IPs Act for re-building London restricts proximity of combustible materials
1666 Great Fire of London
Early on the morning of September 2, 1666, fire breaks out in a baker's shop on Pudding Lane. Fanned by strong easterly winds, the inferno spreads through the predominantly wooden city and rages for four days. Nearly four fifths of the city is destroyed.
Position in plan becomes subordinate to symmetry
The inglenook
Inigo Jones (1573-1723) the marble mantel shelf — full height design
Iron chimneys
1652 Inigo Jones, Wilton House, Salisbury
Palladian orders dominate the so-called Anglo-Classic period. The repetition of ordered patterns and decorative mouldings reflect a new adherence to proportion in fireplace composition.
PAGE 42
FIREPLACE
Hob Grate
Designed to improve the performance of the fire by reducing its opening, decorative metal boxes (hobs) support a metal basket, radiating heat into the room while guarding against sparks.
1689 King's Private Dressing Room at Hampton Court, Christopher Wren
Wren's signature chimneypieces unite the fireplace with the decor of the room. Emblematic of the Queen Anne style, these austere fireplaces reflect a "politer" way of living. Featuring adorned mirror and massive over mantle by prolific wood carver Grinling Gibbons.
Historical period	Architectural features
Central hearth	Wall fireplace
Wall fireplace
Seventeenth
century
continued
The over-mantel mirror and china shelves
The introduction of the hob grate (first only one front piece with bars)
6 Eighteenth
1766 Drawing Room at Osterley Park,
Robert Adam
Imported from Italy, Roman architectural orders are reinterpreted in Adam's library, where the same ornament is shared across the chimney-piece, frieze and bookcases, forming a unified neoclassical composition.
House of
George I
l714—1727
George 11
1727-1760
George III
and Regency
1760-1820
The demarcation between the central hearth and wall fireplace becomes less distinct
Pattern books and Palladianism: location in plan is dictated by symmetry at gables. Heavy bolection
Count Rumford Clay chimney pots Chimney boys
1708 Queen Anne Act requires pargeting of flues in London
1764 ‘Building Enactment’ Acts set further restrictions for the proximity of the hearth to combustible materials
Robert Adam (1728-1792) use of scagliola compo and soft woods with marble slip
1775 Etruscan Room at Osterley Park,
Robert Adam
Excitement over the newly uncovered frescoes at Pompeii translates into stylized interiors where Adam (influenced by Piranesi's etchings) applies decorative Greek motifs of urns, scrolls and medallions to blank walls - an attempt to reduce heaviness while capitalizing on the trend for classical antiquities.
1442
1850-1885 The Clergyman's Visit, F.D. Hardy
A valence draped across the opening directs smoke up the flue, a simple technology that becomes a decorative device implemented by all classes.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 43
Eighteenth
century
continued
Neoclassicismrjohn Nash (1752-1835)
The beginning of the Gothic Revival: Janies Wyatt (1746-1813)
The hob grate increasingly made of two separate front plates (the ogee) or Adam gun steel baskets
1870 Lancaster House, London
Scarred by a battle of styles, the Victorian fireplace mirrors the social restructuring happening across the country: the Industrial Revolution challenges the necessity of the traditional fireplace; freed from Its multiple functions, the fireplace compensates by becoming increasingly stylized...
1789 Ham House, Surrey
The Georgian introduction of reproducible designs from master architects...
iineteenth
entury
louse ot lanover ■he Regency 811-1820 leorge IV 820-1830 William IV 830-1837
7-1901
The kitchen range
Gothic revival: A.W.N. Pugin (1760-1832), John Ruskin (1819—19<K)), Sir George Gilbert Scott (1811-1878)
‘Queen Anne Style’ of Norman Shaw (1831-1912)
The beginning of the Arts and Crafts movement. Use of glazed brick
Charles Rennie Mackintosh (187)8-1928) .
Art Nouveau (1892-1905)	/
C.F. A. Voysey (1858-1941)	/
Sir Edwin Lutyens (1869-1944) /
Central heating	/
Town and County Planning Act
1883 Drawing Room Inglenook at Cragside, Northumberland
The inglenook Is a massive room within a room, complete with decorated ceiling and ornate windows. Weighing over ten tons, the ornately carved stone mantle projects the manor's coat of arms - the mantle's last stand before rapid electrification and mass production.
1936 Public Health Act 1956 Clean Air Act
1968 Smokeless zones Smokeless fuel
1930-1939 London Building Acts
1976 The Building Regulations
Historical period
Architectural features
Central hearth	Wall fireplace
Smoke disposal
Central hearth	II

8 Twentieth century
House of
Saxe Coburg
Edward Vll 1901-1910
George V 1910-1917
House of Windsor from 1917
1904 Willow Tea Room, Glasgow, Charles Rennie Mackintosh
A minimally decorative wrought iron grate adorns a modern backdrop of blue and white glazed tile -emblematic of the motif of Mackintosh's popular Glasgow Tea Rooms.
2014 Chesney's "Design a Fireplace."
Using an app, customers craft bespoke designs from a suite of period-then
1443
‘smoke-eating’ fires
Improvement in efficiency
1875 Public Health Act (abolition of chimney boys)
Mass-produced metal register grates and ceramic tile surrounds
PAGE 44
FIREPLACE
CHRISTIANITY DECLARES THE FIREPLACE OBSOLETE
Old Testament passages prescribing the ritual burning of animals on altar-hearths as offerings to God are considered by theologians as types (typology being the biblical study of Old Testament precursors for New Testament events) of the later self-sacrifice of Christ on the cross - the divine, ultimate sacrifice which renders any further sacrifices unnecessary. Zooming in on this apparent liberation from the hearth-altar, a handful of 15th century Dutch painters render the fireplace flameless in a new generation of Christian domestic allegories. These painters choose to extinguish and even board up the domestic fireplace - a radical gesture in a culture and climate that usually foreground it.
The absence of fire in their painted fireplaces is a symbolic break with the Old Law. In the form of the Eucharist, the Holy Spirit is a kind of divine fire, meaning that literal fire is no longer necessary. "Christ is our altar," writes Thomas Aquinas.
"'Build an altar of acacia wood, three cubits high; it is to be square, five cubits long and five cubits wide. “Make a horn at each of the four corners, so that the horns and the altar are of one piece, and overlay the altar with bronze. 3Make all its utensils of bronze - its pots to remove the ashes, and its shovels, sprinkling bowls, meat forks and firepans. 4Make a grating for it, a bronze network, and make a bronze ring at each of the four corners of the network. 5Put It under the ledge of the altar so that It Is halfway up the altar. 6Make poles of acacia wood for the altar and overlay them with bronze. The poles are to be inserted into the rings so they will be on two sides of the altar when it is carried. “Make the altar hollow, out of boards. It is to be made just as you were shown on the mountain."
— Exodus 27:1-8.
Old law: hearth altar needed for burnt offerings.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 45
1444 Robert Campin's Madonna and Child Before a Fire-Screen: encircling the Virgin's head, the firescreen suggests a halo. Held in her arms, Christ is where the flames would be In the dark, empty hearth in the background...
1464-1468 In Dirk Bout's Last Supper, the fireplace is boarded up and rendered obsolete by jesus sitting in front - the entombed flame replaced by the New Law embodied by Christ.
"[T]wo columns of a fireplace are barely visible in the dark shadows of the background. This fireplace provides a framework for a carefully aligned composition within this painting: the firescreen in the center of the hearth is placed so that it suggests a halo for the Virgin and the darkness of the hearth accentuates the tongue of fire emerging from behind the firescreen directly above the Virgin's head. The strict alignment of this tongue of fire with the firescreen and the Virgin's head, all bracketed within the frame of the fireplace, suggests that it was meant to underscore an association of meaning between these figures and objects. ... The hearth floor, though invisible, would be located where the tiles of the floor meet the rear wall on a line that is traceable along the front of the seat of the bench, across the Virgin's lap, and above her left arm. Thus the Virgin supports the Child as the hearth holds the fire, and Mary literally becomes 'the hearth of the virginal womb.'... It is the association of the Child with the fire that clearly invests this scene with the connotations of the burnt sacrifice of the Old ■F - Christ is identified as the spiritual fire of the New Law and the illumination of the Sacrement of the Eucharist."
~ In the Hearth of the Virginal Womb': The Iconography of the Holocaust in Late Medieval Art," Carra Ferguson O'Meara, The Art Bulletin, Vol. 63, No-1 (March, 1981), 75-83.
"The hearth has been sealed by a wooden screen and there are no andirons or other accessories, implying that it is not meant to contain a physical fire. It was the Crucifixion that ended the physical holocausts of the Old Law and replaced them with the spiritual burnt offering of the New. Dust as the wooden screen seals this hearth, so the wood of the Cross rendered inoperative the altar of burnt offerings of the Old Law. This screen, therefore, clearly acts as a symbol of the Crucifixion. Directly in front of the place where the fire would be burning are the head and shoulders of Christ who literally replaces the fire of the hearth ... the fireplace becomes the altar that contains the sacrifice of the Cross and the Sacrament of the body of Christ. The sealed hearth, therefore, becomes the Christian counterpart to the altar of burnt offerings of the Temple."
— O'Meara, 84-85.
I
PAGE 46	FIREPLACE
NOBLE FIREPLACES OF WELBECK ABBEY
Derek Adlam, curator of the Welbeck Abbey estate in Nottinghamshire, explains to the editors the significance of three of the estate's fireplaces, dating from the early 1600s to the late 1800s, each one embedded with significance for Cavendish family, the occupiers of the estate...
Wife: Olge Beast, stag-like creature with a lion's tale, heraldic device of Baroness Catherine Ogle (1570-1629).
1.	LATE 16TH CENTURY: FAMILY SYMBOLS
"The first photograph shows the carved stone fireplace in the Horsemanship Dressing Room. It is, we believe, contemporary with the room itself, which appears to date from a phase of development of the residence by Sir Charles Cavendish (died 1617) or his son William, later the 1st Duke of Newcastle. The quality and fineness of carving (though not the design) is very close to that of the exotic fireplaces in the Little Castle at Bolsover, Sir Charles's other residence in the region, which was largely complete at the time of his death. The panel above the fireplace shows the Ogle Beast, a heraldic device associated with the family of Sir Charles' wife, Baroness Catherine Ogle, a great Northumberland heiress. The Ogle badge (a rose en soleil) is found all over the Abbey as a decorative device commemorating this significant marriage. The use of a purely classical vocabulary in this fireplace is an interesting example of the first phase of Palladian influence in England, and reference to a royal court style. The rest of the room, however, still has the feeling of contemporary English mannerism with its eccentric blend of Gothic and classical."
HERALDRY
Husband: Cavendish serpent for Sir Charles Cavendish (1594-1654)
Derek Adlam, curator of Welbeck Abbey estate, and fireplace expert, in conversation with the editors.


FIREPLACE	PAGE 47
2.	LATE 19TH CENTURY: WAGNERIAN
"Your second photograph shows the marble fireplace on the landing above the North Stairs. This is part of a major, new development undertaken by the 6th Duke of Portland who inherited the estate from his cousin the 5th Duke in 1879. The objective of the campaign was to convert the 1st Duke of Newcastle's Riding House of 1623 into a great library (the Titchfield Library) with, at its far end, a new house chapel. The commission was given in 1889 (the year of the 6th Duke's marriage) to Dohn Sedding, a leading light in the English Arts & Crafts movement. Sedding unfortunately died from influenza (together with his wife) early in 1891, and the project was taken over by the enamellist, silversmith, architect, sculptor and designer Henry Wilson who was Sedding's chief collaborator. The design of this fireplace is presumably by Wilson as it and the decoration above forms part of the curved Print Corridor linking the medieval / 16th / 17th / 18th centuries Old Wing to the old Riding House. The Print Corridor wing is dated 1895. The plaster modelling of a parfit gentil knyght with a submissive dragon above the marble fireplace is part of a programme of decoration that extends the full route from landing, corridor, Titchfield stairs and Library, culminating in the Chapel altar with its huge silver frontal by Henry Wilson - a kind of grail-quest, I believe. All very Wagnerian; Henry Wilson was a keen admirer of Wagner's operas."
3.	CA. 1895: RAPUNZEL
"The fireplace of Henry Wilson's Titchfield Library ca. 1895, within the shell of the old Riding House. Executed in alabaster, the central decorative element represents the fairy-tale of Rapunzel. In it she is letting down her long hair. Why on earth this story was considered appropriate and relevant to the decorative programme, the Abbey and its new library is quite beyond me. Wilson drew a much more elaborate treatment of the Titchfield Library which, if it had been completed would have been one of the most brilliant Arts & Crafts interiors in Britain. As it stands it is impressive if rather odd, though when furnished with big free-standing book stacks, display cases and seating furniture, it was a marvellous room."
Parfit gentle knight with submissive dragon.
Rapunzel letting down her Iona hair.
2013 Contemporary fireplace: a wood-chip burning furnace (new delivery of fuel, right) provides heat for the entire Welbeck Abbey estate. Annual forest growth far exceeds the amount of wood burned each winter.
PAGE 48
FIREPLACE
I
PIRANESI'S FANTASY FIREPLACES
In 1769, Giambattista Piranesi designs 61 fireplaces in his collection Diverse Maniere (in full, Divers Ways of Ornamenting Chimneypieces and all other parts of houses taken from Egyptian, Etruscan, and Grecian architecture with apologia in defense of Egyptian and Tuscan architecture). The book, with parallel texts in Italian, English, and French is pitched as a catalogue for aristocrats - most of them British - stopping by Venice on their Grand Tour, who become interested in elaborate designs for their fireplaces at home, which are diminishing in importance as modern forms of heating technology begin to take hold. Customers include the Earl of Exeter for his Burghley House and Patrick Home for Wedderburn Castle in Scotland. Not being part of any classical lineage, the fireplace, for Piranesi, is an area of total freedom for his lavish designs, overloaded with Egyptian, Etruscan, Roman, and Renaissance motifs, and creatures real and mythical (peacocks, dolphins, and seahorses to centaurs and satyrs)...
"[C]himneypieces [are] an interior feature with no precedent in antiquity. As there was little design history to respect and no function to fulfil other than providing a mantelpiece and embellishing a fire opening, the chimney-piece demonstrated the imaginative application of the past to a strictly contemporary requirement." (Fondazione Giorgio Cini, Factum Arte, 2010.)
The extravagant designs, always symmetrical, are dreamscapes for Piranesi and compensatory devices for customers:
"On the threshold of modernity, the fireplace had won in efficiency what it had lost in size and centrality, which it now tried to retrieve by means of elaborate ornamental frames. This was a losing battle, however, and it is difficult to believe that it was still fire that was being exalted in Piranesi's fireplaces. Removed from the center of the house, fire now multiplied and divided along the walls of different rooms." (Luis Fernandez-Galiano, Fire and Memory, 2000.)
From top:
Snake meanders perfectly under mantel; winged women balance on a crowned goat skull; Piranesi's rendering of fire becomes indistinguishable from its smoke.
Egyptian pastiche with handstanding "jugglers"; firebox flanked by two standing figures who appear to be the opposite of sphinxes, with cats' heads and female bodies.
Howling greyhounds guard firebox; Roman she-wolf in the mantel's frieze; scale of fireplace clear by the tiny fire, like a camp fire on the ground, with no grate; flames indistinguishable from smoke. Fire grate appears, fire disappears...

FIREPLACE
PAGE 49
FANTASIES REALIZED
Piranesi's customers for his incredibly intricate fireplaces are mainly aristocratic Englishman, ready to pay for their costly realization; later, his creations can be conjured by 3D printing...
1769 Fireplace described by Piranesi "in the frieze, sacrificing two fauns, including winged genii; high on the wall, the figure of a woman lying in a shell"...
... designed and realized for the 9th Earl of Exeter's Burghley
House. "A Carrara marble chimneypiece, Italian, the design
by Piranesi, Roman, circa 1769, the mantel with dentil, egg
and dart and waterleaf carved bands above a frieze centered
on a carved jasper panel depicting a sacrifice attended by
winged classical figures with scrolling foliage and flanked by
carved jasper panels depicting a lion and a leopard each
surmounted by grotesque masks and supported by crossed
elephants heads, the tapering jasper jambs with bacchic	2010 Realization:
masks, headers and paw feet, 161cm by 194cm."	a 3D print of a Piranesi
— John Culverhouse, curator, Burghley House.	fireplace featuring goat's
heads and angel's heads. Piranesi's etching of a fire survives In the computer modeling but not the in the realization.
PAGE 50
FIREPLACE
I
EXPANSION
In 1960, Giovanni Mariacher documents fireplaces and flues so large or imposing they threatened to swallow the whole room. Discoveries from his Chemlnees: de tous les temps et de tous les pays (Guy le prat éditeur)...
Mora, Spain "Cuisine rustique espagnole.
Le manteau forme un renflement semi-circulaire; l'ouverture est un arc."
Tolmezzo, Italy Combining the convenience of a sidewall chimney with the conviviality of centrality, users sit in as well as around this fireplace and under its enormous chimney. "Grande cheminee rustique avec rebord de bois pour les marmites et les ustensile de cuisine. Le large espace reserve en-dessous est accuiellant; des bancs et des sieges y trouvent place et sont disposes autour du feu."
(Cheminees: de tous let temps et de tous les pays.)
1752 Alcobaca Monastery, Portugal Closed after its monks succumbed to gluttony, the monastery's massive kitchen featured a sunken fireplace and enormous chimney - not hidden in the wall but articulated almost as a column. Beneath the chimney hood monks could warm by the fire while preparing their meal of fish and game. Not from Mariacher but noted by English travel writer and novelist William Thomas Beckford in 1835, who described it as "the most distinguished temple of gluttony in all Europe. What Glastonbury may have been in its palmy state, I cannot answer; but my eyes never beheld in any modem convent of France, Italy, or Germany, such an enormous space dedicated to culinary purposes."

FIREPLACE
PAGE 51
1443-1451 Palace lacques Cœur, Bourges, France
Fireplace elaborated to the scale of a large doll's house/castle, as if about to be consumed by flames. Later bricked-up at the back. "Sur ce petit chateau crenele se dessinent les fléchés et les tympans des petites fenetres auxquelles s'accoudent les dames, cependant qu'une foule de soldats s'agite entre les créneaux."
Zurich: Swiss porcelain stove, with steps leading a path up and around the stove.
PAGE 52
FIREPLACE
THE SIBERIAN FIREPLACE
"Russian stoves, including the Siberian, are among the cleanest-burning furnaces available, superior even to catalytic wood stoves. The intense heat (around 2,000°F) means that all smoke is burned. Tests show the Siberian efficiency exceeds 90 percent. One indication of this is the absence of carbon in the firebox. Where most stove interiors are black with soot, the Siberian firebox is white, showing that all the carbon has been consumed. The fact that the burn is so clean and the firebox surrounded by so much masonry makes it perhaps the most fireproof of all furnaces.
"This ability to burn clean is one reason why virtually any nonexplosive fuel can be used in the Russian stove. When burned in a conventional wood stove, pine produces a lot of creosote because of the unburned pitch it gives off. In a Russian stove this same pitch burns, becoming part of the fuel, and thus produces still more warmth for the house. ...
The more rapidly a fire burns, the more energy is extracted from the fuel, and the cleaner the burn. Conventional iron stoves could not withstand such high temperatures and in addition most of the heat would be lost up the chimney. A masonry stove, however, is able to store all this heat in its tremendous mass.
The heat is absorbed in the masonry by sending the exiting hot gases (little more than air and water vapor once the fire is roaring) on a circuitous route before exiting up the chimney. Once charged with heat, the masonry radiates warmth into the house for days. It keeps the ... home above 70°F. all day, and at approximately 68°F when it comes time to fire it up the next morning, the owners report." — Peter Tonge, "As days grow cooler, consider snuggling up to a Siberian stove," Christian Science Monitor, 3 September, 1985.
Siberian fireplace as bed.
FIREPLACE
Russian stove: the family feeder
PAGE 53
"The lady of the house begins to warm the stove as soon as she wakes up in the morning. Inside she puts three large cast iron pots. First for schi [a type of soup], second for porridge, third for all other necessities. She hurries starting the oven and putting the cast iron pots so there is food for everyone.
"Elena Vasil'eva Bunina from the Kuzmino Zaharovsky village remembers stories from her grandmother Klavdiya Vasil'evna: 'It sometimes happened that the village foreman walked the village in the morning issuing supplies. He would pour water over the stove fires of those who didn't stock up on supplies or take care of their stove responsibilities in time. He did this so they would go to work. And they went! Then in the evening, the whole family and their livestock were hungry.'...
"[T]hey gave names to all the corners and sides of their stove. For example, the first side of the stove 'stared' at their neighbor Katerina's house, so this side was called 'Katerininskaya.' And if the rear left corner 'looked' at a hill, it was named 'Hills.' The names were invented for convenience: there were many cast-iron pots in the stove and if someone from the household would ask the lady of the house in which pot are the potatoes, she would respond, 'the one on the Hill side.'...
"The stove would work hard. The family would use it for both their own food and the feed for their livestock. Bread was baked, milk was warmed and porridge was boiled in the stove. In village families, the lady of the house baked the bread for the entire family. For the kids she baked sweet rolls and different pancakes. It's not possible to make such delicious 'soul-inspired' cakes in an electric or gas oven! ...
"The lady of the house seats the children further away, so they don't get burned. 'Don't get close, or Vuva [name given to the stove] will bite - see how she threatens with her tongue!' says the lady of the house to those who try to look inside."
— Vologodskaya Oblast' Universal Academic Library, www.booksite.ru
Anatomy of the Siberian fireplace, large enough to encompass other elements of architecture...
)• Space between stove and wall 2. Mirror 3 Little stoves A. Chimney
5.	Damper
6.	Flalf-door
7-	Breather
8-	Hearth window Space below hearth
JO. Space below stove
»"Protective sheet (protects floor from sparks)
12. Roof
»Decking (for sleeping, wood material as finish) B|Golbesh - construction in front of the stove, or accessing the decking IS. Stair
Circuitous path of smoke through baffles ensures highly efficient burning, an exhaust consisting mostly of water vapor, and warming of the bricks, which in turn warm the room.
PAGE 54
FIREPLACE
I
FIREPLACE
PAGE 55
1777-1814 Weathering humans: Dean-Jacques Lequeu's fantastical "Section perpendiculaire d'un souterrain de la Maison Gothique" showing a massive two-storey furnace. Inspired by Abbé Terrasson's novel Selhos (1731), which described the masonic initiation of an Egyptian prince in a subterranean city, Lequeu depicts, in this "gothic" transposition, the three successive and elemental tests of this initiation involving fire, water and air: an architecture of the Elements, which, instead of protecting humans from the weather, exposes them to extreme climates. You insert simple humans on the left side, and out come heroes on the right side.
— Sébastien Marot
PAGE 56
FIREPLACE
ENTER THE SMOKE DOCTORS:
BIRTH OF THE CONVECTIVE FIREPLACE
The "smoke doctors" attempt to make the fireplace hotter, less smokey, and more efficient by combining its traditional radiant function with convection, sparking a revolution in heating...
1579-1640 LOUIS SAVOT
A physician from Paris is the first person on record to scientifically study the ventilation and convection of the fireplace and its effects on sanitation. His resulting design, which he builds in the Louvre in the early 1600s, sets the fire on a raised platform to improve its radiant capacity. John Putnam, scholar of the smoke doctors, describes Savot's attempts in The Open Fireplace in All Ages (1886) as a "study of architecture from a sanitary point of view, and having found in the smoky chimney an unusually troublesome patient, he set to work, like a true physician, to investigate the causes of the disease. But his success was only partial. The treatment he administered was quieting and salutary; but he failed to discover the real trouble and the secret of its cure. He improved the form of the fireplace opening by diminishing its width, so that less cold air could enter on each side of the fire, and he showed that the flue should be smooth to lessen the friction of the ascending smoke." The room is warmed not only by radiation, which the ordinary fireplace performs, but also by the heat of convection. By the 17th century, the first signs of convective heating are embedded in Savot's design for a ventilating fireplace.
1713 NICOLAS GAUGER
Fellow Frenchman Nicolas Gauger (1680-1730) picks up the baton in the 18th century, publishing the treatise on the modern fireplace, La Mechanique du Feu, in which he revises the designs of his forebear Savot. One proposal includes a tighter elliptical shape to reflect more radiant heat into the room. Like Savot, Gauger also proposes a hollow back, jambs, hearth, and mantel for the "purpose of pouring into the room a copious supply of fresh air heated in these hollow walls." Gauger's major evolution of Savot's work is to bring in, for ventilation, air directly from the outside into spaces called caliducts or meanders, that contain "horizontal divisions or baffles so arranged as to cause the air to circulate in the hollow spaces, in the direction of the arrows, as much as possible, before entering the room ... The temperature and amount of fresh air introduced into the room were regulated by a valve in the air-channel acting like a two-way water-cock. A small cylinder, revolved within a larger fixed one in such a way that the cold air could be passed directly into the room, or first into the caliducts and thence into the room, or shut off altogether."
When the book is published the word for ventilation does n^Kst	Dr. Desaguilers, the
tlffjator^^u (BLSJre^^would be the first person to useBe Wn.1
ca. 1640 Louis Savot s Louvre Fireplace warms by radiation + convection-pulling currents of air through intakes beneath the fire platform, channelling it through iron-clad panelling at the back of the hearth, and expelling it from two decorated vents above the fire and just below the mantel. The air is warmed but not changed - a continuous recirculation of waste air. Savot writes on convection: "It is not enough that the fireplace is well-shaped, if the fire that one makes below isn't proportionate to the opening of the pipe For as the flame turns to atmosphere, in wind, and fumes, it is the manner of too large of a fire to result in a larger quantity than is possible to exit though the opening, this air which brings the smoke would be forced to flow back with itself back into the room. More, it is because it is the flame which produces the atmosphere, and the wind that hunts the smoke, & the source ascends, & that it's the atmosphere as well & the wind that nourishes, & augments the flame, that if there isn't a sufficient flame, the smoke is not able to rise: this is why sometimes the flame stops making smoke and why, at the beginning of lighting a fire there is smoke in the room until the fire is sufficient.”
FIREPLACE
PAGE 57
cD,c RECOMMENDATIONS for the
ft
1713 In La Mechanique de Feu, Nicolas Gauger 'ntroduees a fireplace with a much sharper curved back, capable of focusing heat rays more powerfully Into the room.
2. Clean air supply controlled on demand
It is also the first fully ventilated fireplace, drawing in fresh outdoor air through caliducts and dispersing in accordance with the user's desire.
3. Caliducts disperse fresh warmed air
Fresh air enters at (a), is warmed through
the caliducts and dispersed at (x), an adjustable
outlet.
1713 Ventilation diagrams from La Mechanique du Feu. Heat and smoke distribution rationalized by way of roundness and ventilating chambers. The fireplace is no longer a hollow chamber but a machine Wl,h moving parts.
PAGE 58
FIREPLACE
PREFAB FIREPLACE:
BENIAMIN FRANKLIN'S INSERT
The greatest thinkers and statesmen of their day are preoccupied with the fireplace: a focus of frustration as much as pleasure. It is smoky, it consumes too much fuel; it delivers what little heat it generates quickly up the chimney and out of the room. A well-functioning fireplace is the critical instrument of progress; the lack of one condemns a family to poverty.
On a sea voyage in 1785, Benjamin Franklin writes the letter that became the publication "Observations on Smoky Chimneys": "Much more of the prosperity of a winter country depends on the plenty and cheapness of fuel, than is generally imagined. In travelling I have observed, that in those parts where the inhabitants can have neither wood, nor coal, nor turf, but at excessive prices, the working people live in miserable hovels, are ragged, and have nothing comfortable about them. But where fuel is cheap (or where they have the art of managing it to advantage) they are well furnished with necessaries, and have decent habitations."
Influenced by the efforts of his European predecessor Gauger, Franklin designs the Pennsylvania Stove, a prefabricated iron unit that you insert into your existing fireplace. The Pennsylvania (commonly known as the Franklin) works through convection as well as radiation. As smoke and flames pass over the baffles, the air becomes "rarefied" (heated) and is expelled into the room through vents in the side. Though widely publicized, the model requires too much adaptation of the existing brick fireplace for the general consumer and there is no known example of a stove operating according to Franklin's specifications.
Benjamin Franklin, 1706-1790. "[TJhere are some I know so bigotted to the fancy of a large noble opening [for their fireplace], that rather than change it, They would submit to have damaged furniture, sore eyes, and skins almost smoked to bacon." (Letter to Dr. Ingenhausz, physician to the emperor in Vienna, 1785.)
Prefab parts: G, E, D, A, R are the baffles through which air is warmed before re-entering the room at M and N.
1742 After bricking up the firebox, so that the fireplace has a "false back" and the chimney now reaches almost to the floor, but leaving a gap at the bottom, insert Franklin's Pennsylvania Fireplace unit into the fireplace. The device will draw air into the fire through an underfloor duct (I) and circulate it through a series of baffles behind the fire (D); the smoke exits through an inverted syphon (P) at the bottom of the firebox - the longer path being a means to extract the maximum heat before the smoke escapes into the chimney; at (K), warmed air is pushed into the room through convection.

FIREPLACE
PAGE 59
nUNT RUMFORD'S EFFICIENCY DRIVE
wP. mjn Thompson, better known as Count Rumford, is a - Englanc*"*30rn statesman, a loyalist to the British during ^^evolutionary war, a spy, military advisor, philosopher,
H pioneer of thermodynamics. While on placement in an aria, in 1791, he simultaneously held the positions of . ¡gterofwar, minister of police, major general, chamberlain "f the court, and state counsellor. At the same time he 0 vised a 13-top stove in a military hospital, capable of ooking 1,000 meals daily. Arriving in London in 1795, he CurnS his attention, for two pivotal years, to the quotidian firgpjgce, whose inefficiency and wide ranging smoke -diluting not just the home but the entire city - bothers him ? t as much as his contemporary Benjamin Franklin. In his 1796 treatise Experimental Essays, Political, Economical and Philosophical, Rumford laments:
1800 "The comforts of a Rumford stove," cartoon by tames Gillray. Rumford stands in front of a Rumford fireplace, his shadow where the smoke would be, if not for his narrowed chimney throat.
" the enormous waste of fuel in London [which] may be estimated by the cast dark cloud which continually hangs over this great metropolis, and frequently overshadows the whole country, far and wide; for this dense cloud is certainly composed almost entirely of unconsumed coal, which having stolen wings from the innumerable fires of this great city has escaped by the chimnies, and continues to fail about in the air, till having lost the beat which gave it volatility, it falls in a dry shower of extremely fine black dust to the ground, obscuring the atmosphere in its descent, and frequently changing the brightest day into more than Egyptian darkness."
Rumford's principle, in stovetops and fireplaces, is to concentrate the area of heat as much as possible: he makes the firebox taller, almost triangular in shape and much more shallow by bricking up the excess space. He "rounded off the breast" so as to "remove those local hindrances which forcibly prevent the smoke from following its natural tendency to go up the chimney". He also adds a dampener in the throat while slanting it at an angle towards the vertical chimney flue. The smaller space for the fire creates a stronger updraught, drawing smoke up the chimney faster, making the fire burn hotter, and allowing it to better retain heat. The Rumford Fireplace becomes a coveted item: Rumford claims to have modified over 250 fireplaces alone in a two-month period in 1796, and his design soon becomes widespread in England and the US.
THE RUMFORD-IZED FIREPLACE
1796 Any fireplace can be easily converted by any mason: Rumfordizing requires bricking up half the firebox right up into the chimney throat, and building the outlines of a ziggurat in the firebox.
While Rumford's fireplace intervention is relatively simple and universally applicable, his earlier design for a large stove top is customized for a specific nobleman's kitchen in Munich and would require the tending of 13 separate stoves (and their fires below).

PAGE 60	FIREPLACE
HEATING PUBLIC SPACE
Common in meeting halls, schools and churches, the enlarged stove gains a foothold thanks to its tremendous efficiency in heating large spaces. Still in the center of the space, like a medieval fireplace, stoves are often merely an above-ground protrusion of the furnace in the basement, where the flame has now been exiled. In early 19th century London, primarily thanks to John Soane's experiments, the stove becomes part of a larger convective or radiant system - embedded in the floor slab, running through hollow columns, spewing warm air through hidden ducts - promising, for the first time, thermal homogeneity. There ensues a tricky period of adoption, and the adaptation of other elements, to accommodate these new mega-stoves and their attendant systems. As well as promising even and efficient heating, they also mark the coupling of heating and ventilation, the start of a paradigm - HVAC - that will come to dominate architecture...
1799 Stove pipes poke through window panes to expel waste gasses from Independence Hall, Philadelphia. Constructed without fireplaces, the Judicial Chamber relies on two stoves to heat the large space.
1800 Stove dominates St. Martins In The Fields, London.
1800 Stove dominates Bank of England, London
1800 Court of Chancery, Lincoln's Inn Hall, London (from Microcosm of London, Pugin and Rowlandson.)
FIREPLACE
PAGE 61
I 0l)N SOANE'S HYBRID SYSTEMS In unrealized designs for the Bank 1792	, gtoc|< Office, John Soane sketches at least four different heating
0f Englan|iieant t0 stave off the cold, and to satisfy the local obsession with systems, i^e English, Soane says in an 1815 lecture, must "see the fire, the hr®P	e 0f heat will satisfy," whereas the "Romans were less anxious
0, no °e®|ves to have the appearance of fire, provided they had the
*omfort°fwarmth-"
the
, s,ove and stove-1; I column: a stove, P'p® hree openings (a) **££the flame's
w Wlitv is placed likea ""Seval «replace ¡n tf ¿ ' of the office,
here it connects to a
long flje embedded in a column (b) that Supports the vault and „arms the space through radiation.
John Soane, 1753-1837, architect, heating innovator.
Later sketch for the central stove, its closure of the fire compensated for by the inscription of a flame pattern on a snubbed flue and a flame sculpture atop.
2,	Hypocaust &
3.	Hot air: meanwhile, in a labyrinth of underfloor ducts, Soane designates separate channels for a hypocaust system (in which hot
air and smoke from a basement furnace heat the floor slabs) and fora hot air ventilation system, in which clean air, also warmed by the fire, would be blown into the room - a convective heating system added to the radiant.
In revised designs, the hall's central "stove" becomes more a receptacle and distributor for warm air, with a network of ducts, the fire itself exiled to the basement.
Fireplace:
Dual flues evacuate smoke and gasses from the fireplace and from the central stove In the basement.
PAGE 62
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE AS VENTILATOR
David Boswell Reid, doctor and scientist of convection at the university of Edinburgh, labelled "the ventilator" by skeptics, is commissioned to design the heating and ventilation system for the new Palace of Westminster in the 1850s. He engineers a system that uses a Gothic tower in the middle of the complex to draw air into the parliamentary chambers through the floor and ceiling. After moving to the US in 1856, Reid proposes a series of "Artificial Atmospheres" as a means of preserving health and curing diseases, engaging the ventilating power of the fireplace and promoting the continuous circulation of air. In his proposal for curing yellow fever, a stream of fresh air travels across the body of the patient, quarantining the sickness and purging waste air through a flue. At the physician's request, a prescription of medicated air may be administered. Two years later, Reid is vindicated when Louis Pasteur proves that microbes live in the air, and in 1870 when the English physician Dohn Tyndall determines that diseases are caught by inhaling air laden with bacterial swarms.
David Boswell Reid, 1805-1863: "Mental anxiety may, perhaps, be considered the most powerful enemy to the duration of human life, and, next to it, defective nutriment, whether in quantity or quality. But after these, no other cause, at least in modern times, appears to have inflicted so great an amount of evil upon the human race as defective Ventilation.''
1858 Convective potential of the fireplace, drawing air from lower levels, the outdoors, upper levels, or parallel flues. "Any ordinary fire-place may be converted into the ventilating power with the use of a few bricks, or some sheet iron, providing apertures for fuel and for regulating the fire." (David Boswell Reid, Ventilation in American Dwellings.)
JFig.6.D
Fig.7.E
Quarantine: fireplace extracts diseased air from an encapsulated bed.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 63
Lewis L Leeds Man's
Own Breath is His Greatest Enemy, 1871.
FIREPLACE AS TERRIBLE VENTILATOR
Boswell's American counterpart, Lewis W. Leeds, describing himself as "civil engineer," "sanitary engineer," and "architect" designs the heating and ventilation systems for Congress in Washington D.C. In the lectures that would later be collected into a book titled Man's Own Breath is His Greatest Enemy (1871), Leeds rails against the deadly and unnecessary effects of poorly ventilated architecture: "Between six and seven thousand children died in this city, last year, under six years of age - more than half of the whole number of deaths in this city ... You shut them up and smother them in your foul bed-chambers, surrounding them with this poison of human breath - that is too foul to support the combustion of a candle. You poison them to death!" Elsewhere, Leeds turns his attention from disease control to the comforts of the parlor, pointing out that the feet should be kept warmer than the head, and the back warmer than the face - but fireplaces relying on convection guarantee the opposite. Lewis designs and advocates both steam heating and mechanical ventilation - a decoupling of two major comfort systems that will be bundled together, to the detriment of both, by the mid 20th century.
Fig. 10 Suboptimal Heating Condition: "A current of cold air... is usually found flowing along the floor from the windows and doors towards the open fire; and of course the feet and back of those sitting with their faces to the fire, are most affected by this cold air."
Fig. 11 Optimal Positioning for Suboptimal Heating Condition: "Now to get his back warmer than his face, and his feet warmer than his head, it will be necessary to change his position. I admit, this is rather an awkward position. But you know the conventional way for an Englishman to represent a Yankee, is to have him tilted back in a chair, with his feet on the mantel, or in some position higher than his head. But if we want to be really comfortable and healthy, we shall have to change either our manner of sitting, or our manner of heating and ventillation."
Fig. 12 "You also notice the figure of a man sitting very quietly, with his back to the window, as though he was in a profound meditation ... the additional warmth or animal heat of the body will be radiated to and absorbed by this cold window. And thus the very being, life, and vitality will be abstracted, and spinal disease, rheumatism, and all sorts of disorders, are the results frequently of continued sitting in this position. Therefore, never sit with your back to a window."
Fig. 13 "This combination of direct radiation and circulating fresh air - partially warmed - with the excess of heat directly under the windows where the excess of cold occurs, is probably as nearly perfect as any arrangement yet devised."
PAGE 64
FIREPLACE
10
FIREPLACE™: PROMETHEUS PATENTED
The primal importance of the fireplace perseveres despite
new, cleaner and more efficient forms: the heater, the	g
furnace, and the stove - a discrete device, rather than an integrated part of the architecture, made of thick conductive
metal (usually cast iron), the flame hidden in a cabinet	8
behind a small door, the smoke contained within and channeled into a flue, never allowed to drift into the room,
food heated on plates on top, warmth radiated everywhere.	^
Stove patents emerge around 1850 and by 1920 new designs account for 5 percent of all patented inventions in the United States...
B. T. RONEY.
Cooking Stove.
Patented April 17, 1849.
1849 B.T. Roney's Cooking Stove patent:
"The nature of my invention consists first in forming a compound flue for carrying the heat from the top, and concentrating it at the bottom, and preventing its outward radiation; and secondly, the continuation of the air chamber up in front, so that it can be brought into use through a lattice door, for the purpose of roasting."
2 Sheets--Sheet t,
E. BUSSEY.
Cooking-Stoves.
No. 5,880.	Reissued May 19, 1874.
>er_*if .':rf nsdi	lor- ,9061 .id nsrit
1830
1874 E. Bussey describes his improvement on the cooking stove, featuring a large reservoir at the flue for boiling water: "Figure 1 is a perspective view of a cooking stove having connected therewith my improvements. Fig. 2 is a like view of the same from the rear, the water-reservoir being removed. Fig. 3 is a perspective view of said reservoir separated from said stove and having its covering-plate removed."
percentage of total patents
FIREPLACE
PAGE 65
Stoves as proportion of all patents
1860
1870
1880
,®tt 3. E. Daniel's Cooking Range: "The present Mention relates to improvements in cooking ranges fifje oven of which is disposed above the firebox, ?tnat heat may be conducted from the firebox g5Ve 'he oven ... the various parts of the stove ng so disposed as to be in ready access to the ^^Hpr without the necessity of stooping or the (jll'g of the utensils directly above the burning °als within the firebox."
1890	1900	1910	1920
cook
stoves
29%
stove
accessories
7%
grates
10%
dampers
5%
fire pots 5%
hot-air furnaces 12%
fireplaces
6%
heating
stoves
17%
1836-1920 Classification of stove industry patents. Source: STO database, original patents only.
Number of patents
Solid fuel stove,
heater, and furnace patents
as proportion of all patents
PAGE 66
FIREPLACE
CHIMNEY SWEEPS
While child sweeps are enslaved to their masters in Victorian London, for newly emancipated African Americans, chimney sweeping is a credible means of entry into American society - an opportunity to establish a business and rise in social status.
1877 From Street Life in London by Dohn Thomson and Adolphe Smith: "Born in Lambeth, the son of a road-mender, ]ohn Day 10 years old. His father was decidedly addicted to drink, and was in the habit of taking his son on Sunday to public-houses ... when his meagre earnings had been thus uselessly spent, his father came to the conclusion that he could not afford to keep him, and that it was high time the boy should fight his own way In the world. ...
At a time when there was nothing to be done at the flour-mill, he obtained a little work as assistant to a neighbouring chimneysweep ... Fie is now the happy father of a large family, he lives in a house near Lambeth Walk, where he once humbly worked in the capacity of a mere assistant. ... Altogether he is both prosperous and respected throughout the neighbourhood, where he ardently advocates the cause of total abstinence, and Is well known as the temperance sweep."
Coercion: master about to send his sweep down the chimney.
ca. 1860 C.D. Fredricks & Co., Occupational portrait of two African American chimney sweeps-
FIREPLACE
PAGE 67
Saturday, October 4, 1834 Urgent plea in Mechanics' Magazine for the use of mechanical sweeping technology - a flexible, extendable cable fed through the chimney's twists and turns - rather than a child, pictured here trapped, overcome by asphyxiation.
All the cleansing that takes place in the chimney is from the rubbing of his body and rags against the interior of it; but as to repairing,
I believe it never is done with any certainty by him. Supposing the child to be able to sweep the chimney, we cannot rely on him doing it. He may be idle, he may have too many chimneys to attend to within a given time, his master may be dishonest, and may teach him to be dishonest too. My belief is, that the chimneysweeper is called in much oftener than would be needed, if the cleansing were efficiently performed. But as to the machine, rude as it yet is, when it is fairly used ... it accomplishes its object - of cleansing, at least. And in case of fire in the chimney, it may be run up at once to sweep the ignited soot down; but the boy must wait till the chimney is cool enough for his reception."
Archibald Rosser,
15 New Boswell Court Sept. 3, 1834.
PAGE 68
FIREPLACE
"FIRE WORSHIP"
NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
The tsunami of stove technology in the US triggers a resistance movement, men and women of letters who assign themselves guardians of the fireplace's social, ethical, and even patriotic values. In 1846 Nathaniel Hawthorne pens what might be the movement's manifesto...
Stoves are detestabi in every respect, exrJ6 that they keep us M
perfectly comfortable» Hawthorne's diaries ' 1837-the beginning of the resistance movement.
It is a great revolution In social and domestic life, and no less so in the life of a secluded student, this almost universal exchange of the open fireplace for the cheerless and ungenial stove. On such a morning as now lowers around our old gray parsonage, I miss the bright face of my ancient friend, who was wont to dance upon the hearth and play the part of more familiar sunshine. It is sad to turn from the cloudy sky and sombre landscape; from yonder hill, with its crown of rusty, black pines, the foliage of which is so dismal in the absence of the sun; that bleak pasture-land, and the broken surface of the potato-field, with the brown clods partly concealed by the snowfall of last night; the swollen and sluggish river, with ice-incrusted borders, dragging its bluish-gray stream along the verge of our orchard like a snake half torpid with the cold, - it is sad to turn from an outward scene of so little comfort and find the same sullen influences brooding within the precincts of my study. Where is that brilliant guest, that quick and subtle spirit, whom Prometheus lured from heaven to civilize mankind and cheer them in their wintry desolation; that comfortable inmate, whose smile, during eight months of the year, was our sufficient consolation for summer's lingering advance and early flight? Alas! blindly inhospitable, grudging the food that kept him cheery and mercurial, we have thrust him into an iron prison, and compel him to smoulder away his life on a daily pittance which once would have been too scanty for his breakfast. Without a metaphor, we now make our fire in an air-tight stove, and supply it with some half a dozen sticks of wood between dawn and nightfall.
I never shall be reconciled to this enormity. Truly may it be said that the world looks darker for it. In one way or another, here and there and all around us, the inventions of mankind are fast blotting the picturesque, the poetic, and the beautiful out of human life. The domestic fire was a type of all these attributes, and seemed to bring might and majesty, and wild nature and a spiritual essence, into our in most home, and yet to dwell with us in such friendliness that its mysteries and marvels excited no dismay. The same mild companion that smiled so placidly in our faces was he that comes roaring out of Aetna and rushes madly up the sky like a fiend breaking loose from torment and fighting for a place among the upper angels. He it is, too, that leaps from cloud to cloud amid the crashing thunder-storm. It was he whom the Gheber worshipped with no unnatural idolatry; and it was he who devoured London and Moscow and many another famous city, and who loves to riot through our own dark forests and sweep across our prairies, and to whose ravenous maw, it is said, the universe shall one day be given as a final feast. Meanwhile he is the great artisan and laborer by whose aid men are enabled to build a world within a world, or, at least, to smooth down the rough creation which Nature flung to it. He forges the mighty anchor and every lesser instrument; he drives the steamboat and drags the rail-car; and it was he - this creature of terrible might, and so many-sided utility and all-comprehensive destructiveness - that used to be the cheerful, homely friend of our wintry days, and whom we have made the prisoner of this iron cage.

Nearly 100 years later, In Mechanization Takes Command (1948), Sigfried Giedion describes the new generation of stoves that Hawthorne bewails: "Simmering and broiling were physically challenging because they were done on the hearth floor; a woman had to squat or kneel unless she had a small stool handy ... During the late 19th century and early 20th century an ever-growing concentration and automatization of the heat source is observed - from the coal range to electric cooking. This trend Is still evolving and reflects a radical reshaping of the house. The transition from hearth cooking to range or cookstove cannot be overstated. This development altered American cooking methods and relieved the cook of the backbreaking work involved with moving heavy iron cookwares."
1726 German standard
5-Plate
Popularized in the US by German immigrants, the five plate iron stove is the precursor to Franklin's fireplace Insert. Features medieval-style decorations.
1767 Double capacity
10-Plate
Grandfather of all cooking stoves, widely adopted due to its fuel efficiency and radiant heating qualities. Thomas Maybury, Pennsylvania.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 69
PEblefeas.
D|ate can be
C°°pd byPa handle s0 tCwo°rthreepla,eS fd^ctlV °ver the ot anv one time, greater control poking. Features S^de hearth' or easy te ding of the flames.
Exceedingly P°Pular jLnlte its expense. Henry Stanley, Vermont.
1833 Ergonomic Perfect Premium Step First ergonomic cookstove: a lower plate facilitates easier application of heavy pots while a baking oven is tucked into the step above. Levi Kingsbury, Livonia, NY.
1855 Range on top
Empire City No. 7 The most easy to use cookstove: a flat plate with four plates, a projecting hearth plate, and large oven below. Alexander Morrison, NY.
American Cast-iron Cooking Stove Wth coal and Iron mining ^creasing, cast iron becomes the material of choice due to its ability jo handle different cmperatures. Upright, this model prefigures pith century styles.
How kindly he was! and, though the tremendous agent of change, yet bearing himself with such gentleness, so rendering himself a part of all lifelong and age-coeval associations, that it seemed as if he were the great conservative of nature. While a man was true to the fireside, so long would he be true to country and law, to the God whom his fathers worshipped, to the wife of his youth, and to all things else which instinct or religion has taught us to consider sacred. With how sweet humility did this elemental spirit perform all needful offices for the household in which he was domesticated! He was equal to the concoction of a grand dinner, yet scorned not to roast a potato or toast a bit of cheese. How humanely did he cherish the school-boy's icy fingers, and thaw the old man's joints with a genial warmth which almost equalled the glow of youth! And how carefully did he dry the cowhide boots that had trudged through mud and snow, and the shaggy outside garment stiff with frozen sleet! taking heed, likewise, to the comfort of the faithful dog who had followed his master through the storm. When did he refuse a coal to light a pipe, or even a part of his own substance to kindle a neighbor's fire? And then, at twilight, when laborer, or scholar, or mortal of whatever age, sex, or degree, drew a chair beside him and looked into his glowing face, how acute, how profound, how comprehensive was his sympathy with the mood of each and all! He pictured forth their very thoughts. To the youthful he showed the scenes of the adventurous life before them; to the aged the shadows of departed love and hope; and, if all earthly things had grown distasteful, he could gladden the fireside muser with golden glimpses of a better world. And, amid this varied communion with the human soul, how busily would the sympathizer, the deep moralist, the painter of magic pictures, be causing the teakettle to boil!
Nor did it lessen the charm of his soft, familiar courtesy and helpfulness that the mighty spirit, were opportunity offered him, would run riot through the peaceful house, wrap its inmates in his terrible embrace, and leave nothing of them save their whitened bones. This possibility of mad destruction only made his domestic kindness the more beautiful and touching. It was so sweet of him, being endowed with such power, to dwell day after day, and one long lonesome night after another, on the dusky hearth, only now and then betraying his wild nature by thrusting his red tongue out of the chimney-top! True, he had done much mischief in the world, and was
pretty certain to do more; but his warm heart atoned for all. He was kindly to the race of man; and they pardoned his characteristic imperfections. The good old clergyman, my predecessor in this mansion, was well acquainted with the comforts of the fireside. His yearly allowance of wood, according to the terms of his settlement, was no less than sixty cords. Almost an annual forest was converted from sound oak logs into ashes, in the kitchen, the parlor, and this little study, where now an unworthy successor, not in the pastoral office, but merely in his earthly abode, sits scribbling beside an air-tight stove. I love to fancy one of those fireside days while the good man, a contemporary of the Revolution, was in his early prime, some five-and-sixty years ago. Before sunrise, doubtless, the blaze hovered upon the gray skirts of night and dissolved the frostwork that had gathered like a curtain over the small window-panes. There is something peculiar in the aspect of the morning fireside; a fresher, brisker glare; the absence of that mellowness which can be produced only by half-consumed logs, and shapeless brands with the white ashes on them, and mighty coals, the remnant of tree-trunks that the hungry, elements have gnawed for hours. The morning hearth, too, is newly swept, and the brazen andirons well brightened, so that the cheerful fire may see its face in them. Surely it was happiness, when the pastor, fortified with a substantial breakfast, sat down in his arm-chair and slippers and opened the Whole Body of Divinity, or the Commentary on 3ob, or whichever of his old folios or quartos might fall within the range of his weekly sermons. It must have been his own fault if the warmth and glow of this abundant hearth did not permeate the discourse and keep his audience comfortable in spite of the bitterest northern blast that ever wrestled with the church-steeple. He reads while the heat warps the stiff covers of the volume; he writes without numbness either in his heart or fingers; and, with unstinted hand, he throws fresh sticks of wood upon the fire.
A parishioner comes in. With what warmth of benevolence - how should he be otherwise than warm in any of his attributes? - does the minister bid him welcome, and set a chair for him in so close proximity to the hearth, that soon the guest finds it needful to rub his scorched shins with his great red hands! The melted snow drips from his steaming boots and bubbles upon the hearth. His puckered forehead unravels its entanglement of crisscross wrinkles. We lose much of the enjoyment of fireside heat without such an
PAGE 70
FIREPLACE
opportunity of marking its genial effect upon those who have been looking the inclement weather in the face. In the course of the day our clergyman himself strides forth, perchance to pay a round of pastoral visits; or, it may be, to visit his mountain of a wood-pile and cleave the monstrous logs into billets suitable for the fire. He returns with fresher life to his beloved hearth. During the short afternoon the western sunshine comes into the study and strives to stare the ruddy blaze out of countenance but with only a brief triumph, soon to be succeeded by brighter glories of its rival. Beautiful it is to see the strengthening gleam, the deepening light that gradually casts distinct shadows of the human figure, the table, and the high-backed chairs upon the opposite wall, and at length, as twilight comes on, replenishes the room with living radiance and makes life all rose-color. Afar the wayfarer discerns the flickering flame as it dances upon the windows, and hails it as a beacon-light of humanity, reminding him, in his cold and lonely path, that the world is not all snow, and solitude, and desolation. At eventide, probably, the study was peopled with the clergyman's wife and family, and children tumbled themselves upon the hearth-rug, and grave puss sat with her back to the fire, or gazed, with a semblance of human meditation, into its fervid depths. Seasonably the plenteous ashes of the day were raked over the mouldering brands, and from the heap came jets of flame, and an incense of night-long smoke creeping quietly up the chimney.
Heaven forgive the old clergyman! In his later life, when for almost ninety winters he had been gladdened by the firelight, - when it had gleamed upon him from infancy to extreme age, and never without brightening his spirits as well as his visage, and perhaps keeping him alive so long, - he had the heart to brick up his chimney-place and bid farewell to the face of his old friend forever, why did he not take an eternal leave of the sunshine too?
His sixty cords of wood had probably dwindled to a far less ample supply in modern times; and it is certain that the parsonage had grown crazy with time and tempest and pervious to the cold; but still it was one of the saddest tokens of the decline and fall of open fireplaces that, the gray patriarch should have deigned to warm himself at an air-tight stove. And I, likewise, - who have found a home in this ancient owl's-nest since its former occupant took his heavenward flight, - I, to my shame, have put up stoves in kitchen and parlor and chamber. Wander where you will about the house, not a glimpse of the earth-born, heaven-aspiring fiend of Aetna, - him that sports in the thunder-storm, the idol of the Ghebers, the devourer of cities, the forest-rioter and prairie-sweeper, the future destroyer of our earth, the old chimney-corner companion who mingled himself so sociably with household joys and sorrows, - not a glimpse of this mighty and kindly one will greet your eyes. He is now an invisible presence. There is his iron cage. Touch it, and he scorches your fingers. He delights to singe a garment or perpetrate any other little unworthy mischief; for his temper is ruined by the ingratitude of mankind, for whom he cherished such warmth of feeling, and to whom he taught all their arts, even that of making his own prison-house. In his fits of rage he puffs volumes of smoke and noisome gas through the crevices of the door, and shakes the iron walls of his dungeon so as to overthrow the ornamental urn upon its summit. We tremble lest he should break forth amongst us. Much of his time is spent in sighs, burdened with unutterable grief, and long drawn through the funnel.
He amuses himself, too, with repeating all the whispers, the moans, and the louder utterances or tempestuous howls of the wind; so that the stove becomes a microcosm of the aerial world. Occasionally there are strange combinations of sounds, - voices talking almost articulately within the hollow chest of iron, - insomuch that fancy beguiles me with the idea that my firewood must have grown in that infernal forest of lamentable trees which breathed their complaints to Dante. When the listener is half asleep he may readily take these voices for the conversation of spirits and assign them an intelligible meaning. Anon there is a pattering noise, - drip, drip, drip, - as if a summer shower were falling within the narrow circumference of the stove. These barren and tedious eccentricities are all that the air-tight stove can bestow in exchange for the invaluable moral influences which we have lost by our desertion of the open fireplace. Alas! is this world so very bright that we can afford to choke up such a domestic fountain of gladsomeness, and sit down by its darkened source without being conscious of a gloom?
1854 Hawthorne's contempora Henry David Thoreau, chimes in 1 on the soullessness of the stov • Walden, his record of self-suffic-111 living in a cabin in the forest of Concord, Massachusetts. After .• winter using a fireplace, Thoreau°ne writes:
"The next winter I used a small cooking-stove for economy, s|n„
I did not own the forest; but it <jy! j not keep fire so well as the open fireplace. Cooking was then, for i6 the most part, no longer a poetic » but merely a chemic process. It | will soon be forgotten, in these i days of stoves, that we used to roast potatoes in the ashes, after the Indian fashion. The stove not only took up room and scented the house, but it concealed the fire and I felt as if I had lost a companion You can always see a face in the fire ... Nowadays the host does not admit you to his hearth, but has got the mason to build one for yourself somewhere in his alley, and hospitality is the art of keeping you at the greatest distance. There Is as much secrecy about the cooking v-as if he had a design to poison you I am aware that I have been on : many a man's premises, but I am -not aware that I have been in many men's houses."
1855 Built-in
Newport Range
While more expensive than traditional cookstoves, built-in home ranges offer two ovens and larger cooking surfaces, while eliminating the time-consuming upkeep that stoves and their appurtenances demand. : Boynton Furnace Co., NY.
1867 "The Age we live in ... invades every nook and corner... It has pushed forward an army of masons and stove-fitters ... who have come and camped down in the very pleasantest rooms of all the households in the land. What with their rattling and hammering, and thumping and pounding, they have done their best to beat down and trample underfoot all the tender associations that belong to the open hearth ... There are to be no more household gatherings as of old in the evening, for the vestal fires are all gone out. A stove, you know, is not a hearth; heat is not fire; warmth is not blaze ... Near a blackened stove the human heart builds no altars.''
— George Canning Hill (pseud. Thomas Lackland), Homespun; or, Five and Twenty Years ago.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 71
g75 Da*ed(
Contest
portaa*a?constantly
ll’ai1H with minimally
f'00dent^ ed styles, the ^ model Is Koned in bright the front of h ^tove, "an ^vertisement of Kjemity °ne y,?ar and
charne the next.
i^thaP°bertson
and Co-
1882 In The Open A/'r Fireplace for All Ages, J. Pickering Putnam claims that 85-95 percent of heat generated in the fireplaces escapes up the chimney. To combat this, Putnam suggests use of the ventilating fireplace (echoing generations of forebears).
1887 Dressing up
Rather than continue to produce completely new stoves, fabricators turn to mass production of similar core parts upon which new cases, in new decorative styles could be fitted, like a dress. These principles would later fuel the burgeoning auto market in Detroit.
Bridge and Beach Co.
1933 Shortly afterwards, there emerges in Japan the same literary disillusion with the demise of the fireplace. Junichiro Tanizaki, writing on his efforts to modernize the functioning of his home - In Praise of Shadows - remarks:
What most taxed my ingenuity was the heating system. No stove worthy of the name will ever look right in a Japanese room. Gas stoves burn with a terrific roar, and unless provided with a chimney, quickly bring headaches. Electric stoves, though at least free from these defects, are every hit as ugly as the rest. One solution would be to putfit the cupboards with heaters of the sort used m streetcars. Yet without the red glow of the W>sls, the whole mood of winter is lost and with it ■he pleasure of family gatherings round the fire."
It is my belief that social intercourse cannot long continue what it has been, now that we have subtracted from it so important and vivifying an element as firelight. The effects will be more perceptible on our children and the generations that shall succeed them than on ourselves, the mechanism of whose life may remain unchanged, though its spirit be far other than it was. The sacred trust of the household fire has been transmitted in unbroken succession from the earliest ages, and faithfully cherished in spite of every discouragement such as the curfew law of the Norman conquerors, until in these evil days physical science has nearly succeeded in extinguishing it. But we at least have our youthful recollections tinged with the glow of the hearth, and our life-long habits and associations arranged on the principle of a mutual bond in the domestic fire. Therefore, though the sociable friend be forever departed, yet in a degree he will be spiritually present with us; and still more will the empty forms which were once full of his rejoicing presence continue to rule our manners. We shall draw our chairs together as we and our forefathers have been wont for thousands of years back, and sit around some blank and empty corner of the room, babbling with unreal cheerfulness of topics suitable to the homely fireside. A warmth from the past - from the ashes of bygone years and the raked-up embers of long ago - will sometimes thaw the ice about our hearts; but it must be otherwise with our successors. On the most favorable supposition, they will be acquainted with the fireside in no better shape than that of the sullen stove; and more probably they will have grown up amid furnace heat in houses which might be fancied to have their foundation over the infernal pit, whence sulphurous steams and unbreathable exhalations ascend through the apertures of the floor. There will be nothing to attract these poor children to one center. They will never behold one another through that peculiar medium of vision the ruddy gleam of blazing wood or bituminous coal - which gives the human spirit so deep an insight into its fellows and melts all humanity into one cordial heart of hearts. Domestic life, if it may still be termed domestic, will seek its separate corners, and never gather itself into groups. The easy gossip; the merry yet unambitious Jest; the life-like, practical discussion of real matters in a casual way; the soul of truth which is so often incarnated in a simple fireside word,
- will disappear from earth. Conversation will contract the air of debate, and all mortal intercourse be chilled with a fatal frost.
In classic times, the exhortation to fight "pro axis et focis," for the altars and the hearths, was considered the strongest appeal that could be made to patriotism. And it seemed an immortal utterance; for all subsequent ages and people have acknowledged its force and responded to it with the full portion of manhood that nature had assigned to each. Wisely were the altar and the hearth conjoined in one mighty sentence; for the hearth, too, had its kindred sanctity. Religion sat down beside it, not in the priestly robes which decorated and perhaps disguised her at the altar, but arrayed in a simple matron's garb, and uttering her lessons with the tenderness of a mother's voice and heart. The holy hearth! If any earthly and material thing, or rather a divine idea embodied in brick and mortar, might be supposed to possess the permanence of moral truth, it was this. All revered it. The man who did not put off his shoes upon this holy ground would have deemed it pastime to trample upon the altar. It has been our task to uproot the hearth. What further reform is left for our children to achieve, unless they overthrow the altar too? And by what appeal hereafter, when the breath of hostile armies may mingle with the pure, cold breezes of our country, shall we attempt to rouse up native valor? Fight for your hearths? There will be none throughout the land.
FIGHT FOR YOUR STOVES! Not I, in faith. If in such a cause I strike a blow, it shall be on the invader's part; and Heaven grant that it may shatter the abomination all to pieces!

Freeing the chimney. Many years Wo the original gable roof of the old house had become very leaky, a temporary proprietor hired a band of woodmen, with their huge, cross-cut saws, and went to sawing the old gable roof clean off. This operation - razeeing the structure some fifteen feet - teas in effect upon the chimney, something like the falling of the great spring tides.
My closet of cordial and eggs.
At the second landing midway up the chimney, is a mysterious door, entering to a mysterious closet; and here I keep mysterious cordials, of a choice, mysterious flavor made so by the constant nurturing and subtle ripening of the chimney’s gentle heat, distilled through the warm mass of mason ry. How my wife’s geran iu /ns ( bud there! Ah, a warm heart has my chimney.
I and my chimney. Two
grey-haired old smokers, reside in the country. My chimney is my grand seignior here - the one great domineering object, not more of the landscape, than of the house. Even to me, its dimensions, at times, seem incredible.
Mr. Scribe’s letter
The same
It is my solemn duty to warn you, sir that there a secret closet which would not have been contrived exeptfor some extraordinary treasure. Whatever step you choose to take upon it is a matter of indifference to me, but I cannot but share in a natural curiosity. This would of course require the demolition of your chimney.
Tours very humbly, HIRAM SCRIBE
MR, SCRIBE,
Sir:- For your conjecture, we return you our joint thanks and compliments, and beg leave to assure you, that we shall remain,
Very faithfully,
The same,
HAND MT CHIMNEY/'
PAGE 72
FIREPLACE
"I AND MY CHIMNEY"
HERMAN MELVILLE
Hawthorne's contemporary and fellow stove refuser, Herman Melville, tells a tale in 1856 of one man's mission to protect his prized chimney from the clutches of his wife, an intruding architect, and the tide of fashion...
Illustration by Annie Wang
Like a pyramid
The architect of the chimney must have had the pyramid of Cheops before him; for, after that famous structure, it : seems modeled, only its rate of decrease towards the summit is considerably less, and it is truncated. From the exact middle of the mansion it soars from the cellar, right up through each successive floor, till, four feet square, it breaks water from the ridge-pole of the roof like a n anvil-headed whale, through the crest of a billow. Most people, though, liken it, in that part, to a razed . observatory, masoned up.
FIREPLACE
¿$ttW
'kl^rd,
ir^’,d
PAGE 73
Melville's avatar the chimney
the wife
The wicked wife’s plans.
My wife sent many long
the architect, mr. scribe
My wye sen i many tong	■ > : . i . . t	'^"'T T TV'	V'
nights elaborating her plans L\ A \	VA V *	\ V. \ . \
to knock clco II th rout'll the	~	.'J
chininey a boasted hall	S'
Additionally, it seemed to involve a sort of irregular archway which was to penetrate the chimney at some convenient point under the staircase. Her ambition was of the mounting order.
PAGE 74
FIREPLACE
Canopy Height (m)
0 10 20 Forest canopy height, massively reduced between 1850 and 1920 for firewood, construction, and conversion to farmland.
NEW YORK: FIREPLACE CITY
Through deforestation, freezing winters, harbor blockages, philanthropy, and outright banning, the fireplace, as much as the skyscraper, is responsible for the growth of New York City...
1609 Bonfire or campfire in the midst of the forested Manhattan, as found by Dutch settlers in eariy 17th century. "Oh this is Eden!" proclaims one of them, Dacob Steendam. The native Lenape tribe farms different spots on the island, allowing forests to replenish after using them for firewood.
1873 Manhattan deforested, drawn by Oeorge Schlegel. The harbour imports firewood, often chopped by slave labor in the south, until traditional fireplaces are gradually replaced by coal-burning iron stoves in the 1820s.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 75
NEW YOKK's FIREPLACES
1864 New England Kitchen, Brooklyn.
1952 or later Interior of Walker Evans's apartment.
1890-1900 "Wall Elevation with a Chimney, Two Window Bays and Rose Decor," by Frank M. Zimmerman, New York.
1877 (date published)
Library of. Walter S. Gurnee.
PAGE 76
FIREPLACE
THE DOMESTIC CORE
In 1869, sisters Catharine Stowe and Harriet Beecher Stowe seize upon new fireplace and stove technology as a tool for women to better control the home, publishing a manifesto, The American Woman's Home, for achieving an efficient modern dwelling. The Stowes explain the human respiratory system in detail - not as an architectural metaphor, but to show the importance of providing sufficient oxygen to the body, and go on to explain air flows and the principles of convection and radiation to ensure good heating and ventilation. In their ideal "Christian House," the flue and chimney becomes the organizing principle of each floor, a vertical core providing solidity in the middle of an otherwise shakey and drafty American balloon frame timber construction. Water closets and their plumbing can also be buried in the domestic core.
Basement: the engine room of the house, featuring furnace, with fuel store adjacent, separate "laundry stove," ice closet and, archaically, a well.
Ground floor: located in the center of the dwelling, "The chimney and stove room are contrived to ventilate the whole house." Connected to the main chimney, two Franklin Stoves (the metal insert into the fireplace) serve the drawing room and front room. In the absence of a Franklin, smaller fireplaces "not... larger than thirty inches wide, twenty five inches high" are necessary to ensure good ventilation.
Second or attic story: dependent on convective
heat, with no fireplaces or stoves. Arrows above the beds indicate exit chutes for foul air that feed into the central chimney. "R" indicates a hot air outlet connected by pipes running through the core from the basement furnace.
RADIANT VS. CONVECTIVE HEATING
The Stowes outline the physical, cerebral, and economic benefits of radiant heat, at a moment when convection and its bad science threaten to take command...
"The open fire warms the person, the walls, the floors and the furniture by radiation, and these, together with the fire, warm the air by convection. For the air resting on the heated surfaces is warmed by convection, rises and gives place to cooler particles, causing a constant heating of its particles by movement. Thus in a room with an open fire, the person is warmed in part by radiation from the fire and the surrounding walls and furniture, and in part by the warm air surrounding the body. Now, the cold air is denser than warm, and therefore contains more oxygen. Consequently, the cooler the air inspired, the larger the supply of oxygen and of the vitality and vigor which it imparts. Thus, the great problem for economy of health is to warm the person as much as possible by radiated heat, and supply the lungs with cool air. For when we breathe air at from 16 to 20 degrees, we take double the amount of oxygen that we do when we inhale it as 80 to 90 degree, and consequently can do double the amount of muscle and brain work."
— Catharine Beecher and Harriet Beecher, The American Woman's Home: Principles of Domestic Science (1869).
FIREPLACE
PAGE 77
THE WELL AND THE CHIMNEY By Sébastien Marot
The well and the chimney are close cousins. Both are vertical shafts or pipes, the one dug or drilled downward so as to access underground water and bring it to the surface, and the other built upward so as to draw and evacuate the smoke produced in a fireplace. In other words, the well is a source structure, and the chimney a (vertical) sink.
Except where fresh surface water was readily available, as on the banks of rivers and lakes, wells were often a necessary annex of habitations, and the very possibility of drilling one was an essential criteria as to where houses were located. And it is still the case today in many regions and rural or even suburban areas, where most of the farms or individual houses directly pump their water from the aquifer. Most houses are thus like naves floating above some running water, and the well, whether it is located inside the dwelling or just outside of it, is, even more than the solid foundations on which the house rests, the real root which anchors it to its site.
As for the chimney, it was the structural mast or column, the spine of the house or building, its windpipe or trachea, the trunk that held it together as well as the crowning toward which the whole roof canopy converged. Stretched between the ground and the sky, the foundations and the stars, the chimney both drew the smoke out, and radiated the heat from the fireplace into the house. Unlike the bottom of the well, where water lays and is to be found, the hearth (obviously not a volcano) is the place where fire has to be made, kept, managed and tended. It is somehow the belly of architecture, the stomach of the house, the organ that has to be fed so as to ensure the assimilation, the transmutation of matter into calories, and produce the living temperature of the household. But besides its role in regulating the exosomatic temperature of the house, the fireplace is also where the actual food of its inhabitants is prepared and cooked, i.e. where the metabolic process from which they derive and renew their endosomatic energy is initiated, facilitated, exalted and sublimated.
To sum up: whereas the well, and the more or less permanent supply of water it accesses, often dictates the location the house within its environment, the fireplace, which can be more easily placed (and displaced), is the focus of that environment, where its resources (wood, food) converge and are consumed. As sure as humans are the descendants of a lineage of mammals that once crept out of the water, and much later started to achieve their specific humanity by mastering fire, each human abode, each anthropogenic island emerges, between gravity and sublimation, as a specific coupling of well (or spring, or river, or cistern) and fireplace.
This probably explains the extraordinary magnetism of Frank Lloyd Wright's most famous work, the Kaufmann's house, better known as Fallingwater (1935). Nestled in the woods, the house not only hangs over a stream and waterfall, but is anchored on a rock that acts as fireplace. "At that time a real fireplace was very rare," says Wright. In its place were mantels. "A 'mantel' was a marble frame for a few pieces of coal, or a wooden piece of furniture with tiles and a grill, attached to the wall. The 'mantel' was an insult to comfort, but the integral fireplace became an important part of the building itself in the houses I got to build on the prairie. I found it refreshing to see a fire burning deep in the masonry of the house itself." As keen observers rightly emphasized, the Kaufmann house is indeed "more than a house over a cascade, a fire over a rock," surrounded with its natural provision of fuel and shade. Of course, this fireplace was never meant to provide the house with all the heat and light it needed. As everyone knows, a significant part of Wright's genius was invested into carefully embedding a whole set of radiators, and an array of lighting fixtures, within the elements (walls, ceilings, etc.) of his projects so that these would all be (even if discreetly) active conditioners of the indoor ambience. But all the same: the fireplace still acts, in contraposition with the sound of the running stream, as the visible focus of the house, the symbolic core of its well-tempered environment, and the guarantee of its resilience.
I
PAGE 78	FIREPLACE
BURIED IN THE CORE: FIRE IN THE GLASS HOUSE
In Philip Johnson's Glass House (1949) - the freest of plans - the fireplace, embedded in a brick cylinder core, is the only non-negotiable, non-movable, substantive presence (together with the toilet hidden behind it). The fireplace-toilet core is responsible for the single interruption in the principle of transparency.
The ingenuity and originality of Johnson's architecture is often underestmwwj to create a single element that combines water and fire is ambitious. In the P Johnson struggles visibly to give the fireplace the depth it requires and settt for a cinemascope screen of flames, rather than a real hearth.
1949 Arthur Drexler photographs the roaring fireplace for Interiors magazine. "Polished brick and chromium with overtones of medieval luxury: the living room of Philip Johnson's glass house at night. Great fireplace and black iron candelabra give flickering golden light; outside, electricity scatters mechanical moonbeams on the green trees."
FIREPLACE
PAGE 79
l!jn«6 David McLane
lm«phsPhilip
with his
g°ce.The house is ^Bheated by radiant ■p|he floor and
ceiling
the main motif of the house, was not derived from Mies but rather from a burnt wooden village I saw once where nothing was left but the foundations and chimneys of brick..."
... Philip Johnson was a genius - because he never contradicted any criticism, theory or opinion about himself.
His 'thinking' was often simply a reflection of the other's speculations. Famously, he even agreed he was a "whore" (adding under his breath that was true of all architects...). Once Peter Eisenman interpreted the circular hybrid of bathroom and fireplace in Johnson's glass house as an (unconscious?) reference to Philip's march into Poland, as an embedded journalist in the Nazi blitzkrieg... He had seen ruined houses where only the smoke stacks survived, expressionist emblems of the war. In Eisenman's eyes Johnson had somehow expiated, in his private house with its hedonistic core, his dubious enthusiasms of a decade earlier. Of course, Philip duly delivered the required memory as a caption...
m
PAGE 80
FIREPLACE
ARCHITECT'S FIREPLACES
Modernist architects employ the fireplace in their own homes as a foil to machine-age modernism, and the free plan, which they otherwise embrace...
1910 The "psychological center of the home": Frank Lloyd Wright, a fan of the fireplace even as he employs central heating, retains the focus in the Roble Flouse, Chicago.
1924 Stove and stove plate protruding from fireplace in Gerrit Rietveld's Schröder Flouse, Utrecht.
1937 Fireplace straddling the stair and, like a half-inglenook, can also be inhabited on one side, by Erik Gunnar Asplund in Lison, Sweden.
1927-9 A mini-Siberian fireplace, with hefty masonry, designed by Konstantin Melnikov for his house In Moscow.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 81
1948 Isolated stove, ringed by a small white fence, and with flue disappearing via pipe into the wall, with no sign of a chimney, in Aldo van Eyck's house in Amsterdam.
1969 Fireplace pulled out from the wall, and chimney almost hovering over it, Bob van Reeth House, Michelen, Belgium.
laximum
minimum
1996 Maximal minimalism: fireplace a seamless hole in the wall, the mantelpiece eradicated, John Pawson House in (slotting Hill, London.
PAGE 82	FIREPLACE
BOILER VS FIREPLACE
1947 House & Garden, Building Remodeling Equipment issue welcomes the boiler into the modem home.

FIREPLACE
PAGE 83
The ultimate in go-anywhere fireplaces is this wheeled version of FireHOOD. And with an added flue, you can use it indoors, too.
Whicl
Two points for you to consider: They now come in many styles; you can < put one anywhere around your house
Vitreous-enameled steel, the
Acorn hitches to existing flue.
1
Tepee is one of three shapes in which FirePots are	Color, quick installation, adaptability to any room
made. All install quickly with Metalbestos chimneys.	are major virtues of steel fireplaces like this one.
1966 “One-day, do-it-yourself installation is possible with the fireplaces they're making todayi" Popular Science magazine reviews the new generation of prefabricated fireplaces, filling the emotional vacuum created by the invisible efficiency of the basement boiler.
fireplace Should You Choose?
By DARRELL HUFF
‘Q
tart splitting wood, Pop! Here comes our fireplace.”
It’s true. One-day, do-it-yourself installation is possible with the fireplaces they’re making these days.
Other happy news: guaranteed smokefree performance; brilliant colors and new modern shapes if you wish; or the traditional built-in look, with or without masonry.
Best of all, you can now have a fireplace anywhere in your house, upstairs or down, instead of being limited to places where a heavy foundation is feasible. And you can have it without weeks of a tom-up house and a builder’s bill that rips through a thousand-dollar bank account.
Fireplaces fall into seven classes. Make your choice by matching the requirements of each with the situation you have.
1)	Are you prepared to work with masonry? Does your chosen location permit pouring a concrete base? Then you can build a traditional fireplace, using a steel circulator
core as guide and form behind the masonry.
2)	Is a concrete foundation feasible? If so, you can have a brick or stone fireplace and still avoid constructing a chimney. There’s a noncirculator core now that comes with a prebuilt metal chimney.
3)	Does your house already have a flue to take stovepipe? You can install your choice of wall-hung and free-standing metal fireplaces in a matter of hours.
4)	Do you want a conventional in-the-wall fireplace that looks at home anywhere? You can have it without touching an ounce of masonry. Use one of the new go-anywhere zero-clearance fireplace cores.
5)	Want a modem metal fireplace —in brilliant enamel colors? It can be yours — again without masonry. Their prebuilt chimneys are ready to ran through the roof.
6)	Want an outdoor fireplace that can be moved about patio, yard, or deck? Get one of the metal beauties on wheels.
7)	Are you one who will gladly forego the pleasure of a wood fire for the convenience of no splitting and no ashes? There’s a metal type that’s gas-fired. And there’s even a convincing electric model. Continued
Brilliant matal fireplaces like this are especially You can have a built-in wood burner anywhere in the effective when given a background of brick or tile. house without masonry. This is a Majestic Thulman.
PAGE 84
FIREPLACE
LONDON'S GREAT SMOG
In 1952, the coal-fueled fireplace, over-used during a cold snap, is responsible for a week-long "pea-souper" that kills 4,000. A policeman, using fire, directs a London omnibus through the great smog at Marble Arch.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 85
ipeating: after London century, the baton landed onto China, omic growth, fueled by >f combustion, trigger SE" in the northeast. A arbin directs traffic, with an 20 meters. Schools 3se, particulate pollution (World Health Organiza-dation: no more than 25).
PAGE 86
FIREPLACE
CLIMATE CONTROL IN THE WHITE HOUSE
The White House is split between neoclassical symbolism and the demands of modern statecraft. It comes generously appointed with fireplaces and, beneath it all, embraces a variety of high-tech solutions to maintain climate control - a juxtaposition dramatically exposed by the Truman Reconstruction of 1952...
January 19,1950
Truman's White House renovation reveals the accumulation of three consecutive fireplaces nested within one another.
July 1952 Mechanix Magazine reports on the room-sized panel controlling the White House's new HVAC system, calibrated by 106 thermostats dispersed around the building.
July 19, 1951 Workers pose for a photo in one of the White House's massive ducts - the space for an unprecedented HVAC overhaul, climatic infrastructure at a scale appropriate to the US's postwar power.
White House Weathermaker
Comfort of the President and his household will be assured by a new electronic control panel which regulates temperature and humidity in the White House. The complex board monitors the action of 106 thermostats in the modernized executive mansion, which is said to contain the most elaborate year-round air-
iempi^ture system ever a residential Conditions bom the panel ■dmxuP' changes made.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 87
.(Nixon meets with King Hussein Iordan in front of roaring fireplace.
1970 NIXON'S HUNGRY HEARTH
Richard Nixon is known to be a fireplace fanatic - he and his staff use up to 50 cords of wood one winter in the White House. What is unknown, until his daughter Tricia innocently reveals it in a 60 Minutes interview, is that her father, in the summer, often turns on the air conditioning in order to light a fire, such is his love for the hearth. For the media, Nixon's resource-hungry habit serves as a tidy parable of recklessness over energy use, but it is more an indictment of the regime of air conditioning spreading across the US, whereby technology facilitates the manipulation of the interior climate to suit the most eccentric proclivities.
President Nixon’s habit of “absolutely loving’’ to light up the fireplace,
"even when you have to turn up the air conditioning to make it bearable,” came into the conversation as the tour reached its last stop, the Lincoln sitting room, the President’s private study.
“He loves to come here late at night, when he wants to work on a speech, think about a problem, or formulate a policy,” she offered. "One night, when he had an idea for his Nov. 3 speech, he came in here at 2:30 a.m., started a fire,, and had the Fire Department in an absolute panic.
They rushed here and May 27,1970 found him working on his The Boston Globe. speech."	.
1980 CARTER'S CONSERVATION
The very same fireplaces, lit up In order to "dramatize alternative energy sources," according to the Gadsden Times, become, through the alchemy of ideology and the flexibility in the meaning of the fireplace, a symbol of eco-consciousness under the Carter administration. Three years after his disastrous television appearance wearing a cardigan and encouraging the nation to save energy, Carter's energy saving measures are still the subject of ridicule...
Feb 2,1977 Donning a cardigan sweater, Jimmy Carter sits in front of a meager fire in the White House library to give his televised report to the American people on energy. "All of us must learn to waste less energy. Simply by keeping our thermostats, for instance, at 65 degrees in the daytime and 55 degrees at night we could save half the current shortage of natural gas."
Feb 24,1980
The Gadsden Times.
PAGE 88
FIREPLACE
YOUNG SAVAGES
"The kids who squat around the scrap wood bonfire down the street aren't bad at heart - they need to let their primitive ideas go places..." Building fires starts to be recognized not only as a primal activity but also labelled as a masculine one, necessary for personal growth and even to escape poverty.
The Camp Fires of New York . .
Wro the Dead-End Kids want an orange-crate camp fire, they get it! Hard streets—tall buildings—swift traffic—the cop on the beat—nothing discourages them.
The curbstone camp fires of Manhattan’s crowded streets find their counterparts in the back-lot watch fires of a hundred other cities. “Little tough guy” is today's term for yesterday’s “little savage”. The kids who squat around the scrap wood bonfire down the street aren't had at heart—they need a chance to let their primitive ideas go places ... in the right way.
The Boy Scout Movement believes in young savages. That's why hoys like Scouting. They like its traditions of the open air, the lure of the unknown, the thrill of the different, the idea of adventure. They like ACTION .. . and Scouting has it. It’s a man’s game cut to hoy’s size.
Thousands of boys in less-ehance areas wait only for leadership, meeting places and financial aid. Enlist your support today. Write or phone the Boy Scout Foundation of Greater New York, 120 West 12nd S»., New York City, Wisconsin 74251, nr the local Boy Scout Council in your own community.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 89
CRISIS AND THE RESURRECTION
° the fireplace
v . t^e flow of Middle Eastern oil drying up in 1973 as a suit of the OPEC embargo, a roaring fireplace, normally
re:
i luxury,
becomes a necessity for many New Yorkers.
c nlaces are unboarded and rekindled across the city, HgLg to another energy crisis: a lack of firewood. In the y te capital of Albany, the Division of Lands and Forests ssueS a decree: "the policy of this Department [is] to ' courage the cutting of firewood for fuel on state land.
■nje major value of this new effort may be to help alleviate the energy shortage." For a fee of $5 for a cord of wood and the purchase of liability insurance for $1.72, cityfolk are welcomed upstate with their chainsaws to remove sugar maple, red maple, ash, birch, hickory. John McPhee, a reporter for the New Yorker, follows a group of would-be
lumberjacks:
"Eric Meola, one freezing day, left his apartment at nine in the morning and drove in a small rented van to Carmel. His apartment was a floor-through loft on lower Fifth Avenue, and it was cold after ten in the evening, cold all day Sunday, and drafty in the lightest wind. He had read in the newspaper of the state's new program and had decided to add heat to his home with wood. He began with almost nothing. He had no axe, no saw, no maul, no wedge. In fact, he had no fireplace. So for three hundred dollars he had bought a great inverted funnel, a hood, of red enamelled steel, whose connecting stovepipe would rise through a skylight."
— ]ohn McPhee, "Firewood," New Yorker, March 25, 1974.
1973 Felix Colon prepares logs for New York's re-commissioned fireplaces during the energy crisis. "The Clark & Wilkins Company, considered the Tiffany of wood purveyors, dates back to 1870 when a fire was a necessity rather than a status symbol..." ("On Buying Wood for the Fireplace," New York Times, 22 January 1973.)
"In Greenwich Village, fireplaces are small, and Clark & Wilkins generally delivers twelve-inch wood there. The fireplaces in midtown apartments take sixteen Inch or eighteen-inch wood. Certain town houses require twenty-four-inch wood.
... There Is a class of people who cannot enjoy a bottle of wine unless Its subtle pigments are asparkle in the light of a Clark & Wilkins fire. Such people have accounts with the company. ... the company once had lots in various parts of town where stacked firewood filled as much as two entire blocks to a height of thirty feet - many hundreds of thousands of pieces of wood. ...
An accidental fire some twenty years ago [ca. 1953] lasted more than a week and went through the total Inventory of firewood."
— McPhee, "Firewood."
U.S. ENERGY ROUND-UP
Hot Stove League
Call it chic or maybe they’re cold, but the demand for Franklin stoves is booming. ‘’The oil shortage is helping an awful lot,” says Robert Oliver, president of the Portland (Me.) Franklin Stove Foundry.
Since his stoves are handcrafted at the rate of only 12 a day, Mr. Oliver is sold out until the end of April. A Franklin stove, named after Benjamin Franklin, is a cast-
iron stove, burning coal or wood Mr. Oliver's prices range from $169 to $500, depending on the accessories and the finish.
Pot belly stoves are also hot items, and Frank Hynan of the Fireplace Shop in Darien, Conn., says his sales of free-standing fireplaces are up almost 300 per cent over last year’s levels. The Atlanta Stove Works is sold out through March, 1974.
11 November, 1973
The New York Times reports the impact of the oil crisis on various sectors: old fashioned Franklin Stoves are sold out until April; meanwhile a fireplace convention takes place in Florida.
"A fireplace is ... a romantic way to suck cold air into
‘Gas’ Marketing Strategy
In view of the oil shortage, the huge profit increases being reported this year by the international oil companies are causing raised eyebrows on the part of some citizens and politicians.
One self-styled citizens group in Washington, the Center for Science in the Public Interest, has prepared a study called ‘‘Big Oil” which takes the industry to task for high profits, low taxes and marketing concentration.
"The companies are big and growing bigger off the shortage, and I think we ought to be doing something about it," said Albert 3. Fritsch, a co-author of the report.
One cf the most controversial aspects of the report is the allegation that the
United States’s major oil companies have been improperly carving up the American gasoline market.
As evidence, the report presents maps purporting to show that the Exxon Corporation is cutting back marketing in the Midwest while the Gulf Oil Corporation is retrenching in the Midwest and Far West, the Standard Oil Company of Indiana in the Southwest, the Atlantic Richfield Company in the Southeast and West and the Phillips Petroleum Company in the Northeast
The oil companies have denied the charges. Gulf decided to move out of the Northwest and Midwest unilaterally, Gerald Bradley. Gulfs public communications
manager said, because it was "unable to make money in those areas." Standard of Indiana is leaving the Southwest for the same reason, a company official said.
Mr. Bradley said Gulfs executives had never consulted with other companies about concentrating markets and, "If they had, they’d be in jail.”
The study by the Washington group charged the oil companies with concentrating their power by acquiring other oil and fuel companies. Mr. Bradley said Gulf was acquiring coal, nuclear energy and geothermal energy facilities to meet its ultimate goal, which is to become a total energy company. The oil business is not going to last forever," he added.
Fireplaces
There’s a trade association for almost anything, and one of the newest is the Fireplace Institute in Chicago. It will hold its first annual meeting in Clearwater, Fla., in February.
Why Florida? “People prefer a warm climate for winter meetings so they can play golf,” explained Arnold Rodir, the group’s executive secretary.
At the meeting, when they aren't playing golf, the fireplace manufacturers, retailers and distributors will discuss the energy benefits of fireplaces as well^Hplans to develop bui‘ a year, Mr.
Eventual!: research projeci less coal and th| will also be effoi uniformity in fin
months lid. will
a room, heat the air, and send it up the chimney." Anonymous forester, quoted by Dohn McPhee in "Firewood," New Yorker, March 25, 1974.
oa< be codes.
PAGE 90
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE, RADIO-PLACE, TV-PLACE
As a gathering place - the focal point of the home -the fireplace Is usurped by the radio then the TV...
1933-1944 Franklin Delano Roosevelt's "fireside chats."
Radio steals attention from the fireplace, now electric in any case.
1879 Premonition: "Edison's Telephonoscope (Transmits Light as well as sound)" in Punch's Almanac, a moving panorama placed above the fireplace (itself depicting a campfire?).
In a polite show of submission to what it is about to destroy, a television occupies a nook, off-center, carved out of a brick fireplace.
1966 "Fire is thermal, visceral and auditory. With a fire burning, you don't have to worry about what to say next, which in a highly visual culture like ours is a frequent concern to some people. Fire is a kind of dialogue." (Marshall McLuhan, Life,
25 February.)
"... television is now the hearth around which we meet, the cool fire of domestic evenings and the tribal gathering place for moments of ritual celebration or mourning" William Flenry III in Life magazine's celebration, in 1989, of 50 years of television (quoted by Cecelia Tichi in Electronic Hearth: Creating an American Television Culture, 1991).
The fireplace, stripped of its heat and media-bearing functions, and shuttered, next to the television.
(Film still: Pulp Fiction, 1994.)
FIREPLACE	PAGE 91
PAGE 92	FIREPLACE
COOL IS THE NEW WARM
AIR CONDITIONING UNIT SUPERSEDES HEARTH AS CHERISHED FOCUS OF THE HOME
Until some time in the mid 20th century, a comforting flame and welcoming warmth are the features that endow a dwelling with a certain class status and the aura of power that comes with the ability to control the climate. With Willis Carrier's propagation of air conditioning, coolness takes over as the new aspirational atmospheric state. The air conditioner - wedged into windows in the spring, switched on through the night - becomes a new focus, or fetish, commanding affection and devotion. In the same way prehistoric fireplaces made productive inhabitation of northern climes possible, the air conditioner has incalculable economic and social consequences closer to the equator.
1904 Carrier designs an "apparatus for treating air" mainly for the pur|jj , cation of air by water and mist (coolness is byproduct at this point). It ¡s patented two years later. Air sucked into the apparatus from the left (bv »1 device K on the other end) passes cold or hot water-filled pipes B to rea its temperature, and then is moistened by a mist spray H, before passino 6 through metal plates f, g, i, j where impurities are collected.	'
Ho. 808,897.	PATENTED JAN. 2, 195.
W. H. CARRIER.
APPARATDS FOR TREATING AIR.
APPLICATION TILED SETT. 18. 19«.
1904 Air conditioning is born as a science, and as a human need. Harnessing data from Charles Marvin's research into optimum humidity for growing plants, Carrier creates the "Hygrometric Chart" (a hygrometer being an instrument for measuring moisture). In a shift that will have critical implications in architecture, Carrier later changes the name of this codex to the "psychrometric chart" - psychrometry being the study of vapors and coldness.
climate control climate fetish
FIREPLACE
PAGE 93
Convection diagrams showing the distribution of cool air recall 19th century drawings of the fireplace's invisible influence.
1954 Like a fireplace, the a/c unit can be gazed at lovingly; and whereas fireplaces are typically gathering places for men in the Anglo-Saxon imagination, in Carrier's advertising campaign for the new Silhouette model, a/c is meant to attract women. At $250, the Silhouette is a luxury item, with a loop of vents, recalling early convective fireplaces that distribute warm air evenly from various ducts.
In the summer, the a/c unit functions as idealized social gathering place in the American suburban home.
PAGE 94
FIREPLACE
1928 Hyderabad's forest of windcatchers, photograph by Martin Hurlimann. "Once the most striking feature of Hyderabad was its peculiar skyline dominated by wind-catchers. These wind-catchers or Manghu, as they are called In the local Sindhi language, were fixed on housetops, to catch the southwesterly breeze In the hot summer days and evenings. The breeze entering the wind-catchers would penetrate into the room and keep it cool. Due to the numerous wind catchers, Hyderabad became famous as manghan jo shaharu or the city of wind catchers. This tradition started to wane with the advent of electricity during the World War II when the British authorities built a powerhouse at Tando Agha. Most of the new houses and buildings have switched to other methods of room cooling, e.g. electric fans, room coolers and air conditioners and, therefore, the wind catchers are no longer numerous over the cityscape. Only few buildings have continued to follow this tradition of having Manghu on their rooftops."
— Mir Atta Muhammad Talpur, "The Vanishing Glory of Hyderabad (Sindh, Pakistan"), Web Journal on Cultural Patrimony, fanuary-Dune 2007.
NATURAL COOLING: THE INVERTED CHIMNEY
In hot climates, what appears as a chimney may well be its opposite, channeling cool air down into the house, rather than hot air (and smoke) up and out of the house. So-called windcatchers originate in the heat of the Middle East, and spread with Islam. Bernard Rudofsky writes in Architecture without Architects (1964): "Although the origin of this contraption is unknown, it has been in use for at least five hundred years."
FIREPLACE
PAGE 95
i. ce most striking feature of Hyderabad was its peculiar skyline dominated by wind-catchers.
PAGE 96
FIREPLACE
FROM POKER TO THERMOSTAT
A distant heir of the fire-poker - used to rearrange logs and improve the circulation of oxygen around the fire and give a fresh blast of heat - the thermostat, when it emerges in the late 19th century and establishes itself in the 1950s, is the ultimate tool of climate control. The thermostat is one of the first devices that works on a feedback loop: it both reacts to a change in temperature and triggers a change in temperature. In this sense it exploits a critical ambivalence over who is in control of the temperature, being both a tool for making easy, manual adjustments, and an automatic device that reacts to the climate and regulates heat on your behalf. A well-functioning thermostat and boiler shouldn't need to be touched much.

Typical tools for controlling fireplace temperature: tongs, poker.
CHICKEN AND EGG
Antecedents to the modern thermostat measure temperature and adjust heating first to regulate the rearing of chickens (by Englishman Cornelius Drebbel in 1620) and later for the efficient incubation of eggs (by Charles Hearson, another Brit in 1879).
1620 Cornelius Drebbel's chicken incubator, with temperature regulation.
1883 WARREN JOHNSON
A college professor at Wisconsin's State Normal School in Milwaukee (heating degree days: 3,967), Johnson becomes irritated by the hourly visits of the janitor to check the classroom's temperature. Both solving and exacerbating anxiety about the cold, Johnson invents the Electric Tele-Thermoscope, the first system to use a bi-metallic strip (which contracts and expands at different rates to automatically trip a switch). The device is not yet able to trigger the heating system, but rings a bell "[t]o call the attention of the attendant to the fact that the temperature has reached the ... maximum or minimum," Johnson explains in his patent. Kenneth Wirth Jr., the archivist today at the company Johnson founded, states: "Johnson was the first to apply electricity to the concept of heat regulation via thermostats."
Cause for alarm: the earliest thermostat patent rings an alarm bell (highlighted) when the temperature drops, but cannot activate the central heating yet...
FIREPLACE
PAGE 97
CONSCIOUS FIREPLACE:
THE "NEST" THERMOSTAT
The Nest Learning Thermostat records patterns of usage and uses motion sensors to create a heating program that saves energy when the occupant is away or asleep - moments when the seamlessness of the traditional thermostat works against efficiency: it is so automatic, so difficult to program, that it is forgotten on the wall, and simply left to its own devices. The Nest thermostat, the first domestic device to be part of the internet-of-things, can be operated via smartphone. It incentivizes users through schemes like "Rush Hour Rewards" to turn the heat (or cooling) down at peak times. Its design is in the lineage of the classic Honeywell thermostat (1953) and also of the iPod (2001) -the device is designed by former Apple executive Tony Fadell, interviewed here by the editors...
COOLING'S IMPACT ON HEATING
AMO As you were developing Nest, what did you learn from the history of the thermostat? Tony Fadell To begin with, we looked at a history of frustration on the part of the consumer when trying to use their thermostats. Then, when we started to really think about thermostats, the history become very rich as we looked internationally. Whereas a lot of the homes in the US were built in the 1940s and later, in many other places around the world, a lot of homes were built long before the 40s. The way people think of their heating systems in older houses is very different from those who grew up newer houses. The emergence of the atomic suburban American family was the point where the US diverged from the rest of the world and developed its own way of thinking about the heating of their home.
Distant descendent of the fireplace.
AMO Does that mean that they started demanding more control?
TF What happened in the 40s and the 50s was air-conditioning. When cooling became available in all those new tract homes, people also started demanding a different way of heating their home. People had been used to a fireplace or central heating - radiant systems that take a while to kick in, but are quite efficient when they do. But with air conditioning, which works through forced air, they had a system that worked fast, even if it was inefficient at maintaining the desired temperature. So people started demanding from their heating system the speed they had with their air conditioning. Most of the countries where air conditioning never took hold were still stuck with this on/off switch for their heating. It's only when you went down the cooling path that quick and precise control became an expectation. And now all the world is starting to come into this model of temperature control both for heating and cooling.
AMO So this expectation of instant control was triggered by a convective system of temperature control, because convection is very fast, and so very rewarding, even if it also very fleeting?
TF All I have to do is decide: I want this temperature now, whether that requires heating or cooling. Before that, everyone - mostly in Europe - was resigned to the fact that it takes a long time to reach a desired temperature, and they didn't fuss with the system. But with the internet generation, the mentality is "I've got to have it, and I've got to have it now."
AMO ... whereas Nest ties you to a program and gives you incentives to be more patient?
TF Nest also overcomes some of the issues with radiant systems. It's like driving a truck: when you press on the gas the truck doesn't go instantly, it takes a long time. You have to predict well ahead, when you should be accelerating and when you should be braking. The computer in Nest can figure that out for you. You can get what you want, maybe not instantly but you get it efficiently.
PAGE 98
FIREPLACE
1886 ALBERT BUTZ
Albert Butz is the first to invent a thermostat that can also adjust the temperature. Butz is inducted into the Minessota inventors Hall of Fame with the following bio: "In the early 1880s, Butz developed a heat control for a coal-fired furnace. He used a spring motor equipped with a crank arm to operate chains to adjust dampers of a coal-fired furnace or boiler in response to the demands of a room thermostat. The purpose of his invention was to maintain an even temperature in the home and relieve the homeowner of the tedious job of going to the cellar and opening and closing the damper by hand." With the fireplace now converted to a boiler and exiled to the basement, Butz's invention triggers yet another level of alienation from fire: homeowners now potentially never even need to visit the tamed and mechanized fireplace running smoothly beneath their home.
il.)	2 Sheets—Sheet 1.
A. M. BUTZ.
THERMO ELECTRIC DAMPER REGULATOR AND ALARM.
17,868.	Patented Aug. 24, 1886.
jry.j.
1886 Albert Butz's patent drawing for the Thermo Electric Damper Regulator and Alarm, which triggers a furnace in the basement, still features a fireplace in the living room. "My invention relates particularly to improvements in damper regulators and alarms that are designed to operate the dampers or valves of a furnace or stove as the temperature rises or falls in the room or rooms where the temperature is to be regulated."
HONEYWELL ROUND
Butz's patent and his business is bought in 1906, by the engineer Mark Honeywell. His "dewell" is the first programmable thermostat, with a built-in clock, allowing less heat at night and more in the morning through a thermal switch and a motor on the boiler. In 1943, Henry Dreyfuss (American industrial designer and later the author of Designing for People, 1955) patents a " Design for a Control Instrument" which becomes, a decade later, the iconic outer shell of the Honeywell T-86 Round thermostat, popularized in the 1950s. Dreyfuss's patent contains only the statement "I claim: The ornamental design for a control instrument, substantially as shown. HENRY DREYFUSS." It makes no mention of the type or functioning of the control instrument, which Honeywell adapted to fit into the circular casing.
1953 The Honeywell "Round": classic thermostat design by Henry Dreyfuss.
1951 BENEVOLENT GENIE
Popular Science magazine recounts the functioning and the benefits of the thermostat: "Early on a chilly morning while you sleep, a benevolent genie called a clock thermostat snaps a basement switch and turns on the heat. By the time your alarm clock goes off and you yawn and stretch, the house is comfortably warm."
HYSTERESIS
Since thermostats measure the temperature of the air rather than that of architectural surfaces, they are prone to slight fluctuations in climate and can trigger quick changes in a room's temperature if connected to a convective (forced air) heating system. Thermostats therefore come to be designed with a built-in "hysteresis" - a buffer zone around the "set" point to prevent an ever-shrinking feedback loop and a too-frequent switching on and off of the heating. For example, a thermostat may turn the heating on when the temperature drops below 18 degrees, but not turn it off until the temperature rises above 20 degrees.
WINDOW DISPLAYS WHITE DISK IN \ DAYTIME BLACK ONE AT NIGHT
COIL SPRING. STRETCHED BY CAM AND FOLLOWER. SWINGS TENSION-APPLYING ARM FROM "HIGH ' TO LOW" POSITION WITHOUT MOVING MANUAL LEVERS
TIMER DIAL MAKES ONE REVOLUTION IN 24 HOURS
ADJUSTABLE POINTERS SET TIME AND DUR ATION OF NIGHTTIME SHUTDOWN BY POSITIONING LEAVES OF CAM
DAYTIME-
TEMPERATURE
SETTING
LEVER
NIGHTTIME-
TEMPERATURE
SETTING
LEVER
CAM AUTOMATICALLY LOWERS TEMPERATURE SETTING OF THERMOSTAT AT BEDTIME AND RESTORES DAYTIME SETTING IN EARLY MORNING
FIREPLACE
PAGE 99
1918 Minneapolis Honeywell thermostat with 8 day clock, model 77.
AMO Does the Nest thermostat assume that the house for which it's intended is air conditioned and that heat and cooling are delivered by air?
TF We have different thermostats for the US and the EU. The European one is only for heating.
But the US model works with air conditioning and with any type of radiant heating, either underfloor or radiator, and it will work with forced air systems - so it's set up to work with many different systems that are common here in the US. It also works with different fuel sources, including geothermal.
INVENTION AND STAGNATION
AMO Did you go way back to the invention of the thermostat as well?
It seems like you were studying more from a behavioral point of view.
TF If you go on eBay, you will be amazed how many thermostats were being developed in the 1920s and the 30s. They were almost like a computer. Everybody wanted to invent something around thermal control because it was the new thing, and it was within reach. After the 50s it just kind of collapsed and nothing really happened. But people are talking about thermostats again. People want control of their environment. You can't control the outdoor weather, but you can control the indoor weather.
AMO Declining innovation in the 50s actually coincides with the dominance of the Honeywell Round. Do you think there is a connection?
TF When you make it as simple as you possibly can, people understand it, and it is beautiful. Inventors had been adding all these different features and functionalities. It was a kind of feature-creep. It had to go back to its principals again, and that's why the Honeywell Round was so popular.
WEATHER ALGORITHMS
AMO We have been talking to other people who are making thermostats, including Werner Sobek, an engineer in Germany who built an all-glass, totally sustainable house.
He is working on a thermostat that measures not only the conditions inside the house, but also the climate in general, the situation outside the house. Is that something you're also doing?
TF Yes, we are. We get weather data, and that influences how our algorithms respond under certain conditions, changing when it should turn on the heating and the cooling. So if it's going to be a cool day, we wouldn't turn on the cooling as early, or the heating on a more mild day. That's built into our algorithms, and it's external weather dependent. And it's not just temperature, but insulation, a calculation based on the amount of sun that's in the home.
RESILIENCE VS. COMFORT
AMO Have you seen the studies that indicate if you have greater control over the temperature, your tolerance for a wide range of temperatures increases?
TF We had a very international team and also a very diverse team from different parts of North America. Everybody has a different culture around their heating. From the data we collected, we saw that the east coast was much more resilient. In the southwest, they were dying when it hit 82 degrees Fahrenheit in the summer, whereas, for the northeast a temperature like that was no big deal. Likewise, cold in the southwest was also a big deal, but not in the northeast. Temperature swings in the regions where people grow up determine their behavior with heating later on. A lot of people didn't grow up with cooling because they didn't need to. And those people tend to also have a more resilient attitude towards the cold: they understand that you can put on a jumper rather than turning on the heating. That's how the presence of air conditioning changed everything - even our behavior around heating.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 100 NEST
Inside the smart thermostat.
The thermostat as Al...
Smoke detector: the Nest Protest acts as a night light. It gives a verbal warning in the event of light smoke, and can be switched off with a wave of the hand. It can also communicate with the Nest thermostat, instructing it to switch off the boiler in the event of high carbon monoxide levels.
Through surveillance of the Inhabitants' movements and analysis of their programming habits, and the frequency with which they override them, the Nest thermostat "never stops learning."
FIREPLACE
PAGE 101
AMO How did you factor these variations into your algorithms?
TF We had to design a product that could accommodate all of these different backgrounds and ways of thinking about heating and cooling, rather than adapting our algorithms to fit one single type. Being "green" can be taken to mean "Oh, I've got to live in a cave," or follow some strict set of rules. What we said was, we need to first allow people to create the environment they like, then over time, we can bring in something more energy efficient adapted to how you choose to live, and what region you live in.
AMO It's almost like a video game where you can choose easy, medium, or hard levels.
When you install Nest, you could be given the opportunity to confess your level of resilience to extremes of temperature.
TF Absolutely, but first of all we had to take the old concepts, give people something to get on board with, and then after that, after they learn and trust the system, then they're willing to allow the system to take control, knowing that it will be based on our knowledge of what they like.
It's like a nutritionist studying what you eat over a year, and, only after learning all of your habits, then saying OK, now we're going to put you on a diet.
THERMOSTAT & SMOKE DETECTOR: IN CONVERSATION
AMO Can the Nest respond to or understand a sudden burst of heat in one space -the ignition of a fireplace? Can it work with an old fashioned fireplace that is actually in use?
TF It doesn't automatically turn itself off when it sees a fireplace turning on. It can tell if the room temperature has changed, and it can see the spikes and when it hits the right target it can turn itself off. So the fireplace is just another source of heat in the room, like a radiator. But also, when you have the Nest Protect smoke alarm, we can detect the carbon monoxide level and give a warning if it's too high - then it can tell the Nest thermostat to turn off the boiler, because the boiler is the number one cause of carbon monoxide emission in the home. So the two systems work together.
AMO So the Nest Protect and the Nest thermostat can talk to each other?
TF Exactly. The Nest Protect will tell the thermostat if it sees a person in an area where you may not regularly be, or where the thermostat may not be. Let's say the thermostat is in the den but you are in your home office for long periods. You probably need a smoke alarm back there in the den, and when you walk underneath it, it will tell the thermostat: don't turn down, there's still somebody around the house. So they do talk to each other and you don't have to do anything special to set it up, it does it out of the box.
AMO So the vision of the conscious home is already in the process of being realized: devices are already talking to each other.
TF Yes.
AUTOMATION VS. AGENCY
AMO Is the goal of Nest that it doesn't need to be touched? We seem to be willing to sacrifice agency because we get efficiency and comfort as a result.
TF We don't believe that you are going to totally give up your control and give it to some agent.
We believe that long-term behaviors are very hard to change. So when you have an agent working on your behalf, it's much better to put you on a diet that you asked for than you having to worry about it alone over a six-month period. The Auto-Away function on Nest is an agent. It sees when you are not home. You enable the function first, and you tell it what to do when you are not home.
So rather than you having to remember to turn the heat down when you leave the house, Nest does it for you - but you are the one who chooses this in the first place. That is the kind of area where we think automation is good, but if it's just taking over in all aspects - we think that's bad.
PAGE 102
FIREPLACE
Incentive program: the Leaf appears when heating is running efficiently, but - deliberately - gets harder and harder to invoke as Nest learns your habits and preferences.
Pennies from heaven: Nest has deals with 12 energy companies in the US to reward people for using less heat and cooling during peak hours, predicted by weather forecasts and algorithms on energy "rush hours," which often lead to brownouts.
Employees Only Think They Control Thermostat
Jared Sandberg
Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2003
Looking for an office thermostat that actually works? Good luck and Godspeed. You may never find it. The controls for your company's heating, ventilation and air conditioning (HVAC) are likely hidden in the office ducts. If you do spy a thermostat, it's probably locked, or encased behind shatterproof glass. Even worse, HVAC experts acknowledge what millions of office workers have suspected all along: A lot of office thermostats are completely fake - meant to dupe you into thinking you've altered the office weather conditions.
The specialists are unrepentant. Fed up with of complaints from sweaty men and shivering women, HVAC technicians install dummy thermostats to give workers the illusion of control. In some leased buildings, even the corporate tenants don't know the thermostats are useless. Other times, it's the companies themselves, barraged with calls from workers, who ask the landlord's HVAC technicians to "fix" things. Richard Dawson, an HVAC specialist from Homer, III., who has several landlord clients, says too many office workers feel their environment is "anything but what they want it to be." Better to install a dummy when they're out to lunch, he figures.
He estimates that 90% of office thermostats are dummies (others say it's below 2%).
Does he feel bad? "I did what my employer told me to do," Mr. Dawson says. The complainers in the cubicles wore him out. "You just get tired of dealing with them and you screw in a cheap thermostat. Guess what? They quit calling you." Outrageous! As if we haven't been living enough business lies, now this. Thermo-fraud threatens to make more of us look like fools than the New Economy and the disco era combined. Scott McDaniel, an HVAC technician in North Augusta, S.C., installed a dummy and actually bothered to attach a wire to the back of it -- one that dead-ended into the thin, uncomfortable office air. He hoped the wire would fool the office meddler. "There's always someone who thinks they're a technician," he sighs.
That's just one of several examples where the mere illusion of control seems to satisfy us. Plenty of placebo buttons give the same false impression.
That "close door" button on elevators? It won't work unless you're a fireman or an elevator operator with special access to the system. The rest of the time, in deference to various building codes, it's deactivated, according to engineers at Otis Elevator.
That "walk" button at intersections? It tells the system a pedestrian is waiting for a signal, says James Okazaki, assistant general manager of the L.A Department of Transportation. But that doesn't mean the signal will change faster - and it may be broken from public abuse. "People keep pushing It pushing it and pushing it until the signal changes," he says. "You're pushing it like you have a thousand people there but you have one person pushing it 1,000 times!"
Thermostat chicanery goes back about 40 years. Michael Downey, former senior vice president of operations at a commercial real-estate company in i New York, first became aware of dummy 'stats in the 1960s. He says some companies went so far as to install white-noise generators to mimic the hum of the fan even though the system was shut off. Later, as heating prices rose, landlords began to write leases specifying a narrow range for air temperatures. In an attempt to eliminate the human factor and introduce efficiency, many office buildings have replaced thermostats with "thermistors," sensors that read temperature and relay it to a computer that governs the system. But one thermistor can be crowded out by a competing chorus of others, says Paul Milligan, who writes HVAC software programs. The systems are programmed to allow only a slight variance in temperature. Fiddle all you want, but the computer is saying "do not allow a desired temperature," he says.
The average office worker almost has to be a NASA engineer to get these thermostats working. That's exactly what Scott Packard is. The 39-year-old staff engineer, who works for NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., has used various Illicit techniques to control climate at the different offices he has worked In, including obtaining a rare wrench to remove a thermostat cover. He and other suffering employees have been known to hold a desk lamps or computer monitor up to the sensor to fool thermostats into turning on the AC. For heat, they strap a baggie full of ice water to it. "I haven't tried to work within the system," Mr. Packard concedes.
Trying to reform, he recently begged for a fan for his JPL office, but "comfort items" can't be purchased with government dollars. So he resorted to his old ways. "I got a ladder and went into the drop ceiling and adjusted dampers to get more cold air," he acknowledges. Sometimes the stuff is just busted. Vicki Szaszvari, a building-equipment operator for the city of Phoenix, says all the breakdowns are good news for her. "My 2002 truck is paid for," she says. Her license plate: HVAC MAM.
That sounds cold, but Mrs. Szaszvari is compassionate: She once tipped a waitress with a set of keys that unlocked the restaurant thermostat.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 103
AMO The way you are describing the abilities of the Nest Protect and the Nest thermostat makes me think that the next thing coming from you guys could be a burglar-alarm. You are obviously not going to tell us, but everything seems to be in place for that already.
TF Well, we have a lot of things on the drawing board right now to bring on the market. We are really excited.
PENNIES FROM HEAVEN
AMO You partner with a lot of energy companies to give rewards for efficient energy use through the Nest thermostat. Is it the case that in some US states, energy companies are starting to fine people if they put energy back into the grid? Did you encounter any kind of resistance when you were trying to encourage efficiency?
TF It depends on the type of energy supplier. In the UK, their business works on customer attraction and retention, like a cellphone carrier. You've got to have really great customer service, great pricing, and respond to customers who demand a more efficient, more sustainable energy supply. But if you're in a regulated area, they care about getting maximum profit off their monopoly, so reducing energy usage isn't in their interests. And there is another reaction, which is that they want to keep all the data. All of a sudden now there is a new stream of data, and they think they should own it. They don't know what they're going to do with it; they just think they need it because they hear this term 'big data' and they don't know what it really means. The de-regs love us, especially in the UK, because the rewards scheme is something that helps retain their customer base. Whereas before they sold undifferentiated electrons, now they can help their customers save money and be more conscious of the energy they're using,. So some of the energy companies are: "How fast can we get Nest?" And others, who are interested in the status quo, are more slow to get on board...
1953
Honeywell T87 Round Thermostat
1968	2011
HAL 9000	Nest Learning Thermostat
2014
Honeywell Lyric
2014
Anna (Dutch thermostat)
PAGE 104
FIREPLACE
1983 INGLENOOK ENLARGEMENT PROJECT
Immediately upon moving into a mock Tudor house in the Sussex countryside, the editor's family sets about the expansion and exaltation of its inglenook fireplace.
B9tn6qmo9 ygisrr» .»dtete ¿U smos Original: set-back fireplace, with square fire chamber, modest wooden mantel, clad with pale stone slabs deemed ugly, the whole set back in a nook.
Work begins: a family friend (a former builder), is invited to construct a hefty brick platform, though must strip back years of encrusted plaster work before laying the foundations.
Support: mantel is replaced by brick arch; the outline of the chimney almost entirely obscured by the layer of brickwork. The fire chamber obeys basic Rumfordian principles: the smaller the better, and the sides at 45 degree angles, to draw smoke up into the chimney's throat as fast as possible.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 105
Completion: as if the base of a huge continuous chimney, the new fireplace, styled almost as an altar, with its elevated surface for the placement of logs, pokers, drinks, ashtrays, is complete. Builder celebrates with practical joke using the editor's Star Wars light sabre. For the next 17 years the family will ritually light a fire every winter's night, with children enlisted to bring in dusty wood from the spider-infested garage in an unrealistically heavy basket (a hurricane in 1987 yields enough firewood to last until the 21st century). Three of the four family members suffer incessantly from asthma, watery eyes, and irritated skin due to the poor ventilation of the chimney and the backflow of wood smoke into the living room, mixing with thick incessant cigarette smoke. All remain wilfully oblivious to the irritants, basking, along with two happy felines, in the warm glow of the fire behind them as they face the television each night.
In use: during a New Year's eve party some time in the mid-80s, the enlarged inglenook provides a focal point for festivities...
PAGE 106	FIREPLACE
hearthbreaking by Sébastien marot
SMOKING LIKE A CHIMNEY
After the banishment of smokers from cafés, restaurants, workplaces and public buildings in a growing number of countries, the fast spread of the e-cigarette might be one of the most recent developments in the chronicle of the fireplace's exile from architecture. Perhaps the significant expansion of smoking habits in the 19th and 20th centuries was somewhat related to the modernization of the hearth, the transmutation of the fireplace into the stove and then into the radiator, and the progressive expulsion of smoke from the human habitat. The pipe or the cigarette might well have acted first as an individual extension or portable supplement of the fireplace and then as its substitute or surrogate. Enveloped by the smoke he simultaneously inhales, the smoker emanates around himself an evanescent aura, a cloudy prolongation of his self, a home, literally: an atmosphere. And in the rare joints where people may still share an ashtray, the halo that surrounds them is both the shelter of their company and the embodiment of their conversation. Nowadays, the smoker is either confined in the seclusion of his private abode, or out there, under the stars, where the wind swiftly sweeps away his involute. But at night, the faint pulsating glow of his fag - as that of the putative killer in Rear Window- still betrays his breathing presence.
I don't know if the philosopher Peter Sloterdijk was ever a smoker or if he indulged in burning joss sticks (though his strong bond with India and eastern spirituality would suggest so), but I don't remember having ever read anything on smoke in his work. Sure enough, his "spherology" does address the issue of heat and temperature. But the fireplace does not produce just heat; for some time, smoke was probably an essential ingredient in its ability to build up a human sphere.
Cigarette as substitute for chimney (Relics, 2009, by Slinkachu).
Dying Embers, 2011, Slinkachu.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 107
B , terdijk, Sphères III: Écumes, Maren Sell , peter SW 2005), 159 (author's translation). Éditeurs V
*cf- ' 316-433
.., j5i: "The most visible sign of the icf "e of being at home within the group is a^T rth' this symbol, the older one of humanity, tlieh*clearest indication of the fact that men is ,tie f maye ¡t without an element of comfort."
«Clnterdijk actually gives in a footnote I h'd P 320) an interes,in9 precision as to h he describes those nine aspects of the thropogenic island as dimensions: "We could To say that it has nine strata or layers, if the vnacie ofa strata did not su99est successive ! IS without any point zero; if we prefer the term H'mension, it is because it admits the idea that all these branch out from a common interface or zero oint (an interlacing of here-now-us)." Indeed, the hearth is the oldest symbol of this zero point.
s Ibid., 319
1851 Gottfried Semper, Semper, 1803-1879.
The Four Elements of
Architecture.
6 It should come as no surprise then that Gaston Bachelard, the philosopher who initiated the phenomenology of the dwelling (The Poetics of Space, 1958) did so only after devoting a series of books to unravelling each of these "elements": The Psychoanalysis of Fire (1938), Water and Dreams (1942), Air and Dreams (1942), Earth and Reveries of Repose (1946), and Earth and Reveries of Will {1948).
Gottfried Semper, "The Four Elements of Architecture" (1851), in The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings (Cambridge University Press, 1989), 102-103. In a footnote to the word "mound," Semper describes the dose relation of the fireplace and the well; "At ™st glance the mound or the terrace appears as secondary and as necessary only in the lowlands, where solid dwellings had already been erected; yet the mound joined at once with the hearth and was soon needed to raise it off the ground.
with the building of a pit, it may have also ?erved as support for the earliest roofs. Moreover,
1 ls Probable that man, not as an individual but ffteinly as a social being, arose from the plains ?s tee last mud-creation, so to speak. The legends r°m times immemorial of all nations, which often eonceal an idea of natural philosophy, agree on 'nis point."
THERMOTOPIA
"We are still missing a study that would accomplish for the 20th century what Benjamin's Arcades Project Intended to do for the 19th century; given what we know today about that period, such a study should be entitled the Air Conditioning Project."'
So says Sloterdijk in Foams (2004), the third volume of his spherology, where he describes the "anthropogenic islands''2 - the incubators or hothouses of human societies and cultures - as complex spaces combining nine topoi or dimensions: the chirotope, an environment of tools and gestures; the phonotope, a sphere of sounds and language; the uterotope, a feeling of common maternal ancestry; the thermotope, a matrix of comfort;3 the ero-totope, an arena of sexual desire; the ergotope, an atmosphere of common ambition and organization: work and war; the alethotope, a theater of memories, wisdom and theories; the theotope, a relation to the dead and the hereafter; and the nomotope, a social architecture of mores, ethos, mutual expectations and obligations. Given that Sloterdijk also describes the anthropogenic island as a local greenhouse effect, it is tempting to introduce a hierarchy and genealogy within these dimensions and to identify the thermotope as both the origin and focal point of human life.4 "Our basic thesis," writes Sloterdijk, "is that architecture is but a late replica of spontaneous spatial organizations within the body of the group. If the human fact is conditioned by a greenhouse effect, the primary anthropic hothouses have initially no physical walls and roofs but, so to speak, only walls made of distance and roofs made of solidarity."5
No walls, no roofs - but probably a fire, or something like a focus. Indeed, the French saying that expresses the miserable situation of homelessness is rather explicit: "sans feu ni lieu." No fire, no place. No thermos, no topos.
THE FOUR ELEMENTS OF ARCHITECTURE
Fire, together with its counterpart, water, is always an elemental component and condition of architecture, as are the earthly solid materials buildings are made of, and the air or "space" which they define, channel or shelter. The basic elements of architecture are still, in other words, the four elements identified by pre-Socratic philosophy: fire, water, earth, air.6 In stating this, we follow Gottfried Semper (1803-1879), who explicitly stated, a century before, in his elemental and environmental conception of architecture: "The first sign of human settlement and rest after the hunt, the battle and wandering in the desert is today, as when the first men lost paradise, the setting up of the fireplace and the lighting of the reviving, warming, and food-preparing flame. Around the hearth the first groups assembled; around it the first alliances formed; around it the first rude religious concepts were put into the custom of a cult. Throughout all phases of society the hearth formed that sacred focus around which the whole took order and shape. It is the first and most important, the moral element of architecture. Around it were grouped the three other elements: the roof, the enclosure and the mound, the protecting negations or defenders of the hearth's flame against the three hostile elements of nature. According to how different human societies developed under the varied influences of climate, natural surroundings, social relations, and different racial dispositions, the combinations in which the four elements of architecture were arranged also had to change, with some elements becoming more developed while others receded into the background. At the same time the different technical skills of man became organized according to these elements: ceramics and afterwards metal works around the hearth, water and masonry works around the mound, carpentry
PAGE 108	FIREPLACE
around the roof and its accessories ... and the art of the wall fitter, that is, the weaver of mats and carpets ... around the enclosure."7
Three things must be emphasized in Semper's elementary anatomy of buildings. First, the elements of architecture identified (and their number) are closely related to the classical components of the environment which they either host, control, or resist: the hearth to fire, the roof to water (and sun), the mound (or floor) to earth (and water), and the enclosure to air (or wind). In other words, this fourfold anatomy of architecture is consistent with (and grounded in) an anatomy of the environment.
Second, a fundamental hierarchy is introduced between those four elements. Whereas the hearth, which hosts or accommodates fire, is unambiguously considered the primal and central element (and almost the origin of architecture, as in Vitruvius), the three others are clearly described as "negations," as defenders sheltering the "focus" from the natural pressures, excesses, and intrusions of what we would nowadays call the pedosphere, the hydrosphere, and the atmosphere. While all four environmental conditions are necessary constituents of the human habitat, fire is singled out by Semper as the most distinctive element of the human biosphere, a fragile one, continuously under threat of being blown out, buried, or swallowed by the three others. This is a striking antithesis to the ecological concerns that characterize our contemporary situation where combustion, in the form of the energy used to power our homes, threatens to dry out a significant part of our natural fresh water supplies, exhaust the resources of the earth's crust and overheat the atmosphere.8
Third, Semper elaborates the different combinations and relative importance of these four elements of architecture - as well as the technologies associated with each - according to the natural and cultural environments where humans have lived and built. He showed for instance how masonry, initially rooted in mound construction, progressively colonized the very structure of the enclosure, where mats and carpets were supplanted by solid load bearing walls.
Writing in 1851, after the first decades of the industrial revolution, the very year the Crystal Palace opened in London, Semper couldn't but sense how the technologies deriving from the now visually absent fireplace had undergirded this whole cathedral of glass and iron, while at the same time myriad stove makers, boasting their complex new labor-saving models, dominated the stands of the Great Exhibition.9 Since that time, the significance of fire (and fire technics) has continuously increased in the production of architecture while its place as a visible and celebrated element has been almost eradicated. If every building recipe today still includes the four ingredients (or elements) of the environment, the visible presence of each in our built landscape has become inversely proportional to its actual importance and expenditure. Simultaneous with its repression in buildings, fire has been largely ignored in architectural theory in recent decades (seemingly unaffected by the scientific discovery of thermodynamics). Paraphrasing what Kevin Lynch said of waste - when alluding to its paradoxical absence in the discourse on architecture - it could be said that architectural theory has been blinded by a pornography of fire.10
8 On this, see John McNeill, Something New Under the Sun: An Environmental History of Twentieth Century (Norton, New York, 2000), ' an extremely compelling book which precisely "" proceeds to an elemental study of the damages inflicted upon the lithosphere / pedosphere, the hydrosphere, the atmosphere and the biosphere by human development activities during the last century.
91 want to thank lames Westcott for drawing my attention to this proliferation of stove makers in the 1851 Exhibition.
10 See Kevin Lynch, Wasting Away: An Exploration of Waste, What it is, How it happens, Why we Fear it, How to do it Well (San Francisco: Sierra Club books, 1990): "Waste and loss are the dark side of change, a repressed and emotional subject. There is a pornography of waste, just as there is a pornography of sex and death...The accumulation of solid waste, the increasing pollution of water and air, have become our preoccupations. Nothing disposes easily any more; our old poisons return to us ... It's all a nasty business." (page 1, our emphasis). Similarly, our huge power plants, with their colossal emissions of less visible wastes, have been located 'out of sight, out of mind,' in a gesture of deliberate (but venereal ( and shameful) ignorance.
1935 Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 109
it Maybe a blunt and oversimplifying statement, but it seems that, in general, the eviction of the hearth led many authors of architectural treatises, such as Guadet, to relegate the issue of the hearth to footnotes, even while fighting against this eviction: "La cheminée n'est pas encore morte, et il est nécessaire d'y penser." ("The fireplace is not dead, and it is necessary to give it some thought"; Tullen Guadet, Éléments et théorie defarvhitecture, vol. 2, Librairie de la construction moderne, 3e ed., Paris 1902, 155). See Emmanuelle Gallo, "La Réception des nouveaux modes de chauffage domestique en France au XIXe siècle" (2006), who analyzes this reception among users on the one hand, and among professionals - architects and engineers - on the other hand. Gallo shows that the reaction of architects towards new heating technologies was “rather cold and nervous" (with a few exceptions, such as John Soane in England), and that the famous gap between architects and engineers, which emerged in the course of the 19th century notably deepened around the issue of heating and thermal comfort (49). Guadet's Éléments et Théorie de l'Architecture marked a significant change in the notion of the architectural element after Semper. Guadet distinguishes the basic "elements of architecture," dealt with in the first volume, from the "elements of composition," which are specific to building type (domestic, academic, public, religious, etc.) and are examined in the three subsequent volumes. Significantly, the fireplace does not appear among me basic elements, which are analyzed in the following order: walls, opening In walls (doors *jd windows), porticoes and orders, roofs and Mies, floors and ceilings, vaults, stairs and ramps, Ip secondary elements." Whereas the issues or lighting, heating and cooking pop up here and (pe in the other parts, the issue of the fireplace BV appears toward the end of the section on ,ortl„esi|c architecture, in two chapters devoted to Br complement of habitations," and to "heating and hygiene," where it is coupled with those of Mgr conveyance and waste disposal.
Lewis Mumford, Technics and Civilization,
ioo(,Cour* Brace & Company, 1934) reed. Harvest i»b3, HQ.
1841 Fireplace / stage: Gottfried Semper's first built work, the Hoftheater in Dresden, implies a gigantic and collective extrapolation of the hearth.
LEWIS MUMFORD: FROM THE FIREPLACE TO THE SOCKET
The fact that Vitruvius - the original theorist of Western architectural values - held the mastery of fire as the origin of human society is in itself a clear indication of the intimate conceptual bond between architecture and fire.
But whereas the evolution and metamorphoses of fire technics (the uses, fuels, and control of combustion) had a tremendous and ever-growing influence on architecture in the last two centuries, the corresponding eviction of actual fireplaces from buildings weakened the awareness of this bond, especially among historians and theoreticians of architecture." In the past 80 years however, a few authors, swimming against the current, did some work to try restore that consciousness. Four or five books may be considered as milestones.
In Technics and Civilization (1934), Lewis Mumford tethered the history of architecture to the history of energy production and distribution. As such he is probably the single most important architectural theorist of the 20th century. Mumford's principal work in his groundbreaking book was to assign new names to historical periods based on their predominant construction mentalities, materials, and capabilities. The centuries that preceded the industrial revolution, which he called the eotechnic era, was for Mumford a "water-and-wood complex." Mumford then divided the industrial revolution into a paleotechnic phase - a "coal-and-iron complex" - and a neo-technic phase - an "electricity-and-alloy complex."12 Even though these three phases did overlap and even still coexist within globalization, Mumford's periodization, based on the evolution of major fuels and power distribution techniques, provides a historical framework that allows us to stress the major steps in the progressive displacement of fire from buildings, and the corresponding metamorphoses of architecture.
PAGE 110
FIREPLACE
In the eotechnic phase, houses and buildings are indeed the places of fire, altars of combustion for heating, cooking, and lighting alike. While the mastery of glass - another major fire technic of that phase - gradually allowed them to function as heliotechnical boxes, capturing more light and storing more heat from the outside, they are also Chinese lanterns, sanctuaries hosting discrete burning sources and niches (from fireplaces to candles) which punctuate visually, thermally, and olfactively, their internal space, organization, and atmosphere. From the first decades of the 19th century on, the "paleotechnical" shift to coal and iron encourages the encapsulation of domestic fires within cast-iron stoves, and the progressive relegation of combustion to central heating apparatuses and boilers located away from the living spaces, in underground or concealed rooms. In this technological complex, based on the mining of coal, fire, with its soot and fumes, is ostracized in the basement and, thanks to steam ducts and pipes, gradually divorced from the services it performs: heating, lighting, and cooking. Each of these functions develops its own paths and systems through buildings, which are thereby able to expand in size and height: hence the notice seen in fin de siècle European buildings, "Eau et Gaz à tous les étages" ("water and gas to all floors").
Finally, around the turn of the 20th century, the "neotechnic" advent of electricity completes the process by freeing wired buildings, in principle, from having to host any primary combustion facility at all. Henceforth, every building is potentially a pure consumer of secondary energy rather than a producer, the leaf end of an arborescence of power lines and cables permanently conveying and instantaneously providing voltage wherever needed: the city is indeed a tree, and could become more so if buildings, like real leaves, would capture or synthesize energy and feed it back into the grid. Each neotechnic building is a secondary network of wires plugged into an infrastructural grid fed by coal, gas, nuclear, biomass, and hydroelectric power plants - the huge freestanding fireplaces of our era. Cleared of smoke and fumes, houses, apartments and offices are homogeneous thermostatic spaces providing an array of sockets for lamps, radiators, boilers, fridges, TVs, computers... Buildings function less and less as internal combustion engines, and more and more as switchboards, sockets, and chargers. Basically, neotechnic architecture is about the design of output terminals and charging points.
SIGFRIED GIEDION: FROM THE CAST-IRON STOVE TO THE MECHNICORE
The next landmark study exploring the technical evolution of "machines for living" is Sigfried Giedion's Mechanization Takes Command (1948).13 Here, Giedion analyzed the ways in which machines and mechanization had progressively transformed organic processes (the cultivation of soil, the production of food, and the processes of plant or animal reproduction), but also the human surroundings (comfort and furniture), the household, and bodily hygiene (the bath). In doing so, Giedion called attention to the increasing influence that tools, prostheses, fixtures, and appliances were having on architecture, which emerged as a discipline responsible for little more than the design and furnishing of environmental equipment. A building was no longer a construction attended by servants, but a construction providing services. So
So vast was the program of "anonymous history" that Giedion was opening up that he had to focus on just a few significant examples. Unsurprisingly, the "mechanization of the hearth" is one of them, and it introduces the whole section of the book devoted to the transformation of the household (essentially
1948 Sigfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command.

Giedion, 1888-1968.
Well.
Fireplace.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 111

Giedion, Mechanization Takes ! S 9mand; A Contribution to Anonymous C0'1’ /Oxford University Press, 1948), reed.
Çfe-’" aftS.
«OK
» ^'id. 627
Btevner Banham, The Architecture of the i/jell-tempered Environment (London, The »ehitectural Press, 1969; second and ^^Knted edition in 1984). For a detailed t dy of the background of Banham's book, fcannot but refer the reader to the excellent ntroduction Luc Baboulet gave to its recent ^Hjtion in French: "Paysage avec artefacts" ^Banham, L'Architecture de l'environnement Wk tempéré, HYX 2011. Baboulet insists on several previous authors which Banham barely mentions, even though he was well aware of their works, such as dames Marston Fitch, SfcAronin, Victor Olgyay, Ralph Knowles, B^well Fry and dane Drew. If our focus wasn't here on the metamorphoses of the hearth, hut on the broader issue of architecture, environment and energy, the present overview should necessarily include these major books, especially dames Marston Fitch: American Building: The Forces that Shape It (1948), and ititecture and the Esthetics of Plenty (1961).
Banham, 1922-1988.
1969 Reyner Banham, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment.
focused on the functions of cooking and cleaning).14 Tracking the successive means of "concentrating the heat source" while getting rid of the nuisances of direct combustion, Giedion follows the metamorphoses of the cast-iron stove (Franklin, Rumford, etc.) into the gas range and the electric range up to the fully equipped kitchens of the 1940s, teeming with mobile electrical appliances and designed as the cockpits of domestic life.
Giedion did not explicitly draw out the consequences of these transformations, and of the dis-integration of the fireplace, on architecture, except in the final chapter of this section, entitled "The House and the Mechanical Core."
The mechanicore, "embracing the kitchen, bath, laundry, heating, wiring and plumbing"15 - the modern equivalent of both the well and the chimney - was clearly, in his view, the central issue around which the future of architecture revolved: "Mechanization brought with it difficulties of its own: there was on one hand the wish to use rooms as flexibly as possible and to enjoy the utmost freedom of groundplan; on the other hand, mechanization conflicted with this by seeking the utmost concentration of all installations."16 Though Bucky Fuller had explicitly tackled the problem of the mechanicore, his chimney-like solution "incorporating the core within a mast, which carries the weight of his house" nevertheless left Giedion rather perplexed: "Circular or polygonal houses resulted, whose closed ground plan is in contradiction with the inherent trend of contemporary architecture."17 The future of this trunk of wires and pipes (and the elevator shaft and mechanics), both rooting and holding the building up, seemed quite uncertain: "Whether the mechanical core will be dissected into its components or gathered into a single unit has not yet become clear. And it is not certain whether the mechanical core will find its use in one-family houses or in large apartment buildings, the design of which, in America, is still in the hands of routineers."18 Giedion concluded: "what matters is to domesticate mechanization, rather than to let the mechanical core tyrannize the house."
REYNER BANHAM: FROM THE STRUCTURAL TO THE REGENERATIVE
In 1969, four years before the first oil crisis, Reyner Banham published The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment, the first comprehensive attempt to embrace the issue Giedion had started to analyze 20 years earlier.19 But whereas Giedion had busied himself with some of the major mechanical appliances and fixtures that had invaded humanity's surroundings and indoor habitat, Banham would attempt to portray architecture itself as a matter of "environmental management."
The critical and alternative history of modern architecture presented in Banham's book amounted to a manifesto: whereas architects had always more or less considered architecture as the design of structures, the ordering of forms, and the assemblage of materials, it was in fact fundamentally a matter of environmental and thermal control, the provision of an enclosed set of atmospheric conditions and processes suited to human comfort and activities. For Banham, the design of material structures was only one of the possible ways to achieve that end. Architecture was not just about "forms assembled in light," as Le Corbusier would have it, but also about actually producing and distributing light, heat, and convenient climatic conditions. The architectural cell did not just have an envelope or membrane, but also a nucleus. In other words, architecture was basically a matter of energy, and this called for an in-depth reassessment of its history and present achievements.
PAGE 112
FIREPLACE
Giedion on Buckminster Fuller's Dymaxion House "... incorporating the core within a mast, which carries the weight of his house."
Banham introduced his argument with the parable of a "savage" tribe that arrives at a camp-site well supplied with fallen timber: "Two basic methods of exploiting the environmental potential of that timber exist: either it may be used to construct a wind-break or rain-shed - the structural solution - or it may be used to build a fire - the power-operated solution."20 Stressing that a real tribe would choose one or the other solution purely according to custom rather than a rational estimate of the situation, Banham explained that this was exactly the case of Western nations, where architects typically respond by "enclosing spaces framed by massive structures, because that is what architects have been taught to do, and what society has been taught to expect of architects."21
20	Banham, op. c/’f.,
21	Ibid., 21.
22	Ibid., 23.
For Banham, the architectural profession was addicted to the structural solution for environmental management. He broke this down further into two complementary modes: the Conservative ("the ingrained norm of European culture"), where massive and durable structures absorb, store, and return heat, and the Selective, which "operates to expel unwanted conditions from within and to admit desirable conditions from outside." Traditional construction had always combined those two modes, but complemented both with a third, power-operated solution: "the Regenerative mode of applied energy, whether from the combustion of fuel or the exercise of human and animal muscle power."22 As Banham puts it, indicating the historical relation between the three:
"The proverbial phrase 'Hearth and Home' recognizes this interrelationship. But if these three modes should not be too strictly distinguished in traditional building, there is still a crucial climatic distinction that separates practices that are more conservative from those that are more selective,
» Ibid; 23-24.
Environmental behaviour of a tent.
Environmental conditions around a camp fire.
i. Tent membrane deflects wind and excludes rain
Build or burn: Banham's 2- Reflects most radiation, retaining parable of the choices	internal heat, excluding solar
available to a "savage	heat, maintaining privacy
tribe."
and an equally crucial historical distinction that separates our present period, which has the option of being primarily regenerative, from all previous periods."23 [editor's emphasis]
1.	Zone of radiant heat and light
2.	Downwind trail of warmed air and smoke
A revolution had occurred in 1882 with the domestication of electricity, which boosted the regenerative mode from the status of a "modest hand-maiden" to that of a "serious rival" to the Conservative and Selective modes. Yet almost a century later, architectural theory, history, and practice were still focused on "unaided structure" and continued to treat regenerative issues (heating, cooling, ventilating, distributing light and power) as if they were just "a matter for footnotes and appendices." In fact, Banham argued, architectural design was entirely - though unconsciously - dictated by these regenerative issues.
The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment thus presented itself as a counter-history of architecture, describing the major technical innovations that transformed the metabolism and nervous system of buildings, drastically improving their performance in terms of power-operated environmental control: the gradual elimination of smoke and the open flame; the distribution of heat from steam engine, gas, or electric boilers through pipes and radiators; the breakthrough of air-conditioning systems and "man-made weather" (led by American engineer Willis Carrier); the emergence and evolution of technical floors or suspended ceilings (combined with the curtain wall) for both the even distribution and concealment of ducts, pipes, wires, and cables; the correlate horizontal expansion of Giedion's mechanicore in power mats or grids servicing homogeneous space layers; etc.
In parallel, Banham described a number of buildings that could be considered milestones in that counter history, where architects not only took advantage of these regenerative innovations but integrated them architecturally and expressed them in their design. Frank Lloyd Wright was portrayed as "the first master of the architecture of the well-tempered environment" both for his Larkin building (1906), a masterpiece of ventilation framed by its four chimney-like brick stair towers and duct-boxes at corners, and for his Prairie Houses, where the symbolic staging of the fireplace was completed by an elaborate interplay of heating, lighting and ventilating systems.
PAGE 114
FIREPLACE
As if announcing the imminent triumph of the architecture of the well tempered environment, Banham presented a host of more recent exemplary buildings, among them William Lescaze and George Howe's Philadelphia Savings Fund Society (1932), for its ventilation system and préfiguration of the suspended ceiling; Philip Johnson's Glass House (1949), for its fireplace/ bathroom mechanical core linking the electric heating, floor and roof slabs; and Louis Kahn's Richards Laboratories (1965), for their impressive staging of the service shafts in brick towers surrounding and holding the labs.
In the second edition of the book, in 1984, Banham would naturally celebrate the "breath of intelligence" that its first edition had contributed to a new generation of high tech buildings, such as the Willis, Faber, Dumas offices in Ipswich by Norman Foster (1975), the archigramesque exoplumbing and ductwork of the Pompidou Center in Paris (1977), and, last but not least, the Inmos factory by Richard Rogers (1982) where pipes and air handling machinery had been seized as "a modern opportunity to extend the expressive vocabulary of art."24 In Banham's eyes, all these were instances where "the application of radical intelligence to our problems" had triggered "the displacement of habit by experiment, and of accepted custom by informed innovation," and where regenerative technologies had dissolved "what architecture has been made of to date: customary forms." Hence Banham's ultimate conclusion: "The position of these upstart technologies seems as secure as ever, in spite of the predictions of their disappearance along with fossil fuel, and the art of making fit environments for human activities must now accept their claim to be a permanent part of the craft of architecture."25
INTERMISSION
The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment had all the ingredients of a powerful manifesto, suggesting a whole new way to judge architecture based on the evolution of combustion and regenerative technologies. But it so happens that its publication almost coincided with the first energy crisis in the 1970s, and a sudden spike in concern about the "Limits to Growth" (Club of Rome, 1972) and the environmental externalities linked to the exploitation of fossil fuels. Despite its claim to take a stand against the "tone of panic" which characterized "all such responses to the energy crisis, masquerading as a moral crusade,"26 the second edition of Banham's book registered a certain theoretical unease, and discreetly added a number of buildings that actually resorted to the presumably more ecological "selective" mode of building.27 Obviously, and for all its intelligence, the way Banham had framed the issue of thermodynamics in architecture left something to be desired.
In the wake of the energy crisis, a number of authors attempted to recast the problem. One of them was Lisa Heschong, in her short, dense, and elegant book, Thermal Delight in Architecture (1979): a vivid evocation of the thermal experiences provided by various pre-modern architectures, ranging from the hearth-centered home to the Roman bath, the Japanese house, the Islamic garden, the Finnish sauna, the igloo, the Hindu temple, the veranda, inglenook, gazebo or the outdoor swing.28 She contrasted this bounty of thermal delights with the prevailing modern ambition to achieve what Dames Marston Fitch had called "a thermal 'steady-state' across time and a thermal equilibrium across space."29 Against the "high-energy-consuming mechanical methods of neutralizing the thermal environment" and "the modern emphasis on central heating systems, air conditioning and hermetically sealed buildings which has actually damaged our thermal coping and sensing mechanisms," Heschong pleaded for a passive architecture, based on solar energy, that would revalidate that panoply of thermal qualities. Evoking a couple of solar houses recently built at the time, notably by architect David Wright, she wrote:
"A solar house, geared to both the people who live In It and the cycles of the sun is seen to exemplify the human relationship to the natural world. Such an attitude is quite reminiscent of the ancient's fire worship as a celebration of the death and rebirth of the sun. It suggests a parallel between the symbolism of the hearth and of solar buildings. They both domesticate an elemental force to provide for pragmatic thermal needs. They both bring a primal phenomenon Into the realm of everyday experience."30
24	Ibid., 299
25	Ibid., 312
26	Ibid., 278.
27	Particularly te|linq in this respect is the last example publish in the second edition
a house in Santa Cru? California, by Thacher and Thompson (19821 which Banham praised for the subtle adapt* of its gable and solar oriel window to both M winter and summer -airflows (/bid., 309). Bu, the St. George School Wallasey, Cheshire ' 1961, by Emslie Mcjrqan and the Zome house New Mexico, 1972 by Steve Baer, are other examples, basically selective, which Banham also introduced.
28	Lisa Heschong, Thermal Delight in Architecture (MIT Press, 1979).
29	lames Marston Fitch, American Building:
The Environmental Forces that Shape It (Houghton Mifflin, 1972), 46, quoted in Heschong, op. cit., 20
30	Ibid., 57.
1979 Lisa Heschong, Thermal Delight in Architecture.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 115
¡1 Charles G. Stein, Architecture and Energy (Anchor Press/ Doubleday, Garden City, 1977).
* ibid., 237.
»Wassily Leontieff (1906-1999) is the
economist who developed the use of input-output tables to analyze the flows between different sectors of industry, or between different countries. A strong advocate of the use of quantitative data in economics, and a fierce critic &f economists who were reluctant to "get their hand dirty" by working with empirical facts, he was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1973 for this specific and major contribution to the field. Many methods of accounting the flows of specific data, including energy, are based on his model.
1977 Richard Stein, Architecture and Energy, Conserving Energy through Rational Design.
But for all its eloquence on the many lost thermal delights, the book was rather short on evidence of the way that such varied climatic experiences could actually be recovered by a solar architecture.
Much more ambitious in its attempt to tackle the whole issue of energy in buildings was a book published two years previously by New York architect Richard Stein. Soberly titled Architecture and Energy (1977), it endeavored to portray architecture as a wholly energetic issue.31 Stein evaluated the energy costs of both the maintenance and production of modern buildings (operating as well as embodied energy), and identified the many ways in which these high power expenditures could be reduced, thereby making architecture more efficient, adjusted, and functional: "The lack of self-imposed or socially required constraints and the unwillingness to recognize the imperatives of building with care, precision and economy was defeating and enslaving," Stein wrote. "Conversely, the recognition today of the limitations of building in a finite world can reintroduce the meaning and interconnections that have been abandoned. The skill, mastery, and style can return."32
Based on research into energy accounting (inspired by Wassily Leontieff33) and a thorough analysis of the mechanisms and power games at play in the US building industry, Architecture and Energy performed a grim accounting of the various energy systems and standards that had colonized the scene of architecture and construction: "this cast is wandering around the stage, each largely unaware of the others, moving with a Beckettlike isolation, except for occasional interaction. The dialogue is sparse. The spectators realize how interdependent the performers really are, but there is no way to convey this obvious truth to the characters."34
Stein's book paid due reverence to renewable energies borrowed from the environment, such as solar and wind. But it was essentially a plea for the reduction of energy use that would come from the rescaling of power
Stein, landscapes of energy: "The Croton Dam in Westchester County, New York, is a granite dam that maintains an easy scale relationship with the
ci irrm inHinn terrain "
"The power transmission tower challenges the mesa near Cortez. Colorado."
PAGE 116
FIREPLACE
generation and grids, from embracing "differentiated spaces, contrast, and lowered ambient levels," from individually controlled energy and, most of all, from a recalculation of all the conservative, selective, and regenerative features of buildings. For Stein, the challenges of the environmental crisis required no less than reconnecting with the spirit of the modern movement (as well as with the lessons of vernacular architecture):
"The environmental responsibility of architecture, the aspect that introduces many architects into the whole interconnected examination of the ecosystem and its components, broadens architectural practice. The comfortable avoidance of controversial issues; the concentration on the formal aspects of aesthetics; the absence of communication with the scientific community, the groups concerned with the future of the world, and other broad humanistic philosophers,35 the compartmentalization of the architectural process through which technical matters are taken care of by engineers - all these are no longer tolerable in view of the critical nature of our entire world ecological balance. In a word, there is an urgent need to relearn the way to build buildings that function simply and without a complete surrender to energy-dependent systems."36
LUIS FERNANDEZ-GALIANO:
ON THE THERMODYNAMICS OF ARCHITECTURE
If Banham's name does not even appear in Architecture and Energy, the specter of "the most eloquent defender of West Coast hypertechnological society" is, on the contrary, omnipresent in the background of Luis Fernandez-Galiano's Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy (1991), but as a kind of foe.37 Published three years after Banham's untimely death and shortly after the first report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, this book may be considered a counterpoint to The Architecture of the Weil-Tempered Environment,38 Drawing on physics (Prigogine), economics (Georgescu-Roegen), biology and ecology (von Bertalanffy, Lotka, Odum, Margalef), Fernandez-Galiano intended (like Stein) to consider architecture as basically a matter of energy, and, hence, from the point of view of thermodynamics. Indeed, a building is an exosomatic artifact which "accommodates processes but is also, in itself, a process, and both circumstances call for the presence of energy," including "grey" or "embodied" energy:
"Thus energy Is installed in the heart of architecture in two ways: through the energy consumption of buildings (or more accurately of the building's users) in thermal regulation, water heating, lighting, etc., and through the energy needed to organize, modify, and repair the built domain. In other words: through the energy consumed by the processes that the building houses, and through the energy consumed by the process that the building itself is."39
Stressing this fact, Fernandez-Galiano distinguished three different architectures of energy. The first one, which he associated with the first law of thermodynamics (that of the conservation of energy), and called heliotechnology or helioengineering, is essentially mechanistic and focused on the energy of maintenance. By far the most popular among environmentally concerned architects, it envisions the building as "a domestic factory of energy" combining all sorts of solar collectors, wind generators, and methane digesters, i.e. as a machine. Such energy efficient heliotechnology is a reaction against the thermal inadequacy of modern architecture and its promotion of an international standard where "visual homogeneity went hand in hand with thermal homogeneity." Yet Fernandez-Galiano considers high performance, energy producing buildings as subject to exactly the same critique: "Obsessed as it is with maximizing gains, minimizing losses, and optimizing output, this kind of architecture is a living example of the mechanicist, reductive, unidirectional and monofunctional approach to design."40
34	Ibid., 116. At the other end of the chain, St • I
also inquired into "the aesthetics of energy. In producing facilities," describing how bigger.	1
bigger powerplants, always more remote fromj the end users, with their transmission corridor
and the transportation infrastructures, were S’
jeopardizing the scale and meaning of lanrW
icaPes.
35	Stein's research was actually instigated and encouraged by American biologist and politician 1 Barry Commoner (1917-2012), who was amon911 the founders of the modern environmental ° 1 movement, and ran for the presidency of the United States in 1980. His famous Four Laws of Ecology as exposed in The Closing Circle (19711 - everything is connected to everything else- I everything must go somewhere; nature knows ■ best; and there is no such thing as a free lunch-have their specific relevance in architecture.
2000 Luis Fernandez Galiano (1950—), Galiano, Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy.
37	Luis Fernandez-Galiano, Fire and Memory: ..., On Architecture and Energy, MIT Press 2000.
The work originally appeared in Spanish under the title El fuego y la memoria. Sobre Arquitectura y energia, Alianza Editorial, Madrid 1991.
38	Luis Fernandez-Galiano is explicit in a footnote to the first chapter: "It seems paradoxical to
be quoting Banham in this context, because the conclusions we arrive at here are almost diametrically opposed to those he upholds in that book, so exuberantly charged as it is with technological optimism. Nevertheless, in my opinion, the value of Banham's work lies more in his undeniably innovative point of view than in the actual view he propounds, which after all is conditioned by the great expectations of the 1960s."
FIREPLACE
PAGE 117
*lbld' i'm 42 ¡bid-
Hence, Fernandez-Galiano stressed two additional approaches associated with the second law of thermodynamics (entropy), which he differentiated into an optimistic and a pessimistic version. The first of these "architectures of the second principle" he dubbed bioclimatism, since it is fundamentally organicist, preoccupied with climatic adaptation, materials endowed with symbolic biological connotations, and integration into nature. It considers the building as an organism which, like every living structure, aims at performing its functions with the least input or expenditure of energy: essentially what we call passive architecture, an approach "more concerned with controlling than with maximizing the capture of natural energy, nourished by fluctuating energy flows, self regulated by processes similar to metabolic ones."41
As to the last approach, the one corresponding to the "pessimistic" version of the law of entropy, Fernandez-Galiano dubbed it the architecture of rehabilitation. It views matter, and thus existing or inherited buildings, as captured energy, accumulations of information and memory that should be spared, treasured, attended to and transmitted. This "pessimistic" approach was for him the "only one that fully deserves to be considered 'architecture of the second principle.'" It is indeed "as attentive to the process of entropic degradation of matter as to that which affects energy, dedicated to the recuperation and recycling of both the existing material support and the information it contains, and concerned first and foremost with rehabilitating what is fabricated and used, recuperating what has been learned and forgotten."42 In other words, rehabilitation - the repairing, restoration and reuse of already built structures - was presented as the most serious and responsible way to deal, in the field of architecture, with the problem of energy and the inescapable predicament of entropy. What was most needed was to slow down the course of civilization towards thermal death, by preserving captured energy and the heritage of already informed matter, conceived as a fragile but precious genetic pool of information, culture and memory.
Despite the fact that the three approaches - heliotechnology, bioclimatism, and rehabilitation - were not presented as mutually exclusive, no more than the conservative, the selective and the regenerative had been considered incompatible by Banham, it is clear that by emphasizing rehabilitation (the conservation of material information and memory), Fernandez-Galiano inverted the hierarchy proposed by Banham between his own three modes. Instead of calling for the "displacement of accepted custom by informed innovation," and for the replacement of existing structures by more efficient regenerative systems, the concern for entropy and for
Heliotechnology:
"a living example of the mechanistic...and monofunctional approach to design" (Galiano, op. cit., 105 & 109).
When architecture is designed based on energy priorities, the resulting image is not always organic. Many constructions using solar energy, for example, are displays of extreme mechanician; heliotechnology is a branch of heating and ventilation engineering that yields intricate machines full of tubes, valves, and pumps.
4.2. System of solar heating through collectors (Watson).
PAGE 118
FIREPLACE
a more sustainable environment required first and foremost the careful preservation of the energy (and the capital of information and memory) accumulated in our inheritance of extant buildings. Tradition was not an obstacle to the management of a well tempered environment, but the most precious resource for slowing down its degradation.
THE ELEMENT OF FIRE
A broader overview of the literature would single out several other references, and since the escalation of concerns about climate change and the "peak all" in fossil fuels, studies on the role of energy in buildings and cities have been piling up. But the four or five books I have just leafed through represent major milestones in the evolution of the fire's place in buildings and the theory of architecture.
Clearly, things have dramatically changed since Semper's time. While heating, ventilation and climate control systems have invaded the interior of buildings, and whereas combustion techniques have become everywhere essential in the production of the materials, components and structures of all the other elements of architecture (well beyond the arts of ceramics and metallurgy), fire itself has lost its focus, and almost disappeared as a distinct element. It looks as if its overwhelming expansion and distribution through built structures has gone hand in hand with the elimination of its local and phenomenal presence (flame and smoke) from their core. Semper's elementary anatomy of architecture seems a bit anachronistic today. The hearth no longer stands out as the primary, most important and moral element of architecture, which the three others (the roof, the enclosure and the mound) were charged with protecting from the
threat of wind, rain and mud (or dust). After the modern phase, where the fireplace was progressively erased by the free plan, and where the other three elements projected from the inside out, so as to conquer the surrounding conditions (pilotis, roof terrace, glazed façades, etc.), the logic of Semper's elementary anatomy of architecture now seems completely reversed. With the proliferation of green roofs and facades, the plunging roots of geothermia, the multiplication of solar panels, wind turbines and water-retention systems, it seems as if the six façades (the three peripheral elements) are now displayed as "protecting negations" defending not the hearth's flame against the environment, but the environment itself against the dire effects of global combustion, of which buildings are still, and more than ever, among the major end products. Protecting negations or, in many cases, protecting denials: the weird politeness of predators who apologize for not being able, or not really willing, to change their diet.
2011 Synchronized realities? Explanatory model of a nuclear plant (by Frederic Gaspoz, University of Maryland entry for the Solar Decathlon).
FIREPLACE
PAGE 119
1958 Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques.
Simondon, 1924-1989.
TOWARDS AN ORGANOLOGY OF ARCHITECTURE
The extraordinary situation we are now in, where huge combustion processes and massive power plants have multiplied everywhere (but generally out of sight) in order to supply the insatiable energy demands of an exploding global population and its relentless urbanization, has dramatically changed the conditions of architecture. This situation of a ubiquitous thermotope (a contradictio in adjecto), coupled with the energy/climate predicament, calls for a renewed inquiry into the "mode of existence" of architectural objects.
A serious attempt at that would find a strong impetus in a careful study of the works of French philosopher Gilbert Simondon, which have been, so far, only marginally considered by architects.43 Following a distinction introduced in 1935 by engineer and architect Dacques Lafitte, Simondon divided the domain of technical objects (complementary to the mineral, vegetable and animal kingdoms) into three classes, which he also considered, somehow, as three stages in their evolution.44 The first one was "passive machines," i.e. those which are independent from an external input of energy and, as Lafitte said, "have no other useful properties for men than those which they draw from their fixed position in space, their mass, and the strength of the materials they are made of." Simondon considered buildings and architecture as pertaining to the upper range of this class. Then came "active machines," operated through an input of external energy that they transform, thanks to an elaborate system of elements - the technical equivalents of biological organs- that enables them to transmit the effects of this energy flow (a lamp, an automobile, etc.). And finally came "reflexive machines," i.e. those which, in addition to being "active" (but not always: think of an old mousetrap) are also equipped with organs that allow them to "perceive" variations in their relations with their milieu and to adjust or modify their operation accordingly: all the machines which receive, amplify, transmit and display information.
Of course, buildings and constructions have evolved and cannot be entirely confined within the category of passive machines. One immediately notices that Simondon and Lafitte's categories (passive, active, reflexive) are somewhat close to Banham's conservative, regenerative and selective modes, but in that hierarchical order, with the reflexive/selective (and not the active/regenerative) as the most recent evolutionary step.45 But whatever their active or reflexive components, Simondon still considered most architectural objects as globally passive machines because, in them, adaptation generally prevails over autocorrelation or internal consistency:
"Buildings insert themselves between Man and the geographical milieu by producing a microclimate; on the inside, they are adapted to Man by the shape and disposition of the rooms, the stairs, the contrast between the different places or areas, the possibility of heating and lighting, the absence of rain or wind; on the outside, they are adapted to the milieu, in terms of stability and balance, by their foundations, the way their materials are assembled; they are also adapted to their milieu by their roof cover, whose type depends on climate, so as to resist to wind and rain or snow... Despite this double adaptation Inside and outside, buildings have a certain auto-correlation, because one cannot reconcile any overall structure, visible from the outside, with a given distribution inside; this minimum of autocorrelation results In the fact that the external appearance reveals and sometimes even manifests the building's vocation, the social standing or the profession of its users. But this correlation is not tight enough to forbid reconversions or reuses..."46
In other words, the adaptation of architectural objects is not focused on a highly specific end or function. And their potential soliditas or auto-correlation -which mediates (and compromises) between two sets of conditions - is less complete than that of active or reflexive machines, which, narrowly adjusted to a specific kind of operation, are also more mobile, more autonomous, and detachable from their geographical environment.47 As individuals, architectural objects cannot reach the same kind or degree of	j]mt otb^M
and more specialised machines may attain.
B • ndon's first and most important book in this “ jDu M°de d'existence des objets techniques f '*r Paris: 1958)' was ori9inally written as a (At*1® notary thesis to his doctoral dissertation, ■fjLduation à la lumière des notions de forme ^formation (Millon, Paris: 2005) ec C lacques Lafitte, Réflexions sur la science *rnachines(Vrin, Paris: 1935). Although deS„ndon criticizes several aspects of Lafitte's ossification, and generally prefers the notion of objects to that of machines, he basically (and considerably deepens) Lafitte's ïolutionary analysis in three phases (particularly texts gathered in L'invention dans les cours et conferences (Seuil, Paris:
«simondon's classification also echoes ^Kford's threefold history of technics, and could be seen as both a deepening and explication of its internal logic,
* «L'Invention dans les techniques" (1971) in
Simondon, L'invention dans les techniques: ¡¡ours et conferences, Seuil, Paris 2005, 234,
PAGE 120
FIREPLACE
But again - and this is one of Simondon's central theses - technical "individuals" (and consequently architectural objects) are always made of infra-individual components, or organs - the technical elements - and inserted into broader assemblages or networks - the technical ensembles - which largely define their "associated milieu." This distinction defines the "mode of existence" of technical objects, and allows Simondon to explicate the specific mechanism of their evolution.
Strictly speaking, it is individual machines which men deal with, live with, operate and manipulate: cars, buildings, phones, tools, computers, pianos, televisions, etc. Only these metastable objects are real protagonists on the stage of everyday life, whereas the infra-individual (or shared) elements they are made of and the supra-individual (or collective) contexts they are plugged into (or emerge from), tend to slip "out of sight, out of mind," either because these conditions are embedded or sublimated. And this condition of individual machines is concerning because it occludes their meaning and the processes by which they evolve. Indeed, as Simondon explains, technical objects, unlike humans, animals and biological beings in general, do not directly reproduce. Instead, their evolution is subjected to a cyclical process of relaxation,48 which tends to synchronize the phases of historical development: gradually, the given individual machines of an epoch, by being interconnected and combined, form a technical ensemble which, at a certain moment, produces new infra-individual elements or organs that capture, crystallize or synthesize the specific technology of that ensemble. In turn, these new elements are incorporated in other individual machines, which end up forming a new technical ensemble, etc.
The paradigmatic example that Simondon gives is that of the evolution of power sources: in the 18th century most of the energy used came from running water, wind and animal power. These types of power corresponded to relatively small artisan ensembles located along rivers. But from these ensembles
47	But Simondon, witnessing the progress of préfabrication, questioned the degree of of architecture and its possible evolution: "|r.SlV^ order to assess the extent to which a given '‘iM construction is a more or less perfect "paajB machine," it might be possible to introduce , beyond the criteria of functionality and synéro of its different elements, that of the temporal reversibility of the assembly and disassembly Some contemporary buildings are designed so that they may be enlarged or prolonged withm*’ discontinuity (such as the Dominican convent ' built near L'Arbresle by Le Corbusier); but very rare are the buildings that could be disassemble without destruction; in this respect, the passive^ machine is before all a machine irreversibly .j-3® constituted of elements that stick and adhere to one another; the immovable nature of the building [immeuble] lays first and foremost in the irreversibility of its genesis; if buildings became movable and dismountable, they would have the basic characteristics of active machines, which are open, admit repairs and replacement of ‘ : parts. The major postulate of architecture is the immovability of its products, which implies the irreversibility of the genesis, and therefore also the irreversibility of the degradation in time, the impossibility of total recycling and transfer. Butin this sense, architecture integrates and spreads a cultural barrier (the distinction between real estate and furniture [foncier et mobilier]) that a further technological progress might lead to revoke.
The passive machine, by its very development, ' tends towards the active machine, and the active machine towards the reflexive machine.” (L'Invention et le développement des techniques" (1968-69) in Ibid., 182.
48	See Gilbert Simondon, Du mode d'existence des objets techniques (1958), re-issued by Aubier Paris 2012,81-87.


FIREPLACE
PAGE 121
emerged thermodynamic elements such as the tubular boiler or Stephenson's coulisse, which were engaged in new "individuals" such as the locomotive and the railway engine. Because freight transportation was thus liberated from its previous reliance on waterways or contour lines, larger industrial concentrations, which were not only composed of thermodynamic individuals but were also thermodynamic in their structures, could develop around coal mines and steel factories (while the railway transportation of passengers also favored urban concentration). In the same way, it is within these thermodynamic ensembles that the first electrotechnical elements (copper cables, isolators, etc) started to emerge as easier means of transporting energy from one place to another, giving birth to new individuals such as turbines or alternators.
And these, in turn, were integrated within new ensembles of power production, distribution and use whose structures were very different from that of thermodynamic concentrations. The role played by railways in the thermodynamic ensemble was thus taken over, in the electrotechnic one, by power-lines, which stimulated an industrial decentralization that went hand in hand with the development of the car. "The automobile and the high power-line are parallel technical structures, synchronized, but not identical": indeed, automobile technology, even if it increasingly uses electric power, is still largely thermodynamic in its principle.
Architecture among machines and technical objects: drawings by Gilbert Simondon illustrating his course on L'Invention et le développement des techniques (1968-1969).
At the time he was writing his stunning thesis, almost 60 years ago, Simondon already saw that the fully developed electrotechnic ensemble had produced new elements and schemes that were about to spark a new phase of "relaxation": first, with the acceleration of particles, the possibility of exploiting nuclear energy, and, second, with electrometallurgy and the extraction of pure silicium, the possibility of developing photoelectric systems. In his view, those two very different technologies were also essentially parallel and likely to synchronize (i.e. to mutually encourage their simultaneous and complementary develop-
PAGE 122
FIREPLACE
merits): "Nuclear energy will probably long stay inapplicable, in direct form, to small uses such as those which consume only a few watts; on the contrary photoelectric power may be easily decentralized; it is essentially decentralized in its production, whereas nuclear energy is essentially centralized. The relationship which existed between electric energy and energy drawn from oil combustion still exists, though maybe more accentuated, between nuclear energy and photoelectric energy."49
What is extremely interesting here is not only the background that this condensed history gives to the evolution of the fireplace in architecture over the past centuries, but also the profound insight Simondon provides into the elemental process of architectural evolution itself. Indeed, as Simondon said, "elements have a transductive quality which makes them the true carriers of technicity, as the seeds which transport the properties of the species and produce new individuals. It is therefore in the elements that technicity exists in its purest form ... whereas it emerges, in individuals and ensembles, only as combination."60 Architectural invention and imagination thus presuppose, on the part of architects, an intuitive notion of the technicity involved in the elements, and the ability to incorporate them into new metastable assemblages. Hence the importance of the organology of architecture which is attempted in this volume, and of the correlative study of the technical but partly invisible ensembles of which buildings appear to be the terminals and outcrops. This inquiry into the genesis and metamorphoses of these realities, which both undermine and overmineindividual buildings, is all the more urgent at a time when the environmental predicament exacerbates a hysteria of technolatry and a corresponding delirium of technophobia. Nowadays, too many architectural objects are closed machines which, instead of subsuming their elements and sublimating their associated milieu, seem anxious to attain some kind of fake autonomy, by denying both, thereby ruining their intelligibility, durability and legacy.
Si: Silicium, raw material for photovoltaics (and semi-conductors), crucial in a new "electrotechnic ensemble," according to Simondon.
BURNING LIKE HELL
Buildings are today pulled apart and disintegrated by the antagonistic forces that have deprived them of the physical presence of the fireplace. On the one hand, they are more and more dependent on an expansive infrastructure of power lines, pipes, cables, sewers, and networks, fueled by those more and more remote but bigger and bigger combustion plants of fossil energies. Plugged like bulbs of different sizes and voltages onto this messy grid, they emerge as pure consumers in a landscape configured by the giant equivalents of their classic elements (corridor/highway, floor/runway, etc.). As pure consumers, receivers, or terminals, more and more made of components produced by this regenerative system, they cannot but represent their fragile and dubious condition. Either subdued or monumental, self-conscious or self-contained, they do not look metastable nor resilient. Let's be honest, they don't look good: the newer they are, the sicker they seem. As Robert Smithson once said: these buildings don't fall into ruins like their elders, but raise into ruins.
On the other hand, haunted by some kind of generic bad conscience, these same buildings tend to display and even to project out, at the cost of consistency, all the exterior signs of goodwill and of a no less generic concern for "sustainability," often imposed onto them, from without, by an arsenal of regulations. But for all their display of photovoltaic surfaces, green façades, double glazing, passive ventilation, etc., they rarely achieve the consistency of quasi-worlds whose elements would selectively capture, resist, and express the conditions of their local environment (the Elements), and be intimately
49 Ibid., 86-87.
“/bid, 91.
51 I am borrowing this neologism from philosrjS Graham Harman, who distinguishes two wav°*i of questioning and devaluating the import an 1 consistency of objects. The one undermines ** I disintegrates them into their elements, while th other overmines or dissolves them in the netvÜS of their relations with other objects. See for 0rN instance L'Objet quadruple: une rnétaphysiou i des choses après Heidegger (Puf Paris 201m 14-26.	'	'■ ;
FIREPLACE	PAGE 123
correlated so as to produce balanced thermotopes in which fire itself would regain a more modest, but also much more precious and enjoyable presence. Obviously, fire needs to be redomesticated.
An easy conclusion on a threatening issue. But while windows at night are flickering with blue reflections from television and computer screens, dishearthened smokers are out there, freezing.
The most perfect palindrome ever composed, also referred to as Hell's Verse, is sometimes attributed to Virgilius. It supposedly referred to moths (or stars), but the seven billions which nowadays compose humanity (smokers and non-smokers alike) may find it more and more consonant with their global situation. And it is no coincidence if Guy Debord chose it as the title of his most heartrending film. There it goes:
in girum imus nocte et consumimur igni
we turn around in the night and we are consumed by fire
1990 Fischli & Weiss, Snowman.
percentage
PAGE 124
FIREPLACE
FUNCTIONALLY EXTINCT?
FIREPLACE IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Already by the 1980s, the majority of new-build homes in the US have no fireplace. By 1990 a luxury trend is evident: a growing percentage of homes need two or more fireplaces. In the 2000s, fireplace nostalgia kicks in, and fireplace uptake grows by 10 percent, followed by a small decline since 2010, possibly due to the financial crisis and concerns over global and personal health: the unnecessary emission of greenhouse gases, and the discretionary stimulation of domestic allergies to wood smoke...
Number of Fireplaces, New Single Family Homes, USA, 2010

lllfllll
MlMil
mmu
illllilli
year
...since 1991, the fireplace is on the rise
FIREPLACE
PAGE 125

"If the information In this manual is not followed exactly, an electrical shock or fire may result."
Pacific Energy: modernizing Franklin's innovation, an electric insert for real fireplaces.
2011 Fireplace by Empire Comfort Systems, jutting out from the wall for maximum visibility, including imitation logs.
"In the last couple of years houses have gotten smaller and the price points have become more competitive. Its one of the profit centers - like how the wife pays attention to granite counter tops in the kitchen, they just expect that fireplaces are expensive.
As houses have become smaller, the fireplace has become an option instead of a norm. I feel that as the market recovers, the fireplace usage rate will stabilize if not grow. It can be, and it should be, the focal point of the home. It's where your Christmas tree is next to; it's where you open presents; it's where you have your coffee. I'm pretty confident that moving forward the fireplace will regain ground. You may not have four fireplaces in each house, like in some McMansions. It may only have one or two. Basically the builder buys the fireplace for $500, sells it for like $5,000, then adds $7,000 worth of value to the home. I think because of that added value they will keep the market there moving forward."
— Nick Bauer, CEO of Empire Comfort Systems, interviewed by the editors.
PAGE 126
FIREPLACE
REJECTION: BODILY AND GLOBAL HEALTH
Those attempting to resurrect their fireplace are faced with the health risks (and the stigma of visibly contributing to climate change). The Environmental Protection Agency, in a 2013 report titled "Health Effects of Breathing Woodsmoke," lists "irritation of the airways, coughing ... aggravated asthma ... bronchitis ... irregular heartbeat" as effects of prolonged exposure to fine particle pollution exposure in the home.
Spare the Air in the San Francisco Bay Area
The 2013/2014 Winter Spare the Air season runs from November 1 through February 28.
Each day by early afternoon, the Air District will issue an a tj.-^cjSy for the next day. If air quality is forecast to be unhealt' ±, a Winter Spare the Air Alert will be called. The alert will be in effect the entire next day, for a full 24 hours.
National 74-Hmir PM?.5 I 1
When a Winter Spare the Air Alert is in effect, it is illegal to bum wood, manufactured fire logs, pellets, or any other solid fuels in your fireplace, woodstove, or outdoor fire pit.
During the winter season, wood smoke is the largest source of harmful Pâi~. ojiê:e pci tien. On this website, residents can find information about the	*>; •? wood veke, as we|i as detailed information about
the y. cod Burning and how to compiv with it. Here are answers to some	about the Winter Spare the Air
program.
You can also file a
online.
2008 Wood smoke fires are banned in the Bay Area on "Spare the Air" days, when climatic conditions make lingering pollution more likely. Fireplace users can check on an app if they can light up on any given day. In 2011, 2,316 smoke complaints are filed and 178 citations issued for
violation of the ban. "I resent it when I don't have the choice whether to light a fire on Christmas," said Bruce Griffing, a longtime Livermore resident. "It's another example of nanny-government telling people what to do." ("Has The Wood Burning Ban Actually Worked?" Contra Costa Times, January 4, 2013.)
Winsome Brown and Claude Arpels use a wood stove at their country house. By CHRISTINA S. N. LEWIS Published: January 19, 2011
“The smoke from a fire smells very nice,” said Diane Bailey, a senior scientist with the Natural Resources Defensfta|| Council in San Francisco. “But it can cause a lot of harm.” The tiny particles, she said, “can cause inflammation and illness, and can cross into the bloodstream, triggering heart attacks” as well as worsening other conditions.
Tony Cenicola/The New York Times Wickham Boyle and her husband Zachary Minor use a soapstone stove.
Enlarge This Image
WINSOME BROWN, an actress and writer, and her husband, Claude Arpels, own an enviable apartment in TriBeCa worthy of a spread in an interior design magazine. The apartment — which is, in fact, being considered for an issue of Elle Décor — has maple floors, casement windows and all the character one would expect to find in a building that was once a factory.
But one of the features that many people in the city would pay a premium for is something the owners don’t like: the fireplace.
“A wood-burning fire in the city is a	^
ridiculous luxury — we would never have put it in jjfe ourselves,” said Mr. Arpels, grandson of one of thi Read More founders of Van Cleef & Arpels and the former managing"-partner of Netto Collection, a baby furniture company bought by Maclaren. “In the city, it doesn’t make sense to burn fires, because it’s inefficient and it’s polluting.”
Hard as it may be to believe, the fireplace — long ": considered a trophy, particularly in a city like New York-is acquiring a social stigma. Among those who aspire to be environmentally responsible, it is joining the ranks of bottled water and big houses.
Enlarge This Image
2011 "Every time [Sue Duncan, a 52-year-old landscaper In Austin, Texas] builds a fire, it causes 'inner conflict,' she said. 'It's a guilty pleasure.'" "The Love Affair With the Fireplace Cools,"
New York Times, January 19, 2011.
Build or burn: "I've been told if you plan to heat your house with a fireplace, you need a stack of wood equivalent to the size of your house. Which is just a way to say it's ridiculous." )Ashley Eldridge, director of education for the Chimney Safety Institute of America, New York Times, January 11, 2008.)
FIREPLACE
PAGE 127
MerisHealth News
. N FITNESS SEX	HEALTH	NUTRITION	WEIGHT LOSS	THE BEST L
Run off Your Cancer Risk
1 of 7
Can Your Diet Derail Your Relationship?
2 of 7
The B Happi
man-sniffing-barbecue
by Andrew Daniels January 26. 2012 0S:31 am EDT
...western males increasingly attempt to seize control of the flame... in the semi-exiled form of the backyard barbecue...
THE macho barbecue
n inversion of ancient gender roles, the woman is no longer the keeper °t the domestic fireplace (c.f. Hestla): western males Increasingly attempt to control of the flame - from the stifling domestic forces of technology, pnnrfort, and convenience - in the semi-exiled form of the backyard atbecue. No text is offered by Men's Health Magazine in explanation inis urge, except the heading, "man-sniffing-barbecue."
FIREPLACE
EVOCATION: CREATING A FAUX FIREPLACE
eHow, the arts and crafts website, offers a guide to the fabrication not of real fireplaces (as seen in 1970s magazines) but of faux fireplaces - skipping the period when the "fireplace" is actually used...
How to Create a Faux Fireplace
By Mickey Ronacher, eHow Contributor
Fireplaces create a main focal point in a room.They are pleasing to the eye with their warm glow and dramatic architecture. If a fireplace is not present, one can easily create a faux fireplace to achieve the same pleasing and aesthetic affects. Another benefit of having a faux fireplace is that it is easier to maintain than a real fireplace, because there is no chimney that has to be kept clean* Creating a faux fireplace will help to transform a room into a cozier and more inviting space. Does this Spark an idea?
Other People Are Reading
nHow to Build a Faux Fireplace on a Blank Wall
How to Build a Faux Fireplace Out of Wood
*55
Büke €3? Sand
* Tweet
0
R *'
t A
Instructions
J Measure the available wall space to decide where to place the new faux fireplace. Write down the measurements on a sheet of paper. Use the pencil to draw markings on the wall's area that will be designated for the faux fireplace.
Things You'll Need
CU Measuring Tape C~1 Precut fiber board □ Tiles
2
Show (7) More
Find a mantel that fits the recorded measurements. An old vintage mantel
can be found at a salvage yard or a new and stylish fireplace mantel may be purchased at a home improvement store.
J Place a piece of precut fiber board on the floor where the faux fireplace will be set. This board will become the new faux fireplace's hearth.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 129
BLypRSlON: HOW TO DESTROY YOUR FIREPLACE
CO • | fate of the unused fireplace: gutting its platform, niche,
P„ „ pnlarging the floor, replacement with flat screen TV.
;d tlUe'
TyP"
am
Designer fires: instead fa piece of architecture, "efireplace becomes an - "3-clean, often table-top
Portable Gel Fireplace.	Tabletop Fireplace	Planila by Serge Atallah.
by Gido Wahrmann	________
for Carl Mertens.
PAGE 130
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE
PAGE 131
exile of the flame: At Le Corbusier's Raison La Roche, Paris, the original Replace (1925) - still present in a house otherwise heated by radiators .has been gutted. A fire extinguisher nestles in an adjacent niche, poised to tackle any attempted return of the flame...
"...the fire, the hearth, that is to say something ancestral, that eternal thing which is the very key to everything..."
ca. late 1940s Le Corbusier describes the kitchens of Unite d'habitation, Marseilles; the apartments do not have fireplaces. (F. Pottecher, 'Que le Fauve soit libre dans sa cage', L'Architecture d'Aujourd'Hui, 252 (1987), p. 62.)
\
\
PAGE 132
FIREPLACE
return to the radiant: kiel moe on the myths of convective healing
Launched by Benjamin Franklin and the smoke doctors' investigations of the fireplace, and later enshrined by Willis Carrier's air conditioning systems, convection in the form of forced air has been the dominant principle for heating and cooling western buildings for nearly 100 years -despite its manifest inefficiency compared with radiant heating. Kiel Moe, professor of architecture at Harvard Graduate School of Design, asks: Why would we want to heat and cool buildings with air?
Will Lambeth How did you become interested in the architectural technology of heating and cooling?
Kiel Moe From a thermodynamic and physiological perspective, air is peculiar medium for heat transfer. There are other paradigms for thinking about human occupation with very different assumptions and parameters. The heating and cooling apparatus, especially as it evolved in North America in the twentieth century, ultimately served to fragment not only buildings but architectural practices as well. Part of my research focuses on many of the most routine - and unquestioned - assumptions about contemporary buildings. The predominance of air is one example. Its co-determinant is insulation. Architects consented, without much reflection, to fundamentally transform how buildings are designed, how they are built and how they persist, or not, as thermodynamic systems. I am deeply motivated to discern far less acquiescent alternatives that amplify the architectural thermodynamic power of buildings.
WL So you're advocating a practice of architecture that is more cohesive in terms of its disciplinary relationship with heating and cooling?
KM My point of view is that modern architecture has never really had a coherent agenda for energy that amplified the ambitions of architects. It has always applied received engineering and building products from outside concerns.
If you're thinking specifically about buildings and matter and energy, you will come to very different conclusions as an architect than you would as an engineer or an insulation salesman. We have radically different obligations and opportunities. This requires a more convergent architect who can swerve form, matter, and energy towards robust architectural and ecological outcomes.
WL In The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment, Reyner Banham describes the dilemma of choosing endosomatic or exosomatic* energy, conservation vs. construction. In architectural discourse of the last 2,000 years, the optical practice of architecture has dominated the haptic. Is there an opportunity for reconciliation between the two?
KM Yes I think there is an opportunity for architects today. A fundamental part of architecture's agenda could be to design both exosomatic and endosomatic compositions of a building. Very different outcomes in building and practices emerge out of that. It's critical to have some kind of recursive process between the endosomatic and the exosomatic.
"How did a thermodynamically and physioloq irrational medium of heat transfer - air - becom""’ the dominant method of heating and cooling
buildings?" Kiel Moe, Thermally Active Surfaces'
Architecture, (Princeton Architectural Press, 2010)1
Hydronic efficiency: water is 832 times denser than air. "Air is a poor medium for transferring heat energy and it unnecessarily absorbs a disproportionate amount of a building's budget and energy use."
Precursor of HVAC: Benjamin Franklin's Pennsylvania Fireplace, 1742. "With increasingly convoluted channels of combustion exhaust air contained inside a box, [convective fireplaces] were the prototypical logic for later centralized heating systems. Their miniaturized system of thermal source and ducted distribution systems in many ways prepared the logic of later HVAC systems." (Moe, Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture.)
* Endosomatic: Energy
used inside the body Exosomatic: Energy
used under human control outside the body. In Moe's manifesto, the two systems will be combined.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 133
What might an exosomatic design look like? And an endosomatic?
^ different techniques and features do they mobilize?
Wj yn|j|<e Banham, architects could explore both the endosomatic possibilities ■ r physiology as well as the endosomatic reality of our buildings. These ° nively unconsidered domains are absolutely sublime in their latent capacity. re eXCjted to say that I have few prefigured ideas about what an endosomatic/ Klnmatic design would like, only what its necessarily recursive design process t |00k like. I also know very well the thermodynamic indicators that would jr? guide that process. But as for the resulting object and its attachments, this •^perhaps the most tantalizing and wide open horizon of design inquiry today.
\^l The fireplace has undergone a radical transformation in the history of rchitecture. At first it began as a radiant core, forming the social locus both on *he scale of the house and the scale of the city. It was a place to oinmunicate, keep warm, and to cook. The fireplace was both utilitarian and highly symbolic. Fast forward to the 18th century, the flame is concealed by the stove, the stove is exiled to the basement, and the iron pipe i$ the new heating apparatus of choice. Quite quickly the fireplace became invisible in order to sustain a thermally homogenous, increasingly sanitary interior environment. The radiant core is now a convective system delegated to the "impure" zones of the plan. In your book Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture, you discuss the evolution of convective heating and cooling. Can you talk about this evolution and who you think the critical players or moments were?
KM Certainly for me the central agent Is Willis Carrier. His foremost interest was ¡n conditioning air, not human bodies. He mechanized heat transfer and our expectations for comfort, and decoupled thermal modulation from architecture. From that point all the architectural potential of heat is pretty much evacuated from the practice of architecture. If the mass of the building - the great weight of a building - is no longer accounted for in climate control - its equations, and systems - then all that matters is air, which is only marginally interesting from an architectural point of view. Carrier shifted heat transfer to a convective practice from a predominantly a radiant practice - a huge transformation. I think that's a really big singularity. I am deeply interested in the non-modern thermodynamic disposition of architecture that you refer to in your question. Indeed, the canon of architecture is replete with examples of buildings whose utility, symbolic program and social habitus are totally convergent, inextricable, as any nonmodem thermodynamic history of architecture would reveal. I am not interested in these precedents as some sort of recidivistic exercise but rather to articulate for myself the architectural terms by which extremely rich and varied thermodynamic architectures emerged, outside of the reductive, divergent terms of modern building science and formal sensibilities. The Chinese Kang, Korean Ondol, Roman Bath, the Igloo, etc., are all profound thermodynamic architectures in endosomatic and exosomatic ways. We need a way to see around our own, self-selected corners that we adopted, unreflexively, in modernity.
WL What kind of political - lobbying - power does the forced air industry have, and is it changing today? And is convection primarily an American Preference, when it comes to heating and cooling?
KM I am more familiar with the historical emergence of the air-conditioning aPparatus. It is easy to characterize it as a sinister endeavor but any apparatus, °f course, emerges through a huge network of very willing and generally well-tended individuals. I think the effect of the apparatus is rather sinister when y°u at rhe total mangle of practices. As a result, yes, convection has considerable technological momentum, even if it is has negligible 'hermodynamic impact.
1947 Road not taken: coiled pipes prepared for radiant heating slabs, Levittown. Their failure, due to poor materials and poor installation, "contributed significantly to the demise of postwar interest in thermally active surfaces ... As building industry confidence in radiant systems sank, air-based conditioning continued to acquire more momentum and better marketing compared with hydronic systems."
PAGE 134
FIREPLACE
WL It's ironic that with this transformation architects were proclaiming a new flexibility. Now we're in a situation where the exact "flexibility" has cost us agency and led to mechanical systems becoming drivers of building production, especially in terms of cost.
KM I'm very interested in how we lose or gain agency as architects through our history of practices. By unreflectively adopting both the rhetoric and implements of technological escalation, architects have again and again ceded agency to non-architectural interests. This tawdry stairmaster of technological escalation is routinely seen as the sponsor of "new" architectures in naive, early modern ideologies of progress. I think young architects engaged in questions of technology have a sense that we must design these practices, rather than just capitulate and receive imposed agendas. It is a totally different, much less cynical paradigm for practice.
WL What has struck me the most about the fireplace is its persistence in architecture. Despite its apparent redundancy in providing heat or cooking these days, the fireplace persists. Over 50 percent of new singlefamily homes constructed in the US includes a fireplace. Each fireplace is manufactured like an appliance but somehow the builder adds 1,000 percent value; in other words, he may buy the fireplace for $500 but adds $5,000 value to the house. Why do you think this is? Is it simply nostalgia or is there a physiological explanation?
KM I think for a new suburban house in Florida there is no energy or physiological argument to be made. It is purely nostalgia, or some association of "home." I think something like a fireplace only matters if the rest of the architecture goes along with it. If it is just an element or "feature" of the design, it is trivial from an architectural and thermodynamic perspective. But it is nonetheless a powerful human thing. Have you read Wrangham's Cooking with Fire? It's about the role fire has in the course of human development over the last million years. One hundred years of air conditioning and bad fireplaces is a really insignificant part of that history. There's an extremely deep physiological, biological response to fire in buildings that is extremely non-trivial.
And I think it goes beyond the kind of nostalgia or these ideas of home.
It's extremely biological and fundamental to the co-evolution of bodies and buildings in the last thousands of years.

...how did a thermodynamically and physiologically irrational medium of heat transfer - air-become the dominant method of heating and cooling buildings...
WL Your research focuses on both buildings as discrete thermal entities but also as large scale energy systems. What is the difference between the two? Does the architect have influence over both scales?
KM Absolutely. Architects routinely specify not only the endosomatic of a building but, far more unwittingly, the exosomatics of its very becoming. Modern architects have been explicitly trained to externalize the exosomatic reality of their practices and buildings. This is but a modern aberration in the history of architecture. The early treatises on architecture, if just turned slightly
The force of forced air: at a generic 1970s Motel 6, the ubiquitous American heating system, distant descendent of Benjamin Franklin's convective fireplace, nestles under the window. Because of the fluidity of air and the ease of the fan-operated system, room temperature is easy to manipulate, enabling instant gratification, but extremely difficult to maintain. Give another blast of hot air. Radiant systems on the other hand are slow and powerful; like an oil tanker, they cannot be easily reversed...
FIREPLACE
PAGE 135
Forced warm air:
Too local, too hot, too fast
off their normative art-historical axis, are manuals for a more complete thermodynamic architecture that includes all scales of the energy hierarchy of a building. The only way to achieve the latent thermodynamic of buildings and urbanization is to recursively consider, and design, all the simultaneous spatial and temporal scales of any thermodynamic entity. I think closing that metabolic rift and internalizing its modern externalities in architecture is an important task today.
WL What does a building with thermally active surfaces feel like, compared with one dependent on convection? In other words, can you describe the difference from a user's as well as an architect's point of view? In my limited experience with radiant heating surfaces, like a heated kitchen floor, it's incredibly powerful but also incredibly hard to control.
KM First, architects should check their mania for control. Generations of architects were trained through "Environmental Control Systems." This nomenclature itself set up an unbelievably false posture regarding thermodynamics.
If you wish to engage thermodynamics in architecture, a totally different posture and political economy is necessary. Think of Kwinter's article on "Politics and Pastoralism." Rather than control, the task is one of modulation of mass, velocity, and accumulation through design. That is already a radically different aesthetic position. But, yes, if you begin to sensitize yourself to radiant transfer and the effects of thermal symmetry and asymmetries, a whole formal universe is available.
WL One reason convection took command might be that it is instantly responsive and instantly gratifying? The problem is that the change it brings on is hard to maintain. Do you think we can change our expectations and behaviors towards heating and cooling?
KM Air conditioning conditioned far more than air. Foremost, it conditioned expectations for a certain idea of comfort, an idea, to be sure, that is not universal or even physiologically desirable. Modern architecture no doubt created a new human subject. Unfortunately, in the construal of that subject much thermodynamic vitality and delight gets sacrificed. If it is instant responses you seek, buy a hat or sweater, or take your clothes off. Do expectations and behaviours change regarding thermal milieux? Constantly. Expectations and codes for "human comfort" are constantly negotiated, socially constructed entities.
As Michelle Addington has documented, the requirements for ventilation has shifted pretty continuously over the past hundred years, totally in sync with various economic, ecological, and health factors. Architects are trained to accept these realities rather than design more astute or powerful realities. I can never quite discern why we are so acquiescent in this regard.
PAGE 136
FIREPLACE
WL What kind of technology is necessary to make a building into a radiator, basically? Is it already available, and cheap?
KM All buildings have thermally active surfaces. All spaces are responsive environments. Architects and engineers just assume the mass of a building to be neutral. So, first, the full, but latent thermodynamic reality of the most rudimentary material sitting in the sun next to a body needs to be grasped. From there, a thermally active surface might get more intricate as a technological apparatus. But the most compelling examples of thermally active surface architectures are surprisingly monolithic in their endosomatic and exosomatic design. Gilles Perraudin is perhaps one the best examples.
WL If surfaces become thermally active, It's plausible that we could do away with the drop ceiling eventually, liberating a lot of space within architecture. What other repercussions do you see for the elements of architecture, like the window, the roof etc.?
KM I worked on a competition for a pair of office buildings in Denver.
The massing was pre-determined by various zoning, historic, and masterplan criteria. Our proposal was selected because it had 5 stories in the same envelope as the other architects' 4 story, air-conditioned proposals. The thermally active surface approach in this case added an extra floor of leasable square footage. It was a Trojan Horse strategy for getting a more comfortable, more powerful, and more durable scheme to prevail in a market-driven context. But some more space here or there is but the tip of a far more powerful, convergent paradigm for a thermodynamic architecture.
WL How has the diversification of energy resources affected architectural production? Is there more or less room today for reinventing the relationship between architecture and energy?
KM It's a slightly tricky question because there is only one form of energy that we tap into. We get 99.97 percent of our inputs from the sun. All those processes - wind, biomass - are solar energy. Once architects fundamentally understand that and understand that's the start of the energy hierarchy, then they'll make radically different choices about systems or buildings.
Relative systems space required for convective HVAC system (left) and radiant system (right): "By obviating the need for drop ceilings and increasingly complex, multilayered wall assemblies, thermally active surfaces collapse the physical and organizational layers of contemporary construction systems and structure into one robust and integrated layer of architecture."
Thermally active surfaces: Radiant building
FIREPLACE
PAGE 137
Steel-framed, air-conditioned.
Space sav in a compi for an offic building in US, Moe £ his team w extra floor within aim the same building hi by using n surfaces r; than HVAC systems, v require hu service sp the ceiling
WL How do you think architectural education should shift to embrace some of these ideas?
KM I don't think most schools of architecture have any interest in shifting from a modern paradigm for energy in architecture. Faculties generally thrive on the separation of design from construction, the separation of construction and energy courses. The administrative, tenure dossier-driven idea of specialization in architecture is pretty absurd once you look at it as a generalist endeavor. The generalist expertise of architecture simply strains against the phantom culture of expertise that emerged both in the profession and in the academy of architecture during the twentieth century. If you want tenure, you strategically tend to deny the generalist expertise of the architect in favor of a more specific or autonomous agenda. But if you remove those curricular/administrative assumptions and are intellectually supple enough to incorporate, and design, architecture's basic contingencies rather than dossiers alone, I think a lot of things would significantly change in both the academy and practice. If not, as William Gibson noted in the 1990s, architecture will go the way of symphony orchestras, which are interesting, but not protagonists or culture in a major way.
Pre-cast concrete, thermally active surface.
PAGE 138
FIREPLACE
DEADLY PERSISTENCE OF THE FIREPLACE:
45 PERCENT OF THE WORLD STILL COOKS WITH SOLID FUEL
One and a half million years after the first deliberate use, fire is still not entirely under control. Despite the apparent domination of electric and gas stoves for cooking, and of boilers, radiators, and HVAC systems for heating, about 3 billion people - 45 percent of the world's population - still rely on solid fuel and unventilated stoves for household cooking.* While the fireplace may be more or less functionally obsolete in the West, in the developing world the cookstove still plays a critical role in the survival of the family and the home. At the same time, cooking with wood, coal, and biomass caused 4.3 million deaths in 2012 through household air pollution. According to a 2010 report by the International Energy Agency, by 2030, over 1.5 million will die every year due to toxic smoke and indoor fires, more than the premature deaths estimated for malaria, tuberculosis, or HIV / AIDS. A sentimental symbol in the West, the fireplace is deadly elsewhere: 99 percent of the fatalities from indoor pollution occur in developing countries in generally warm climates.
An almost perfect overlap between solid fuel usage, deaths from Indoor air pollution, and the warmer parts of the global south.
Solid fuel cooking as percentage of population, 2000
...a sentimental symbol in the West, the fireplace is deadly elsewhere: 99 percent of the fatalities from indoor pollution occur in developing countries in generally warm climates...
Source: World Health Organization.
Deaths from indoor air pollution, 2000
FIREPLACE
PAGE 139
Cooking Roti over an open flame, with no ventilation except through the walls, Nepal.
Chimney-free, Guatemala.
2011 Central fireplace keeps burning in chlmney-less dwelling, Sappo, Vietnam.
PAGE 140
FIREPLACE
FEEDING THE FLAMES: ADDIS ABABA
Fireplaces, where they are still used on a daily basis, are insatiable - the only architectural element that requires constant refuelling. In Addis Ababa, large sections of the population today are almost enslaved by the fireplace; and the city itself was planned in its service. For centuries, the capitals of Ethiopia are, for the most part, not permanent physical entities but the transient camps of a nomadic Emperor and his retinue and army. When firewood in the area surrounding the camp runs out, as it inevitably does, they must decamp to a new location: the demands of fireplaces have, in essence, the power to move an entire city. In the late 19th century, the mountain capital of Entoto was abandoned due to the exhaustion of wood supplies for building and burning. When Emperor Menelik II moved down the mountain to set up court in Addis Ababa in 1891, and built the city around it, the same pattern of consumption started over again. In 1901 the English traveller Herbert Vivian recorded that "there was scarcely a tree to be seen ... every shrub that could possibly be used for firing has been cleared ... Such is the scarcity of fuel about here that the peasants are in the habit of collecting cow's dung."' The shortage of firewood was so drastic, writes Richard Pankhurst, that Menelik II is almost forced to abandon Addis Ababa. But with the population rising (from 50,000 in 1900 to 70,000 in 1910), Menelik II decides, in 1904 to start importing a renewable fuel resource: first turpentine, then eucalyptus trees (a paradigm shift that belies Banham's allegory of fire and cultural planning). Treeless in 1901, a decade later the city could be re-named "Town of Eucalyptus Trees," so thick was the coverage.
By 1981 though, demand for firewood exceeds supply by 75 percent.2 Governmental agencies and enterprises supply 20 percent of the city's requirement, while the bulk of the remainder is supplied by female firewood carriers.
1.	Vivian, H., Abyssinia, 1901, in "Menelik and the Foundation of Addis Ababa," Richard Pankhurst, Journal
of African History, II, I (1961), 103-117.
2.	Haile, F., "Women Fuelwood Carriers," 1989.
In 2006, a woman named Amaretch reports to the BBC: "Today, I spent from 03:00 to 15 oo collecting the branches of eucalyptus trees wh' people use as firewood. I will sell this big bundle < at the market for about $2. This will feed my fa for a couple of days."	'
"Driving out of Addis Ababa [I pass an] endless line of women and girls ... marching ... into the city" with firewood (William Easterly, The White Man's Burden, Oxford University Press, 2006).
Forest extent in 2013 (black) based on Google satellite images. Forest extent in 1957 (light grey) and 1964 (dark grey), and base drawing from Ronald 1 Florvath, Von Thunen's "Isolated State and the Area around Addis Ababa, Ethiopia," Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Vol. 59, No. 2 Pune, 1969).
In red: routes taken by women of Addis Ababa to find firewood to sell in the city.
EXTENT OF EUCALYPTUS FOREST
H2013 1964 1957
FIREPLACE
PAGE 141
Fuel wood carriers


1830 Europe experiences its deforestation and fuel crises hundreds of years earlier, also triggered by the use of solid-fuel fireplaces. (Image from Germany, Woman apprehended for collecting wood, from Archiv Gerstenberg.)
Fireplace obstacle course: collecting wood in forests that are now protected, women are often extorted by forest rangers and peasants. Hyenas along the road are also a threat.
PAGE 142
FIREPLACE
ENERGY POVERTY AND THE CLEAN COOKSTOVE
The fireplace / stove is a prime target in the UN's fight against global poverty, in which energy poverty plays a decisive role. The UN aims to achieve universal energy access by 2030, meaning that the 1.4 billion people without electricity and the 3 billion cooking with solid fuel will have access to electric alternatives. Unventilated stoves based on solid fuel and open fires will be obsolete. The exile of the flame that happened in the West in the 19th century must be completed around the world in order to eradicate disease and poverty. Led by the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves, there is a new wave of stove design, reminiscent of the explosion in the US in the 19th century, but now in portable, low-cost forms...
21st century clean cookstoves
methanol
ethanol
GLOBAL ALUANCo FOR CLEAN COOKSTOVES
electricity
biomass or briquette
raw or
processed
biomass:
wood
charcoal
crop
dung
raw or
processed
biomass:
wood
charcoal
crop
dung
alcohol stove	electric stove	briquette stove rocket stove	biomass gasifier stove
gelfuel stoves less	efficiency	up to 37% up to 50%	
efficient than	dependent on	efficiency efficiency	37-63% efficiency
liquid fuel	electricity source		
Alcohol cookstoves are	Limited to areas	Insulated, L-shaped	Gasifier stoves force
pressurized or non-	that have access	combustion chamber	the gases and smoke
pressurlzed and can	to electricity.	allows partial	from incomplete
burn ethanol in liquid or		combustion of gases	combustion back into
In gelled or waxy forms.		and smoke inside the	the flame, for a second
Ethanol and methanol		stove. Flow of hot	round of combustion,
burn very cleanly,		gases are channeled	resulting in very low
reducing indoor air		closer to the pot or	emissions.
pollution compared to		griddle. Some rocket	
wood, charcoal and		stoves reduce	
kerosene stoves.		emissions by 40-70	
Alcohol stoves tend to		percent or more for	
produce significantly		carbon monoxide, and	
iess carbon monoxide		over 50 percent for	
than stoves using		particulates in a	
kerosene or solid fuels.		laboratory setting.	
raw or
Processed
biomass:
wood
charcoal
crop
dung
biolite stove
37-63% efficiency
FIREPLACE
PAGE 143
biogas stove
50-65% efficiency
In a merger of toilet and fireplace, this biogas stove can convert manure and human waste into combustible methane. Reduces respiratory diseases, eye infection, asthma and lung problems.
solar box stove
100% (fuel is available at no cost)
Solar box cookers reach temperatures between 177-204°C and present no fire danger.
parabolic solar stove
100% (fuel is available at no cost)
Resembling satellite dishes, parabolic solar stoves cook as fast as an open fire by concentrating sunlight on the bottom of a cooking pot, generating temperatures above 232°C even in sub-zero weather.
Sources:
Energy Poverty: How to make modern energy access universal?" International Energy Qency (IEA), UN Development Program, (UNDP) UN Industrial Development imBftion (UNIDO), 21 September 2010,
¡iWclimate-l.iisd.org/news/iea-undp-and-unido-release-energy-poverty-report/.
"0Solvable Problem of Energy Poverty," National Geographic, September 21, 2010: jtt^/news.nationalgeographic.com/news/2010/09/100921-energy-poverty-¡ookstoves/
Urces for cookstove information: cleancookstoves.org
PAGE 144
FIREPLACE
fireplace vs. phone
...fireplace's last stand: miniaturized, used solely for powering a charging device for smartphones...
FIREPLACE
PAGE 145
...2012 Chinese authorities confiscate 681 iPhone-branded stoves...
PAGE 146
FIREPLACE
PROTECTIVE BUBBLE: "LOCAL WARMING"
A speculative future for the fireplace is being designed at MIT's SENSEable Cities Lab. Inverting hundreds of thousands of years of history, they propose that, instead of people going to the source of heat, and instead of trying to maintain the temperature of entire spaces, heat will now be programmed to follow individuals. A sensor detects motion, and a series of infrared beams encapsulates the beneficiary in a moving bubble of warmth, leaving the rest of the space in the cold, and no escape for the warmed person...
Carlo Ratti, director of SENSEable Cities, explains, in an interview with the editors:
There is an alarming asymmetry between people and energy use: we heat our office buildings during the day when people are there, but also during the night when they are empty. We heat every corner of a house even if only one room is being used. Imagine a system that creates personalized climatic bubbles - energy consumption could be reduced by orders of magnitude. Local Warming aims to achieve that. Motion tracking technology is now sophisticated enough to tell us where people are, and how they move through space, at an incredibly fine-grained resolution. Using that spatial data, we can dynamically control a bank of infrared lenses and cast personalized bubbles of heat around people. The Nuvola di Fantozzi comes to mind - an Italian story from the 1970s of an unfortunate man who is followed by a rain cloud over his head - except this system provides warmth...
OUTSMART THE SYSTEM: The first prototype of Local Warming was installed at the main entrance of MIT during the cold months of winter 2012. Three lenses welcomed students with heat as they approached the building and stepped on an activation mat. The installation got incredibly positive feedback - people gathered around the front steps, tried to outsmart the system, dragged their friends into the beam...
warm people on the steps of MIT.
1975 Nuvola di Fantozzi Italian movie about a man followed everywhere by a rain cloud...
21st century fireplace.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 147
HEATING DRONE: This same principle can be applied to multiple situations and spaces: from ceiling fixtures in interior public spaces to responsive surfaces in the home to heating poles in outdoors parks - not to mention drones that walk with you through the icy winter. We're even working on a parallel system called the Spritz - for warmer climates - that would use the same tracking principles but follow people with a cloud of refreshing mist.
YOUR SMARTPHONE: Future iterations of the system will allow you to log in with your smartphone and set a personal temperature or share heat in various ways. The motion tracking systems might even gather usage patterns to then tailor comfort levels based on behavior or group dynamics, moving from the diagnostic to the predictive. We also envision a tighter integration with other building systems, such as light, sound, or even delivery of data.
EVOLUTION OF THE GROTTO: If you want to explore tomorrow, you also have to consider possible dystopian futures: the first thing we reacted to was the possibility of disconnection and isolation. As humans become increasingly networked in digital space, there is a corresponding physical alienation. With Local Warming, the evolution of the grotto is complete: the fireplace has become entirely atomized and mobile, and its decentralization risks fragmenting social structures. The hearth is no longer the locus of domestic life (reduced to nostalgia or a glorified knick-knack shelf), and with its disappearance, an entire social fabric might unravel - something that Bill Mitchell hypothesized unsettlingly in e-topia (1999). The hermetic environment of a personal climate seems to be the final death toll of human interaction - digitally connected and spatially isolated.
NEO-NOMADIC: Instead we respond by finding potent ways of infusing Local Warming with a strong connective energy. Man is a social creature. Although we no longer need to share space, we still yearn to, and digital networks can provide a powerful antidote to the blight of modern alienation. An asset-light, neo-nomadic and digitally-integrated mode of living may yet be compatible with (and even augment) human interaction. The value of a ubiquitous digital overlay like Local Warming will be proven in its capacity to enact new forms of sociability - sparking our mobilized heart(h)s to vibrant encounters in physical space.
"Ubiquitous digital overlay": in a collage of the system's predicted use, lasers detect passersby and swivel to encapsulate them in a moving heat beam.
PAGE 148
FIREPLACE
Electric kettle.
EXTINCTION
After (hundreds of) thousands of years of service to architecture and civilization, the fireplace has mutated beyond recognition. Going incognito, hiding inside various modern devices, its Promethean drive is no longer expressed directly in flames but through apparently inexorable technological innovation. As the most blatant symbol of entropy - a fire burning out before our eyes, its exhaust suffusing the room - the fireplace has been the victim of expanded scales, and intensifying demands on our energy systems, to fuel relentless progress. Other devices can easily outperform the fireplace. Its memory might be preserved by UNESCO as the first architectural element to become extinct.
AUTOMATIC TOASTERS = the end of Prometheus?
...fire as an element is too erratic out of control, and dangerous for, mankind of consumers ... while half of mankind is still using open fire each day, out of dire necessity, the other half has evolved apparatus and sophisticated devices that in their design try to efface their remote heritage, denying their relationship with the real thing...
= BY TOASTMASTER


1940 The toastmaster toasts one slice at a time, mimicking the disintegration of family activities concurrent with the disintegration of the former functions of the fireplace.
PAGE 149
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE
PAGE 150
bibliography
Alberti, Leon Battista. De Re Aedificatoria. Florentiae: Nicolaus Laurentii, 1485.
Annand, William. Mysterium Pietatis: or,
The Mysterie of Godlinesse... EEBO Editions, ProQuest 2010.
Bachelard, Gaston. Psychoanalysis of Fire. Beacon Press, 1987.
Beecher, Catharine and Harriet Beecher Stowe. The American Woman's Home: Principles of Domestic Science. XB. Ford, 1869.
Christin, Anne-Marie, ed. A History of Writing. Flammarion, 2002.
"Clean Cook Stoves." Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves. www.cleancookstoves. org/ (accessed May 14, 2014).
Crooke,Helkiah. A Description of the Body of Man... W. laggard, 1615.
David, Henry. Walden. Princeton University Press, 2004.
Dresbeck, LeRoy. "The Chimney and Social Change in Medieval England," Albion:
A Quarterly Journal Concerned with British Studies, Vol. 3 No. 1 (Spring) 1971. 21-32
Dreyfuss, Henry. Designing for People. Simon and Schuster, 1955.
Easterly, William. The White Man's Burden. Oxford University Press, 2006.
"Energy Poverty: How To Make Modern Energy Access Universal?" International Energy Agency (IEA), UN Development Program, (UNDP) UN Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO),
21 September 2010.
Fernandez-Galiano, Luis. Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy. Chicago:
The MIT Press, 2000.
Franklin, Benjamin. Observations on Smoky Chimneys their Causes and Cure; With Considerations on Fuel and Stoves. Illustrated With Proper Figures. LL. D. London: Printed for I. and X Taylor, 1793.
Gauger, Nicolas. La Mécanique Du Feu,
Ou L'art D'en Augmenter Les Effets Et
D'en Diminuer La Dépense. Première Partie, Contenant Le Traité De Nouvelles Cheminées Qui Échauffent Plus Que Les Cheminées Ordinaires Et Qui Ne Sont Point Sujettes À Fumer... C.-A. Jombert, 1749.
Giedion, Sigfried. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Haile, F. Women Fuelwood Carriers in Addis Ababa and the Peri-Urban Forest. Geneva: ILO, 1991.
Heidegger, Martin. Holderlin’s Hymn The Ister. Indiana University Press, 1996.
Hill, George Canning. Homespun, or, Five and Twenty Years Ago. BiblioBazaar, 2012.
Hill, Nicholas. The English Fireplace: Its Architecture and the Working Fire. Quiller Press, 1985.
Horvath, Ronald 1, "Von Thunen's Isolated State and the Area around Addis Ababa, Ethiopia," Annals of the Association of American Geographers, Vol. 59, No. 2 ]un, 1969.
Huff, Darrell. "Which Fireplace Should you Choose?" Popular Science, December 1974.
"IEA, UNDP and UNIDO Release Energy Poverty Report." Climate Change Policy & Practice, http://climate-l.iisd.org/news/iea-undp-and-unido-release-energy-poverty-report/ (accessed May 14, 2014).
Leacroft, Helen, and Richard Leacroft.
The Buildings of Ancient Rome. Brockhampton Press, 1969.
Leeds, Lewis L. Man's Own Breath is His Greatest Enemy: Lectures on Ventilation. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1869.
Leroi-Gourhan, André, and Michel Brézillon. Fouilles de Pincevent. Bordes, 1972.
Lewis, Christina S. N. "The Love Affair With the Fireplace Cools." The New York Times, January 19, 2011. www.nytimes.com/2011/ 01/20/garden/20fire.
html?pagewanted=all&_r=0 (accessed July 6, 2013).
Mariacher, Giovanni. Cheminees: De Tous Let Temps Et De Tous Les Pays. Paris, 1111.
McDonald, Roxana. The Fireplace Book I
London: The Architectural Press, 1984
McPhee, John. "Firewood," New Vba, March 25, 1974.
Moe, Kiel. Thermally Active Surfaces in f
Architecture. Princeton Architectural Pr 2010. SSS'
Neal, John. Brother Jonathan: Or, the New Englanders. Nabu Press, 2010.
"New Analyses Verify the Use of Fire by Peking Man." Phys.org. http://phys.org/
news/2014-03-analyses-peking.html
(accessed May 14, 2013).
Nishi, Midori. "Regional Variations in Japanese Farmhouses," Annals of the Association of American Geographers Vol. 57, No. 2 June, 1967. 239-266	' 1
O'Meara, Carra Ferguson. "In the Hearth of the Virginal Womb," in The Iconography of the Holocaust in Late Medieval Art, The Art Bulletin, Vol. 63, No. 1 March, 1981 75-83
Pankjurst, Richard "Menelik and the Foundation of Addis Ababa," Journal of African History, II, I 1961. 103-117.
Perlés, Catherine. Préhistoire du Feu. Masson, 1977.
Planas, Roque. "Kanzi The Chimpanzee Can Start Fires And Cook, Making Him One Of The World's Smartest Monkeys." NY Daily News, www.nydailynews.com/ news/national/kanzi-chimpanzee-start-fires cook-making-world-smartest-monkeys-article-1.998716 (accessed May 14, 2014.)
Pottecher, F. "Que le Fauve soit libre dans sa cage," L'Architecture d'Aujourd'Hui, 252, 1987.62
Raverty, H. G. A Dictionary of the Puk'hto, Pus'hto, or Language of the Afghans. Second edition. London: Williams and Norgate, 1867.
Reid, D. B., and Elisha Harris. Ventilation In American Dwellings; With A Series Of Diagrams, Presenting Examples In Different Classes Of Habitations.
New York: Wiley & Halsted, 1858.
Rudofsky, Bernard. Architecture Without Architects: A Short Introduction to
FIREPLACE
PAGE 151
E padiqreed Architecture. University Mexico Press, 1964.
0 i rd Benjamin. Essays, Political, ^ °0rrilcal and Philosophical. ■¡Jnpe'9n; Proiect Gutenberg, 1976.
Jared. "Employees Only Think H Control Thermostat." The Wall Street http://online.wsj.com/news/
Kr™40'304
cchwartz, Carly. "Bay Area Spare The Air: u The Wood Burning Ban Actually Worked?-” The Huffington Post. www. jOfjngtonpost.com/2013/04/01/bay-area-fc-e-the-air_n_2991712.html (accessed May 14, 2014)-
Sear Frank. Roman Architecture. Cornell University Press, 1983. 33
Swift, Jonathan. Journal to Stella: Letters to Esther Johnson and Rebecca Dingley 1710-1713. Cambridge University Press, 2014.
Jaipur, Mir Atta Muhammad. "The Vanishing Glory of Hyderabad" Web Journal on Cultural Patrimony, January-June, 2007.
"The Solvable Problem of Energy Poverty," National Geographic, 21 September 2010. http://news.nationalgeographic.com/news/ 2010/09/100921 -energy-poverty-tpokstoves/ (accessed 17 November 2013).
Tichi, Cecelia. Electronic Hearth: Creating an American Television Culture. Oxford University Press, 1991.
Tonge, Peter. "As Days Grow Cooler, Consider Snuggling Up to a Siberian Stove," Christian Science Monitor,
3 September, 1985.
Vitruvius: the Ten Books of Architecture. New York: Dover Publications, 1960.
Jfelogodskaya Oblast' Universal Academic Library, www.booksite.ru
Weston, Jessie L. Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Dover Publications, 2003. Wrangham, Richard. Catching Fire: How Cooking Made Us Human. Basic Books, 2008.
Ding, Lu Yu, Yong Hong . Geomancy
and the Selection of Architecture Placement in Ancient China. Hebei, 1996. "4,000 Year-Old Fireplaces on Abu Dhabi's Islands," Emirates News Agency. May 2, 2000. www.uaeinteract.com/news/ viewnews.asp?NewsFileName=20000502. htm#4,000 year old fireplaces on abu dhabi's islands (accessed February 5, 2013.)
Guadet, Julien. Éléments et Théorie de L'architecture, vol. 2. Paris: Librairie De La Construction Moderne, 1902. 155
Harman, Graham. L'Objet Quadruple:
Une Métaphysique Des Choses Après Heidegger. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 2010. 14-26
"hearthbreaking"	Heschong, Usa. Thermal Delight in
Sébastien marot	Architecture. Chicago: The MIT Press
1979.
Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space. Boston: Beacon Press, 1969.
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-tempered Environment. The Architectural Press, London 1969.
Commoner, Barry. The Closing Circle: Nature, Man, and Technology. Random House Inc. 1971.
Fernandez-Galiano, Luis. Fire and Memory: On Architecture and Energy. Chicago:
The MIT Press, 2000.
Fitch, James Marston. American Building: The Environmental Forces That Shape It. Oxford University Press, 1948.
Fitch, James Marston. Architecture and the Esthetics of Plenty. Columbia University Press, 1961.
Gallo, Emmanuell. La Réception Des Nouveaux Modes De Chauffage Domestiques En France Au Xixe Siècle. Paris: Presses de la Sorbonne, 2006.
Lafitte, Jacques . L'invention Dans Les Techniques: Cours Et Conferences. Paris: Seuil, 2005.
Lafitte, Jacques. Réflexions Sur La Science Des Machines. Paris: Vrin, 1935.
Lynch, Kevin. Wasting Away: An Exploration of Waste, What it Is, How it happens, Why we Fear it, How to do it Well. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1990.
McNeill, John. Something New Under the Sun: An Environmental History of Twentieth Century. Norton, New York,
2000.
Mumford, Lewis. Technics and Civilization. New York: Harcourt, Brace and Co., 1934.
Semper, Gottfried. The Four Elements of Architecture and Other Writings. Cambridge University Press 1989. 102-103
Simondon, Gilbert. Du Mode d'Existence des Objets Techniques. Paris: Aubier,
1958.
Giedion, S. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Simondon, Gilbert. L'individuation A La Lumière Des Notions De Forme Et D'information. Paris: Millon, 2005.
Sloterdijk, Peter. Sphères III: Écumes. Paris: Maren Sell Éditeurs. 2005. 159
Stein, Charles G. Architecture and Energy. New York: Anchor Press/ Doubleday, Garden City, 1977.
2012 Participants in Doha's TEDx event build a firepit on the beach.
PAGE 152
FIREPLACE
FIREPLACE
PAGE 153
o sources and courtesy
»¡«'Prometheus," by Rubens, prado Museum.
Patrick Lakey; Sharr, Adam.
M i, „net's Hut The MIT Press, 2006. tfeide99el
■ t/jncent Van Der Pas / www.flickr.com/ p8 tos/archetypef°tografie/3800495402/.
Aerial view of the Robert Sherer power Lfapt north of Macon, Georgia by Antennas.
■ Rowlett, John, Clive Gamble and o hin Dunbar "Human Evolution and the ihaeology of the Social Brain." Current Anthropology, Vol. 53, No. 6, December |j|2' © Laurentiu Garofeanu / Barcoft US
p13 Photo by ZHONG Maohua © Science china Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013; photo by P. Goldberg, Copyright 2014 Braai4Heritage; photo by Kenneth Garrett; Copyright © 2014 Elsevier gV Courtesy of H. Rüther, Zamani project.
P14 © DigitalGlobe.
P27 Tsakirgis, B. "Fire and smoke: hearths, braziers and chimneys in the Greek house." British School at Athens, Vol. 15, 2007; Goldman, Hetty. "Preliminary Report on the Excavations at Eutresis in Boeotia," Notes -ffioggArt Museum), Vol. 2, Special Number: Excavations at Eutresis, The President and Fellows of Harvard College, September 1927; Westgate, Ruth, lames Whitley, British School at Athens, University of Cardiff.
School of History and Archaeology. Building communities: house, settlement and society in the Aegean and beyond: proceedings of a conference held at Cardiff University,
17-21 April 2001. British School at Athens, 2007; Lin Foxhall, School of Archaeology and Ancient History, University of Leicester.
P28 Olympia, Sanctuary of Zeus.
Prytaneum / Harvard Fine Arts Library, Visual Collections - Slides and Digital Images; d2011.03985; McDonald, William A.
Progress Into the Past: The Rediscovery of Mycenaean Civilization. Indiana University Press, 1990.
P29 © Bettmann/CORBIS; Olympia,
Leni Riefenstahl, 1938; Telluride Gallery.
Australian Museum; Beech, Mark, Richard Cuttler, Derek Moscrop, Heiko Kallweit and John Martin. "Papers from me thirtyeighth meeting of the Seminar for Arabian Studies held in London, 22-24 Duly ■¡ "Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies, Vol. 35. Archaeopress
Oxford, 2005; Drawing by Alan Braby from Armit, Ian. Towers in the North: the Brochs of Scotland. History Press, 2003.
P30 Dr. Theodossopoulos.
P31 Photo by Antoin Sevruguin /
C.R. Smith Archive; "Heating and Cooking in Nishapur" by Charles K.Wilkinson, the Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin.
P32 Leacroft, Helen and Richard Leacroft. The Buildings of Ancient Rome. Brockhampton Press, 1969; Tyler Bell / www.flickr.com/photos/tylerbell/ 2686308433/sizes/l/; Chris-PA / www. arboristsite.com/community/threads/ masonry-heater.250019/page-2.
P33 Guo, Qinghua. "The Chinese Domestic Architectural Heating System (kang): Origins, Applications and Techniques." Architectural History Vol. 45,
2002; photo by ¡John James Kennedy.
P34 Stephenson, Charles (consultant editor). Castles: A History of Fortified Structures: Ancient, Medieval & Modem.
St. Martin's Griffin, 2011.
P35 English Heritage.
P36 Hill, Nicholas. The English Fireplace. Quiller Press London, 1983; Horn, Walter and Ernest Born. Plan of St. Gall: Study of the Architecture and Economy of, and Life in, a Paradigmatic Carolingian Monastery (California Studies in the History of Art). University of California Press, 1980.
P37 Toledo: kitchen of the house of the Greco ©All Rights Reserved. Centro de Estudios de Castilla-La Mancha (UCLM) / www.flickr.com/photos/ceclm/8935698080/ in/photostream/; The ruins of Wycoller photo by Kelly Dewhurst / http://wonder fulworldwelivein.wordpress.com/ 2013/ 12/01/wycoller/; Hill, Nicholas. The English Fireplace. Quiller Press London, 1983.
P38-39 McDonald, Roxana. The Fireplace Book. Architectural Press, 1984.
P40 Conwy Castle - fireplace, Conwy,
UK © All Rights Reserved by Hummeline; Tattershall Castle - fireplace in the Private Chamber by Tim Laughton / www.flickr. com/photos/tim_laughton/8203766582/; photo by Patricia Petkosek.
P41 The Great Fire of London, Dutch School, 17th century, © Museum of London; http://loveisspeed.blogspot. nl/2013/04/wilton-house-is-english-country-house.html; Hill, Nicholas. The English
Fireplace. Quiller Press London, 1983; "Couvre-feu utensil for extinguishing the fire in a fireplace" scanned from book Old Church Lore, William Andrews & Co., The Hull Press; London.
P41-42 McDonald, Roxana. The Fireplace Book. Architectural Press, 1984; The Osterley Library before the recent rearrangement of the books. ©NTPL / Dennis Gilbert; © 2014 StudyBlue Inc.
All rights reserved; The Clergyman's Visit by F. D. Hardy / Wolverhampton Arts and Heritage.
P43 Rex Harris / www.flickr.com/photos/ sheepdog_rex/11153361596/; Photo by CHESNEY'S.
P44 © JewishEncyclopedia.com
P45 Follower of Robert Campin:
"The Virgin and Child before a Firescreen," National Gallery London; The Last Supper by Dirk Bouts / O'Meara, Carra Ferguson. "In the Hearth of the Virginal Womb:
The Iconography of the Holocaust in Late Medieval Art." The Art Bulletin, Vol. 63,
No. 1 March, 1981. Image and original data provided by SCALA, Florence/ART RESOURCE, N.Y.
P46-47 Photos by Hans Werlemann.
P48 Copyright © 2002-2011 Donald A. Heald.
P49 © Burghley House Preservation Trust Limited; Piranesi and Jonathan Scott. Piranesi. Academy Editions and St. Martin's Press, 1975; © Copyright 2014 The San Diego Union-Tribune, LLC. An MLIM LLC Company. All rights reserved.
P50 Giovanni, Mariacher. Cheminées de tous les temps et de tous les pays.
G. Le Prat, 1963; Copyright © 2013 Dominican School of Philosophy & Theology.
P51 Giovanni, Mariacher. Cheminées de tous les temps et de tous les pays.
G. Le Prat, 1963, National Museum of Switzerland.
P52 http://otvet.mail.ru/question/ 72105251; © Chitinskii Oblast' Museum.
P53 PyccKan neub by MaxapoB;
3BOHapeB, H.M. 77ewn m xa/wnnb/ cbommm pyKaMM. MeHTpno/iurpact), 2011; Elpel, Thomas J. Living Homes: Thomas J Elpel's Field Guide to Integrated Design and Construction. Hops Pr, 2001.
PAGE 154
FIREPLACE
P57 Construction diagrams from Nicolas Gauger's Mechanique du Feu, ca. 1714.
P58 The Great Hall, Bank of England courtesy of Bishopsgate Institute; Library of Congress LC-USZ62-25564.
P59 Ravetz, Alison. "The Victorian Coal Kitchen and Its Reformers." Victorian Studies Vol. 11, No. 4. Indiana University Press, Dune 1968; The comforts of a Rumford stove Vide Dr. G-rn-ts lectures Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division Washington, D.C. 20540 USA.
P60 Courtesy of Bishopsgate Institute.
P61 Summerson, ]ohn. "The Evolution of Soane's Bank Stock Office at the Bank of England." Architectural History Vol. 27, Design and Practice in British Architecture: Studies in Architectural History Presented to Howard Colvin. SAHGB, 1984, John Soane Museum.
P62 Reid, David Boswell and Elisha Harris. Ventilation in American Dwellings. Book from the collections of: Harvard University.
P63 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
P66 Courtesy of Library of Congress; Street Life in London, 1877, by John Thomson and Adolphe Smith CC BY-NC-SA 3.0.
P67 Joseph Glass.
P68 Edgerton, Samuel Youngs. "Heating Stoves in Eighteenth Century Philadelphia." Bulletin of the Association for Preservation Technology, Vol. 3, No. 2/3, 1971.
P69-70 Courtesy, The Winterthur Library: Printed Book and Periodical Collection.
P71 Harris, Howell John. "The stove trade needs change continually: designing the first mass-market consumer durable, ca. 1810-1930." Winterthur portfolio. 43 (4). Henry Francis du Pont Winterthur Museum, Inc., 2009.
P74 Sanderson, Eric. Mannahatta:
A Natural History of New York City. Harry N. Abrams, 2013; Maps by Jesse Allen and Robert Simmon, based on data from Steyaert and Knox. NASA; New York 1873 by George Schlegel, restorated by Adam Cuerden.
P75 © Walker Evans Archive, The Metropolitan Museum of Art; Bequest of Samuel E. Haslett; SCALA Archives.
P76 Beecher, Catharine Esther and Harriet Beecher Stowe. The American Woman's Home: Or, Principles of Domestic Science: Being a Guide to the Formation and Maintenance of Economical, Healthful, Beautiful, and Christian Homes. J.B. Ford, 1869.
P78 Lewis, Hilary and John O'Connor.
Philip Johnson: The Architect in His Own Words. Rizzoli, 1994; photo by Thomas Loof / Trunk Archive; Photo by Arthur Drexler.
P79 Philip Johnson, architect lives in glass house he designed himself in New Canaan, Ct, Fairfield County. Photo by David McLane, 1966. NYDailyNews.com © 2009 Daily News, L.P. All rights reserved.
P80 Robie House, living room with fire place photo by Margaret Olin; "Interieur overzicht bovenverdieping. Rechts: kamer van de zoon. Trapgat in geopende toestand, schoorsteen met potkachel" by Ton van der Wal is licensed under CC BY 3.0 Nederland.
P81 Postiglione, Gennaro with Francesca Agerboni (editor). 100 : one hundred houses for one hundred European architects of the twentieth century. Taschen, 2004.
P82 © 2014 Conde Nast. All rights reserved.
P83 Popular Science Pub. Co.
P84-85 ©Trinity Mirror / Mirrorpix / Alamy, Getty Archives.
P86 Photo by Abbie Rowe / The Harry S. Truman Library and Museum; The US National Archives / www.flickr.com/photos/ usnationalarchives/8451613066/.
P87 US National Archives and Records Administration; Courtesy: Jimmy Carter Presidential Library.
P88 ©Copyright All rights reserved by Jon Williamson.
P89 Tyronne Dukes / The New York Times; Peter Lippman / The New York Times.
P90 Photo by Popperfoto / Getty Images; Courtesy of Terra Media Archives; Popular Mechanics, Published by Hearst Magazines, January 1953; © Bettmann / CORBIS.
P91 Life, Feb 25 1966; Videostil, "Pulp Fiction," directed by Quentin Tarantino / Miramax NY Films, LLC, 1994; 1966 RCA print ad / RCA.
P92 Paola Mayorga / http:// arch3230mayorga.wordpress.com/.
P93 Frigidaire ad. 1960; ad by Servel; ad by Carrier.
P94-95 Hyderabad photo by Martin Hürlimann, 1928.
P97 Photo by Jack Hill /
©Times Newspapers.
P98 Popular Science Pub. Co;
Design Observer © 2003-2014 Observer Omnimedia LLC.
P99 engine631 / www.ebay.nl/ usr/engine631.
P100 ©2014 Nest Labs; Anita Martinz/ www.flickr.com/photos/annia316/ 449554916/in/photostream/.
P102 ©2014 Nest Labs.
P106 Slinkachu www.slinkachu.com.
P110 Copyright Flameport Enterprises Ltd; Giedion, Siegfried. Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous History. W. W. Norton & Company, 1969.
P111 Banham, Reyner. Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. University of Chicago Press, 1984.
P112 © The Estate of R. Buckminster Fuller.
P113 Banham, Reyner. Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. University of Chicago Press, 1984.
P114 Photo by Jakob Boserup; Heschong, Lisa. Thermal Delight in Architecture.
The MIT Press, 1979.
P115 Stein, Richard G. Architecture and energy. Anchor Press, 1977; © 2011 The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art.
P116 Fernandez-Galiano, Luis. El fuego y la memoria: Sobre arquitectura y energia. Alianza Editorial, 1991;
Photo by Architectura Viva.
P117 Galiano, Luis Fernandez.
Fire and Memory On architecture and Energy. The MIT Press, 2000.
P118 University of Maryland;
Centrale nucléaire by Frédéric Gaspoz.


P119—121 Gilbert, Simon. Du mode d'existence des objets techniques. Aubier - Montaigne, 1958.
FIREPLACE
PAGE 155
pl23
photo
by Fischli & Weiss.
qHP GROUP, INC.; Pacific Energy; p125vp Control Systems.
BmP1
IPC Media Homes Network; PAPER P128K Copyright 2014 EVENTup. All Rights & ^rved; photo by Auc|rey Trubshaw; ReSnarling Photography; © 2014 Apartment °h apy; Copyright © 2004-2011 - William T"e _ pjelifreak.com; photo by Thomas ^T/Time Inc. Lifestyle Group; photo '’Monica Medina / http://studiomorado. Sgspot.nl/2013/01/velas-candles.html.
29 © 2014 SEIDAL.com. All rights Hjyed; Table Top Fireplace, designed by pA Mertens; Bubble, designed for Planika by Serge Atallah / Copyright © 1999-2012 planika.
P132 Kiel, Moe. Thermally Active Surfaces ¡nArchitecture. Princeton Architectural Press, 2010.
P139 © Dr. Doan Rothlein; Use of "Rocket J/to"photo by M. Mbege; Photo courtesy of Kirk Smith.
P140 ©BBC MMIX; http://charlesethiopia. blogspot.nl/2013_03_01_archive.html; Horvath, Ronald 1 "Von Thiinen's isolated state and the area around Addis Ababa Ethiopia." Annals of the Association of American Geographers Vol. 59, Issue 2, 1969.
P141 Ullstein bild / The Granger Collection, NYC-All rights reserved.
P142 GLOBAL ALLIANCE FOR CLEAN COOKSTOVES.
P144 Courtesy of BioLite; 142 SENSEable City Laboratory / MIT.
P146 Videostill, "Fantozzi" directed by Luciano Salce / Rizzoli Film.
P148 Plante, Ellen M. The American kitchen, 1700 to the present : from hearth to highrise. Facts on File, 1995; The Russell Hobbs K2 Kettle.
P149 Photo by Raymond Drayer.
p151 Kris Krüg / www.flickr.com/photos/ kk/6947894964/.
p152 Collage by Annie Wang.
5000 BC Clay kiln-like object with lunar calendar hidden inside, found in Slatino, South West Bulgaria
"The Assyrologist Dean-Marie Durand claims that people learned how to read before they learned how to write. Early evidence of the precedence of reading can be found in the Neolithic calendar discovered in Bulgaria, near the village of Slatino. It takes the form of a graph or chart containing rows of numbers, represented by plain vertical lines indicating the phases of the moon. This document is not a text in the true sense of the word, because no words are present, but it needs to be 'read,' and it records an actual situation that existed elsewhere. The calendar clearly had a sacred, or even a mystical purpose. This astronomical table was found inside a clay dome resembling a kiln, and was evidently of a secret nature. The entrance to the 'kiln' was defended by a serpent that also served as a handle; the actual inscription could only be seen clearly by elevating the object using this zoomorphic handle, and tilting it in a certain way."
— Michael Guichard, "The Precursors of the Written Word in the Danube River Basin," A History of Writing, ed. Anne-Marie Christin (Flammarion, 2002).
2016 Politics of the toilet: gender neutral toilet sign, designed by artist Peregrine Honig and compliant with the Americans with Disabilities Act, which determines public restroom code in the US. The sign spreads globally, bundling the concerns of potty parity (the call for equal distribution of facilities among men and women) and transgender access.
toilet
no architectural treatise declares the toilet as the primordial element of architecture, but it might be the ultimate one... once part of a communal experience, the toilet gradually became privatized, enclosed within architecture, plugged into plumbing, placed in counterintuitive proximity to showers and baths, enshrined in a private retreat that proliferates within wealthier nouses everywhere... and eventually transformed by digital technology into a diagnostic apparatus... the toilet is the existential zone of interaction - on the most intimate level - between humans and architecture... we can imagine buildings without almost any of the other elements of architecture but not without *ne toilet... life, especially in the urban context, is difficult to *ustain without the toilet; a comfortable and regulated life demands it... but at the moment when the global triumph of e Euro-American toilet is triumphant, the infrastructure it depends on - abundant water, sophisticated plumbing, large-Scale sewage systems - is increasingly unsustainable...
PAGE 2
120 AD Communal pleasure: men converse while defecating at the Roman toilets of Vercovicium, a fort on Hadrian's Wall. The men clean themselves with sponges on the end of sticks, dipped in the channel at their feet (later, the widespread practice of cleaning with a stick triggers the English expression "Don't get the wrong end of the stick.")
2011 Last resort: the toilet only becomes communal In extreme circumstances - above, in Lagos, removed from supporting infrastructure, between a river of plastic and an open sewer. According to a March 2012 report by Nigeria's Water and Sanitation Program, 32 million Nigerians have no latrine and must defecate in the open.
2014 Laughing stock: tandem toilets at the Sochi Winter Olympics become an easy means to ridicule Russia's preparedness for the games. After this image goes viral, the twin-toilet's hurried conversion into an improbable store-room, with three chests of drawers where the toilets were the day before, only heightens the joke. The appearance online of several more tandem toilets in Sochi today indicates Incompetence or crudity rather than a lack of shame or the continuation of a long lineage of sharing this now privatized act.
A ROOM OF ONE'S OWN
PAGE 3
¡'Anecdotal evidence, November 2013: in a restaurant in Manchester, a waiter lists the specials then promptly informs the group where the toilets are-succeeding in both infantilizlng the diners in the name of comfort and convenience (in case you need to get to the toilet quickly, and the architecture of the restaurant proves too labyrinthine) and neatly closing the loop between eating and evacuation.
No architectural treatise cites the toilet as the primordial element of architecture - unlike the fireplace, the roof, or the wall - but the toilet might be the ultimate element. After millenia of going outside, then a few centuries (in some parts of the world) of throwing it outside, the toilet is gradually incorporated into buildings, plugged into plumbing, turned into a technological device, placed in counterintuitive proximity to baths and showers, and enshrined as a very private room that is now proliferating within wealthier dwellings the world over. The toilet is a mini-arena with an audience of one, the architectural space in which bodies are replenished, inspected, and cultivated, and where one is left alone for private reflection, where identity can be developed and affirmed. In personal domestic spas, we combine the luxuriant regenerative habits of the Romans with the obsessive privacy of the puritan tradition.
The toilet is the fundamental zone of interaction between humans and architecture. Today we can imagine buildings without almost any of the other elements of architecture, but not without the toilet. Life, especially in the urban context, is difficult to sustain without the toilet, whose function it is to bring in and expel water from architecture; a comfortable and profitable life demands it.
The actual meaning of "toilet" is remarkably slippery: it can be the discrete device itself, the room in which that device is installed, and, in an archaic sense, it can be the act of cleansing or preparing for the day. Whereas the fireplace shattered into various devices suffused throughout architecture, the toilet has experienced the opposite trajectory: the compression of its functions - washing, bathing, excreting - into one private room that can barely even be precisely or universally named.
According to the WTO (World Toilet Organization), we now use the toilet - meaning for urination and defecation (it is hard to be precise with the cloud of euphemisms hanging over the device, the room, and what we do there) - between six and eight times a day. It is easy to imagine this frequency increasing as the (Western) body adapts to the increasing availability of private toilets (the idea of shared toilets / bathrooms is anathema in middle class homes, and has been for decades in hotels). Is there a slow creep of incontinence, facilitated by ubiquitous convenience, with architecture and the body locked in an obscene dialogue, each constantly mutating, the better to fit together?*
The domestication, privatization, and proliferation of the toilet is the great unspoken driver behind much architecture and urban planning. But at the moment where the globalization of the Anglo-Saxon toilet and its attendant behavior is on the brink of completion, the model it depends on - abundant water, sophisticated plumbing, large-scale sewage systems - is increasingly untenable and unaffordable. It took 250 years for the standard western flush toilet to take hold (invented in 1596, it only started to become fully functional and popularly used after the Great Exhibition in London 1851). The developing world cannot wait as long to undo its dominance.
The toilet is at once the most private and the most political element, subject to government interference at least since King Francis I's 1539 edict instructing citizens of Paris to take responsibility for the collection and proper disposal of their "waters." Today, the toilet is the site of cultural superimpositions (in Thailand, sit-toilets with grated sides for squatting on), philanthropy (Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation's challenge to "reinvent the toilet"), and intimate habits that only seem to be intractable...
PAGE 4
SEWAGE SYSTEMS
TRAJECTORIES OF THE TOILET: UNIFICATION AND DIVERGENCE
The development of the toilet Is a meandering chronology, marked by moments of sanitary progress - where excreting and bathing are able to unite in close proximity within architecture thanks to plumbing - and recurring regression, where the infrastructural link is fractured again, only to be re-established under more prosperous and civically organized conditions...
2450 BC
Great Bath at Mohenjo-Daro
3600 BC Habuba Kabira's sewers
CÛ O)
Ô Lj
Cesspool
smell
1700 BC Toilet at the Palace of Minos at Knossos
120 AD Roman i communal latrine at Vercovicium, Hadrian's Wall
211-224 AD
Roman chariot toilet
1167 Christchurch 1 Monastery and Cathedral, Canterbury
3rd century
Baths of Caracalla
1517 Da Vinci's Romorantin sanitary city
PAGE 6
UNNAMEABLE ELEMENT: THE WORDS FOR TOILET
We lack the words in English to unambiguously describe the toilet (as a thing) or the room In which It exists. There Is no totally reliable word for the object that we urinate and defecate In: the adjacency of bathing and excretion In one room triggers a tendency to name that receptacle with terms that properly refer to washing. Both "lavatory" and "toilet" go through the same evolution, starting as words for cleaning and ending as places for shitting. Words and histories In other languages reveal similar ambiguities...
Definition: A dressing-room; in US esp. a dressing-room furnished with bathing facilities. Hence, a bath-room, a lavatory; (contextually), a lavatory bowl or pedestal; a room or cubicle containing a lavatory ... The action or process of dressing, or, more recently, of washing and grooming.
Unless noted, source is: OED Online, July 2013.
bathroom
lavatory
restroom
washlet (Japanese)
BWC (bathroom water closet)
English
W.C.
English, French, Spanish, German, Dutch, Italian, Arabic, Swahili...
ce suo toilet room ma tong horse-container or toilet bowl xi ge rest room she hou back of the house
geng yi shi changing room
mao ce bathroom Chinese
(pronounced toilet) now toire toilet benki toilet bowl kaha-ya north room old oteiarai washroom benjoo toilet enho the far side setsuchin snowy retreat
kawaya outhouse chyoozuba manual watershed kooka back closet toosu east end Japanese
(Allen Chun, "Flushing in the future: the supermodern Japanese toilet in a changing domestic culture," Postcolonial Studies, Vol. 5, No. 2, 2002, 158.)
1940 loo
English, privy, lavatory.
hammam
Arabic and Persian, bath.
1899 restroom
Lavatory in a public building or workplace.
1959 "Such a gentleman ... always pretended not to see you if he met you coming out of the toilet."
— Stella Gibbons,
A Pink Front Door (London: Hodderand Stoughton Davison), 79.
TouaAÉTa
toualéta
Greek
anoxie' prior] apochorlsi
Ancient Greek, withdrawal.
1780 bathroom
A room containing a bath and often other facilities. Hence, a euphemism for a lavatory.
1819 outhouse
Chiefly American, lavatory, esp. one which is external to a main building.
1860 earth closet
Patent for an odorless latrine, using soil.
shauchalay
Hindi, toilet, lavatory (English toilet and bathroom are also used).
shauch
Hindi, evacuation of excrement, toilet, ablution, cleanliness.
1806 washroom
Chiefly American, lavatory or W.C.
1867 latrine
English
1819 toilet
A private room for dressing later with a toilet bowl.
"There is the closet, there the toilet." George Gordon Noel Byron, Don Juan, Canto I, cliii. (London: Thomas Davison), 79.
1755 water closet
A closet or small room serving as a privy, furnished with water-supply to discharge the pan. The first name for the toilet that acknowledges the function of excretion rather than washing.
sisma
Arabic, toilet (taboo).
PAGE 7
1612 necessary
privy, formerly also necessary place, neces-gary stool.
1620 lavatory
An apartment furnished with apparatus for washing, also including
water-closets.
1684 toilette
The action or process of dressing, from French toile (cloth)
1718 "a pretty machine to cleanse an House
of Office, viz., by a small stream of water no bigger than one's finger, which ran into an engine made like a bit of fire-shovel, which hung upon its centre of gravity, so that when it was full a considerable quantity of water fell down with some force." — Aubrey at Beddington, Surrey quoted in Clean and Decent, Lawrence Wright, 1960)
Çlçme
Turkish, toilet or loo.
1398 bath
To bathe, the place of bathing, the water in which one bathes.
oratory
Room for silent worship, euphemism for latrine.
1375 lavatorie
Middle English, vessel for washing.
1656 toylette
French, a bag or cloth to put night clothes in. (Thomas Blount, Glos-sographia; or, A dictionary interpreting all such hard words, whether Hebrew, Greek or Latin... as are now used in our refined English tongue.)
8th century bad
Old Saxon
1000 AD baed
Old English, bath.
1140 privé
Private or intimate, from Latin privatus.
latrines
French, mostly in plural form, from the Latin.
toilette
French, action of washing.
garderobe
Small room or cupboard, euphemism for latrine.
baed
Old English, idea of 'heat' originally prominent in bath.
latrina
Public toilets, Latin, a privy.
toile
French, meaning cloth.
balneae
Anglo-Latin, bathhouse.
3rd c. lavatarium
Latin, place for washing.
Thermae
From ancient Greek, public bathhouse in tradition of Diocletian baths.
cacare
Latin, meaning to defecate, to do what's necessary.
lavatrina
Latin, to wash.
1350 privy
Middle French
1225 "A mid be menske of bi neb is be fe ereste del bitwene mudes smech & nases smel ne berest bu as twa priuees buries." "Amidst the greatest ornament of thy face; that is, the fairest part between the taste of mouth and smell of nose, hast thou not two holes, as if they were two privy holes?"
— Eric Tohn Dobson, The English text of the Ancrene Wisse (Cleo. C.vi), 1972, 267.
çeçme
Persian, fountain.
bata ruma
Nepali from English, bathroom.
klosett
lokus
badezimmer
German
1763 cagatorio
Spanish, meaning a place to defecate, from the Latin.
inodoro -retrete *N
Spanish '
1706 privada
Spanish, privy, a necessary house. (John Stevens, A new Spanish and English dictionary: collected from the best Spanish authors, both ancient and modern.)
baño	CO
servicios	£ CO
toilette	E
lavabo	CD -C
sanitario	Q.
excusado	<D
water	
PAGE 8
EARLY TOILETS AND SEWERS
3600 BC HABUBA KABIRA Some of the first extant sanitation technology is for drainage systems rather than the devices that utilize them... The earliest evidence of a sewage system is in Habuba Kabira, a colony on the Euphrates river created by the Sumerians from South Mesopotamia.
Pipes from houses discharge wastewater and stormwater into wells, trenches and a street gutter or pipe.
Clay wastewater pipes found in South Habuba Kabira: "u-rinne" (U-section, endpiece/out-let) and "muffenromr" (sewage pipe with support brackets).
Street map: "a network of drainage channels discharge[es] their flows west of the ramparts in the countryside. ... Wastewaters from the houses were directed either to openings through the ramparts toward a pit in the city if a nearby one was available, or to the street gutter. Vallet (1997) believes that the elaborate drainage network is not unique to Habuba but is part of the Urukian civilization." (Jacques W. Delleur, "The Evolution of Urban Hydrology," Journal of Hydraulic Engineering, August 2003, 563.)
2450 BC MOHEN30 DARO On the right bank of the Indus river, 400km north of Karachi, almost every house in Mohenjo Daro (Mound of the Dead) is connected to a sewer. "Wastewater was conveyed in baked clay conduits to covered gutters, then through canals dug under the streets and covered with bricks, and finally to larger collectors. Settling tanks existed in this network to prevent clogging." (Delleur, "The Evolution of Urban Hydrology.") Only two latrines are found in the city; "the drains of Mohenjo Daro seem not to emerge as conduits for solid waste." (Gregory L. Possehl, The Indus Civilization, AtaMira Press, 2002, 106-7).
Latrine mounted at the top of steps, connecting with sewage system (right).
PAGE 9
3400-180°
BC MESOPOTAMIA
3300-1800 BC Toilet in a private house in Tell Asmar, featuring seat coated with bitumen and supported with baked bricks. The hole leads to a pipe made of baked clay modules sealed with bitumen; leads to vaulted sewer canal. (Aldo Tamburrino, "Water Technology in Ancient Mesopotamia," Ancient Water Technologies (Springer, 2010), 41.)
3400-2900 BC Drainage pipes made from terracotta (left) and clay bricks (right) in Chogha Mish, Mesopotamia. The town has a sewer, irrigation drains, wells and cesspools.
1700 BC PALACE OF MINOS AT KNOSSOS, CRETE
An elaborate system of stone drains is constructed for sewage, rain water and general drainage. Latrines are flushed by emptying a large jar of water. A wooden seat doubles as a back rest.
The water closet "consists of a small chamber about a metre in width and two metres in length, resembling in its shape and size a similar room in a modern house. Outside the lintel of the door is a flag stone sloped towards a hole, which opens into a short drain beneath the floor, and down which water could be thrown for flushing purposes, and also the household 'slops.' From the groove seen in the wall there appears to have been a wooden seat about 57 cm from the ground."
— Captain THM Clarke, "Prehistoric Sanitation in Crete," The British Medical Journal, Vol. 2, No. 2228 (Sept. 12, 1903), 597-599.
Drainage system of the domestic quarter at the Palace of Knossos (Colin F. MacDonald and Dan M. Driesse. Source: The Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol. 83 (1988), 235-258.)
PAGE 10
6th-2nd century BC GREECE: COMMUNALISM
2nd century BC In the Stoa of Kotyos, a sanctua dedicated to Asclepius, Apollo, and Hygela, vislto are provided with a large communal public toilet ^ Water for flushing is supplied from the theme 50 meters away. The shallow tank in the middle contains a sewage pipe that connects to the main conduit. "Under every lavatory seat, even the simplest ones, a vertical slab was used to cover the void between the floor and the seat."
4th century BC Gymnasium lavatory on Amorgos, typically for at least four simultaneous users sitting 85 cm apart; "in most other cases [water] flowed into the lavatory from natural sources, either continuously or periodically."
2nd century BC Lavatory at Ithidiki's residence in Minoa Amorgas for use by 2-4 people at a time. Residential lavatories are flushed with leftover water from the kitchen or bath or from a rainwater cistern.
"lavatories were used In antiquity by many people simultaneously, from two to three people in the small domestic latrines and up to 60 people in the larger public latrines ... Most of the ancient names ... refer to the lavatory as a private place (the part - att'o -apo). Despite that, all the remains of ancient Greek lavatories undoubtedly indicate simultaneous usage by more than one person. Even in residences where the inhabitants numbered at least five to ten people, there are lavatories with two to four defecation openings. In these cases it is not known if there was a simultaneous usage by residents of different sexes. At the public lavatories as well, there is no doubt that they were used by dozens of people, often more than fifty, a practice which expanded during the Roman era and survived in many Byzantine and medieval lavatories of the eastern Mediterranean, i.e. monasteries and castles as in Mytilene."
— All quotes this page: Georglos P. Antoniou, "Ancient Greek Lavatories: Operation with Reused Water" in Ancient Water Technologies, ed. Larry W. Mays (New York: Springer, 2010).
5th century BC
Earthen toilet seat and "defecation vessel" found at Olynthos.
PAGE 11
CENTURY BC ROME’S CLOACA MAXIMA: SULLIED BY SEWAGE
« the streets above, massive blocks of stone are dragged along, and yet the tunnels do not cave ^They are Pour,ded by falling buildings, which collapse of their own accord or are brought lP shin9 t0 9rounc* by fire- The ground is shaken by earth tremors; but in spite of all, for 700 Cf = from the time of Tarquinius Priscus, the channels have remained well-nigh impregnable." p^ny the Elder.
qe systems are a matter of civic pride: the Roman statesman Agrippa tours the Cloaca Maxima h boat in the first decade AD; the Roman jurist Ulpian documents an edict stating that sewers must ■[kept clean, distinguishing between private sewers, to be maintained by property owners, and ublic sewers, maintained by the state. Rome's sewers though "were primarily conduits for surface drainage - rainwater and its accumulations - and did not receive human excrement, which was thrown into the streets. Here it lay in a runnel down the middle until the street was flushed with ater. Most Roman gentry used chamber pots, which were emptied by slaves, while the common eople used the public facilities and bath-houses." (Maggie Black and Ben Fawcett, The Last Taboo (Routledge, 2008), 11.)
43-33 BC Shrine of Cloacina in the Roman forum, depicted on a coin. Cloacina (the figure holding a flower) is the Roman goddess of the Cloaca Maxima and also associated with Venus (beauty) and with cleansing - a conflation of expulsion and cleansing common to many cultures, languages, and periods.
"The existing remains stand over the drain that flows under the basilica [Aemilia], near the point where it empties into the Cloaca Maxima, and consist of a marble base, round except on the west side, where it has a rectangular projection, 2.40 meters in diameter, resting on a slab of travertine and eight courses of various kinds of stone."
—	Samuel Ball Platner, A Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome (Oxford University Press, 1929).
"Pliny records after a tradition that the Romans and Sabines, after the battle of the Forum, underwent purification at the place where in his time were the Sigma Veneris Cluacinae, for that ciuere in the old language signified to purify."
—	Francis Morgan Nichol, The Roman Forum: A Topographical Study (1877), 239-240.
Path of the Cloaca: "emptying the neighbourhoods of the Forum and the Aventine, [the Cloaca] was reportedly large enough to accommodate a wagon loaded with hay.
In 33 BC, while the sewer was being cleaned, Agrippa decided to test its limits. As Aedile of Rome, he travelled the entire length of the mighty sewer in a boat manoeuvred by oars, to inspect the cleaning operation."
— Julie Floran, The Porcelain God (Citadel, 2000).
PAGE 12
1167 CHRISTCHURCH MONASTERY AND CATHEDRAL, CANTERBURY
For nearly a thousand years after the Roman Empire, the possibility of sewage systems is largely ignored, then resurrected in extremely organized compounds like the monastery at Canterbury, England, which has a system of lead pipes providing running water (green lines), rainwater drainage, settling tanks for purification, and drainage pipes from the "necessarium" (red).
Monks survive the Black Plague in 1349.
PAGE 13
1756 KEDELSON ESTATE
Sewage system drawn by Isaac Ware in A Complete Body of Architecture. Despite the sophistication of the system, "bog houses" are still outside, possibly because of the lack of s-trap toilets.
PAGE 14
DIVINE INSTRUCTIONS JERUSALEM'S ESSENE & DUNG GATES
"The Temple Scroll offers legislation ... in connection with the holy city of the sanctuary. 'You shall make for them latrines outside the city where they shall go out, north-west of the city. These shall be roofed houses with holes in them into which the filth shall go down. It shall be far enough not to be visible from the city, (at) three thousand cubits' (46.12-16; 206). It has often been noted that, as the sabbath limit for a journey was two thousand cubits (one thousand according to CD 10.21), the Essenes had to plan carefully so as not to defile the seventh day [the day before the sabbath, they would dig a shallow trench, closer to the camp, ready for burying faeces in]. Yigael Yadin has argued that the Essene Gate in Jerusalem was so situated that it would be at an appropriate distance from the communal 'place of the hand.'"
— James C. VanderKam, The Dead Sea Scrolls Today (Michigan: Wm. B. Eerdmans, 1994), 113.
1000 BC Some archaeologists (F.J. Bliss, E. Robinson) consider the elusive Essene Gate, possibly sited in three locations in Jerusalem's city walls, and the nexus of Dead Sea Scroll instructions on defecating far from the city, as one and the same with the city's Dung Gate, where human waste is carted until the 16th century. (Rainer Riesner, "Josephus' 'Gate of the Essenes' in Modern Discussion," Zeitschrift des Deutschen Palästina-Vereins (1953-), Bd. 105(1989), 105-109.)
"You shall have a designated area outside yoj camp to which you shall go. With your utenSL shall have a trowel; when you relieve yourselv 0,1 outside, you shall dig a hole with it and cover68 up your excrement. Because the lord your God travels along with your camp."
— Deuteronomy 23:12, ca. 700 BC.
"While praising the people who built Masjid Quba, Allah says, 'Therein are men who love to cleanse themselves; and Allah loves those who i cleanse themselves.' (9:108) When this verse was revealed, the Prophet asked the people of Quba, 'What do you do when cleaning yourselv that Allah has praised you for it?' They said, 'yyees cleanse ourselves after emptying the bowels with water.'"
—	"The Ritual and Spiritual Purity," al-islam.org !
"Whilst relieving nature.
By all means pray that all sentient beings Will eliminate their impurities By completely ridding themselves of lust, anger and delusion.
Whilst washing up afterwards,
By all means pray that all sentient beings May turn towards the Peerless Way And leave worldly things behind them.
Whilst cleaning off the soil with water,
By all means pray that all sentient beings Will avail themselves of purifying patience,
That they may, after all, be free from any defilement."
—	"Pure Deeds," Avatamsaka Scripture, Mahayana Buddhism.
PAGE 15
PEITIES ANC*
DEMONS OF THE TOILET
1779 Kawaya-no-kami, god of the toilet. Drawn by Toriyama Sekien in The Illustrated One Hundred Demons from the Present and the Past.
7th-10th centuries AD Purple Maiden. In Daily Life in Traditional China, Charles D. Benn recounts:
"The privy had its own deity. According to a tradition recorded in the fifth century, she was the second wife of a provincial official. In a fit of jealousy the man's first wife slew her by throwing her into the pit of a latrine during the Lantern Festival, the fifteenth day of the first moon. Later the rule of heaven took pity on her and dubbed her the goddess of the privy. Mortals knew her as the Purple Maiden. It became the custom of the fifteenth day of the first moon to welcome the Purple Maiden at one's latrine by uttering the words, 'Your husband is not at home and his first wife had gone out. So, little damsel, you may come out [of the privy].' It was also the custom for householders to shine torches into wells and latrines on the last day of the first moon to expel all ghosts."
Other versions of the Purple Maiden myth feature a woman, ZiQu, who becomes goddess of the latrine. One account tells how ZiQu as a concubine was forced to clean the toilets and died from frustration and shame. In others, the jealous wife of her lover threw her in a cess pit as an act of revenge.
1848-1854 Akaname (filth licker), an un-earthly Japanese character, is known to come into the bathroom and lick the sludge from the bottom of the bath with its long tongue.
1863 Belphegor: demonic embodiment of sloth.
3. Collin de Plancy's "Dictionnaire Infernal" describes how for him to appear, he must be summoned while on the toilet, where one "offered him the vile residue of digestion." The Catholic Enyclopedia describes Belphegor as "baal of Mt. Phogor, or Peor, a mountain of Moab. ... Beel-phegor was the Moabite divinity who ruled over Phogor... To the baal was generally ascribed the fertility of the soil and the increase of flocks; he was worshipped by offerings of the products he gave and often by unchaste practices done in his honor at his sanctuary."
PAGE 16
ca. 211-224 AD START OF PRIVACY:
CHARIOT LATRINE AT BATHS OF CARACALLA, ROME
Similar in shape - with its circular cutaway - to earlier communal toilets,
the single latrine at Rome's Baths of Caracalla, decorated with chariot wheels,
individuates and exalts the act of defecation, a precursor to modern "thrones"...

PAGE 17

600
Dra
Archa1
10Q0 AD THE TOILETS OF JAPANESE PALACES
iwings to'lets and sewer systems from archaeological digs, eologists discover fecal remains - known as coprolites - which enable
them
to discern and recreate where toilets existed on palace grounds.
PAGE 18
THE GARDEROBE: INTEGRATION WITH ARCHITECTURE
During the wave of castle construction by the Normans after the invasion of England in 1066, the toilet becomes an integral part of architecture in the Anglo-Saxon world for the first time - though it is still supplemented by the convenience of the portable chamber pot. The walls of castles are thick enough to accommodate a small alcove with a chute in the bottom, sometimes featuring a wooden-seat, through which castle dwellers excrete. There is a dog-leg in corridors leading to the garderobe, to protect against odor and provide a modicum of privacy, but there are no doors, and multiple garderobes are often placed side-by-side. "Garderobe" is part euphemism, since the space resembles a closet, and part literal: robes are actually hung in the toilet, as in a closet, since the ammonia emanating from them kills fleas. Garderobes may be corbelled (that is, cantilevered) slightly over the castle walls to give the necessary clearance. Alternatively, garderobe chutes -a kind of proto plumbing, or echo of it from the Romans, whose knowledge and infrastructure in England is now lost - are sometimes sluiced with rainwater from the roof. The waste drops unimpeded several stories down - exhilaration, fear, and the cold play an important role in the use of the garderobe - into a moat or stream or simply onto the ground, sometimes periodically cleared by a designated servant.
1225 Aydon Castle, Scotland. Users are suspended outside the castle walls, their waste falling into a moat.
1295 Chirk Castle, Wales, garderobe with a small chute
TYPOLOGY
After the garderobe, waste can fall either in cesspit (A); be conveyed into a moat (B); drop into a moat (breteche-style garderobe )(C); or evacuated in multiple styles (D). (IE. Kaufmann, The Medieval Fortress, De Capo, 2004.)
rT,CAL stacking ¡proto-plumbing
absence of pipes forces innovation Sftfie section: most castles feature ' arderobes repeated on multiples H||S( but given that the garderobe and the chute are basical|y the same thing- they cannot be stacked into continuous core. Their chutes and outlets must be strategically arranged both to ensure the structural solidity of bewails in which they are carved out, and to avoid positioning over windows, doors, or other garderobes...
1300s Toilet tower: the southwest tower of Langley Castle, (¿rthumberland. Is entirely devoted to garderobes, four on each of the four floors, the chutes discharging Into a pit below, through which a stream of water could be diverted to flush.
Coats of Arms currently installed 'n Langley Castle's garderobes.
Architecture of evacuation: Vlollet-le-Duc's rendering of the stepped system of garderobe shafts at Langley Castle.
PAGE 19
1100s Staggered: garderobes at Chateaux de Tonquedec, Brittany.
1100s Arrayed: nine garderobe chutes at Portchester Castle, England: used by Benedictine monks in a priory within the castle walls.
WEAK POINT IN CASE OF SEIGE
The garderobe - a protrusion unnervingly similar to the breteche, from which objects were thrown at the enemy -has the reputation of being the weak link in the fortification. Iron bars are added to the chutes to prevent entry to the castle by attackers. In the siege of Chateau Gaillard, 1203-04, a French soldier spotted an unguarded garderobe shaft and climbed up it to penetrate the castle walls...
dedicates an entire (sub)building to garderobes. The gdanisko (knight's toilet) serves solely as such, and is accessed by an enormous aqueduct-like bridges; waste drops directly into the moat below. Drastic separation of toilet from living area - and, crucially, from the cathedral inside the castle - is standard practice in castles built by Krzyzacy knights.
>tructural similarities: Breteche for defence, larderobe for vulnerable excretion...
PAGE 20
PAGE 21
SLjthwell Palace: semi-communal s
ir norrlornl-icic' In/'otacJ r.
, housingt
S'>p°sslb
1350 =““'sing four garderobes, located at the circj® „niSibie distance from the inhabited area.
13th century Around the same time as garderobes are established In the architecture of castles, hurling waste from chamber pots into the street remains the norm (here in West Wickham, Kent).
^Hwas a student iry London in 1968, oHii^greatest rushes of enthusiasm lau ^^by Nicholas/Grimshaw and ^^Hf's "Bathrooyh Tower." A spiral-^Hrefabricated bathroom capsules Kl a ’it" j prner block converted stu	/ ovided vertical
Bti< between floors, and, if you made HI	ntually, an available bath-
■T	ceding
Bvo xt es of British architecture: ^Bnrs romanticism, and the Victorian ^Bng aesthetic that would later be s "high tech," on its effortless ■lUc	/	realize
I™	8 years to
Hpll Palace... like the Japanese,
HpH do not think of generations as ^Hive - therefore inevitably forgetful Hi cumulative - very convenient for ^■ medieval concepts...
PAGE 22
POPE JULIUS ll's TOILET
Sanitation is a communal concern during the late Middle Ages in Europe. Public lavatories, sometimes sited on bridges over rivers, are considered a way for towns to encourage public cleanliness by preventing them from dumping their excrement in the street. Even into the Renaissance, private toilets remain uncommon, even for elites:
"[It is] important to remember the difference regarding privacy, which was practically non-existent in 15th-century Italy and only started in some places to come into practice in Rome and Italy in the beginning of the 16th century and, later in that century, elsewhere in Europe. It was in medieval times quite customary for the pope as well as kings and princes to lay down on a daybed and hold an audience, even when they felt sick or were otherwise incapacitated. I do know Pope Julius II (1503-1513) did so when he was rather ill in 1512. These princes were always surrounded by their personal attendants and, if nature called, they were accommodated with their private 'secret' toilet brought to them in order to relieve themselves. Pope Julius II was one of the first* to have a private bathroom and separate toilet facility installed in the Vatican palace next to his bedroom (1507), but for medical purposes mainly.
"One of the reasons for less secrecy around the now very private custom was that doctors had to be able to continually observe the body movements of the pope, king or prince, in order to safeguard their health, so each deposit was examined by them. They still operated according to the Hippocratic theory based on the movement of 'humores' and body elements, which prevailed well into the 18th century. Of course nobody was allowed to tamper with royal or papal bodily fluids that were thus discharged from the body, or to substitute them for somebody else's [fluids]. This could also be a reason for sitting on the toilet in [the] company of others."
— Loes L. Raimond-Waarts, "An Expert's Take on Toilet History and Customs from Antiquity to the Renaissance," Bible History Daily, February 17, 2012.
*ln another article, Raimond-Waarts suggests that Pope tulius ll's predecessor, Alexander VI, may have been the first to have his own bathroom in the Vatican: "By having a room specially equipped for the daily washing routine, Alexander VI seems to have been a fairly progressive man." ("The so-called 'Bathroom of Pope Alexander VI,'" Biblioteca Apostólica, Vaticana / Brepols, 2003.)
1507 First private toilet in the Vatican?
Fig. 1: Apartamento Borgia, ground plan. Palazzo Apostólico Vaticano (after Rtcovmo 193$, 2 fig-1).
A • -<040 (che era un sottoscala)-A’ * -preccwo-
B« -passagiodalbSalaallacoaidetta Stanza da Lotto-C « -Stanza da Lotto (dicesi) di Aleswndro VI Borgia -D • -fincstrella che di verso ponente con le cuiochía (nkxhi*?J incassate nei muri che forma no gli sguin-d (dicesí che fosse un bagno)-
E » -passagk) dalla stan/a C alia stanzctta G*
F » -staiuctta dctta T Aleo va avente un soffit todi tegno a cassettini falto so tío Benedetto XV*
G » -grande stanza con armadi*
H • -punto dell'anttco camino ora chiuso*
I » -camino falto fdrse alTgioia di Alessandro VI Borgia-
PAGE 23
UTOPIAS
Any utopia worth its name must consider sanitation. Thomas More describes, in his Utopia (1516), a deterrent for the idolatry of gold and silver, which "will scarce gain belief among us, who value gold so much and lay it up so carefully. They eat and drink out of vessels of earth, or glass, which make an agreeable appearance though formed of brittle materials: while they make their chamberpots and close-stools of gold and silver."
Aslo in 1516, Leonardo da Vinci is commissioned by French King Francis I to build a new city at Romorantin, which he wants to become the seat of his kingdom. Da Vinci designs a subterranean system of waterways that would serve for conveyance, as a means of bringing in fresh water, and for evacuating foul water (in separate channels). Leonardo writes in the Codex Atianticus about the toilets of Romorantin: "The seat of the latrine should be able to swivel like the turnstile in a convent and return to its initial position by the use of a counterweight; and the ceiling should have many holes in it so that one would be able to breathe." Da Vinci describes the hygienic functions of the split-level city thus:
"Wagons or other similar things ought not to go by the high streets, rather, those should be only for gentlemen; wagons and other loads for the use and convenience of the people ought to go by the low ones. The privies, the stables and suchlike noisome places are emptied by underground passages, situated at a distance of 300 brachia from one arch to the next, each passage receiving its light through the openings in the streets above. And at every arch there should be a spiral staircase; it should be round because in the corners of square ones nuisances are apt to be committed. At the first turn there should be a door of entry into the privies and public urinals, and this staircase should enable one to descend from the high-level road to the low-level road. The site should be chosen near to the sea or some large river, in order that the impurities of the city which are moved by water be carried far away."
— Da Vinci, quoted by Dulie Horan in Porcelain God, 44-45.
Construction on Romorantin begins in 1517 but ceases two years later, due to the plague, lack of funding, and Leonardo's death. The sanitary utopia is his last project, and its principles will go unheeded for centuries...
1512 Purported self-portrait by Leonardo Da Vinci.

ca. 1517 Horse stalls in the stable drop waste into canal network below, which doubles as transportation system.
PAGE 24
REVELATIONS OF THE TOILET
In 1517, one year after More's Utopia and Da Vinci's utopia of waste management, Protestantism is born - and Martin Luther's key revelation of salvation through faith not work comes to him while he's sitting on the toilet. His study, where his 95 theses is likely composed, is next door to the latrine in his house in Wittenberg, Germany. The historical process that Luther would initiate, radically changes the European bathroom, while the Catholic church's attempts to reform worldly abuses and improve discipline among clergy and laity leads to new notions about the connection of spiritual and physical hygiene...
Luther's lavatory thrills experts
BBC, October 22, 2004
Archaeologists in Germany say they may have found a lavatory where Martin Luther launched the Reformation of the Christian church in the 16th century. The stone room is in a newly-unearthed annex to Luther's house in Wittenberg.
Luther is quoted as saying he was "in cloaca," or in the sewer, when he was inspired to argue that salvation is granted because of faith, not deeds.
The scholar suffered from constipation and spent many hours in contemplation on the toilet seat.
'Earthy Christianity'
The lavatory was built in the period 1516-17, according to Dr Martin Treu, a theologian and Luther expert based in Wittenberg.
"What we have found here is something very rare," he told BBC News Online, describing how most buildings preserved from that era tend to have served a grander function.
The toilet is in a niche set inside a room measuring nine by nine meters, which was discovered during the excavation of a garden in the grounds of Luther's house.
Dr Treu said there can be little doubt the toilet was used by Luther, the radical theologian who argued for a more "earthy Christianity," which regarded the entire human body - and not just the soul - as God's creation.
The Reformation, which resulted in Europe's Protestant churches, is usually reckoned to have begun when Luther nailed 95 theses to the door of Wittenberg's Castle Church on 31 October 1517.
The theses attacked papal abuses and the sale of indulgences by church officials, among other things.
Structural concerns
Luther left a candid catalogue of his battle with constipation but despite this wealth of information, certain key details remain obscure - such as what the great reformer may have used in place of toilet paper.
"We still don't know what was used for wiping in those days," says Dr Treu. The paper of the time, he says, would have been too expensive and critically, "too stiff" for the purpose.
And while it is probable that the inspiration that led to Luther's reforms occurred on this toilet, it is impossible to prove it beyond doubt, Dr Treu says.
Future visitors to Wittenberg's Martin Luther museum will be able to view the new find, though structural concerns mean they will not be free to test its qualities as a toilet.
Martin Luther
(1483-1546).
1516-17	m
Fount of the reforma- ■ yS tion: stone toilet at LuthiH House in Wittenberg. J| "Th s art was given to ¡‘m me by the Holy Sprit onJ8 this Cloaca..." The toil^E features a 30-square-cefl timetre seat with a hole « leading to a cesspit drain. Elsewhere, Luther I writes: "I'm like a np<0 | stool and the world's lilqH a gigantic anus, and we'rd about to let go of each il|j other."	S
1517 Martin Luther's toilet, Wittenberg, Germany - where the revelation of salvation through faith not works comes to him.

PAGE 25
PAGE 26
PAGE 27
Breugel the Elder, 1525-1569 (from Lampsonius's Pictorum aliquot celebrium Germanise inférions effigies, Portraits of some Celebrated Artists of the Low Countries.
1559 Pieter Breughel the Elder, "The Netherlandish Proverbs." The two backsides poking out of the ^.latrine over the bridge illustrate either the proverb "they both crap out of the same hole" (meaning to be in agreement) or "It hangs like a privy over a ditch" (meaning it is obvious). To the left, "to wipe one's ass on a door" (meaning to treat something 1 lightly).
PAGE 28
FIRST FLUSH
In 1592, one of Queen Elizabeth's 102 godsons, Sir John Harrington, publishes a manifesto so radical it must pose as a satire, titled "A New Discourse of a Stale Subject: Called the Metamorphosis of Ajax" (Ajax being a pun on 'jakes,' slang for privy). Harington describes in bawdy terms his idea for a crank-operated water closet that flushes excrement away with running water into a sewage system. Concluding a florid letter in the book to an "M.E.S. Esquire" describing step-by-step how to build the contraption, Harrington writes: "it is but a standing close-stool easily emptied. And by the like reason ... all other places of your house may be kept sweet." Harrington's toilet would rely on a valve trap design that maintains a seal between the pot and the cess pit below, reducing stench and filth drastically, keeping the impurities contained in a single room.
Harrington builds a working version of the device at his home in Kelston, near Bath; the queen visits and is impressed, later installing her own model in Richmond Palace. But the valve closet model of the flush toilet is not taken up for another nearly 200 years; noise, cost, malfunction, and unwillingness to change habits, even for the better, are the probable causes for the reticence of the English elite in adopting the technology. Harrington is prepared for failure though, writing, "But pah! what have I talked of all this while? of ADAX? Pa-pe, what an unsavoury argument is this! Nay, fie, I marvel you would read it. I have lost all my credit with out wenches, if they hear that my pen has thus polluted my paper."
Instruction kit
The parts of the metamorphosized "ADAX" laid out "all in sunder, that a workman may see what he hath to do." A martyr, at bottom, appears to resist the work of "the rare engineer," above.
A the cistern b the little washe c the waste pipe D the seat board e the pipe that comes from the cistern f the screw g the scallow shell, to cover it when it is shut down H the stool pot i the stopple k the current I the sluice
Disclaimer
"... all about your vessel and elsewhere, myst be passing close plastered with good lime and hair, that no air come up from the vault, but only at your sluice, which stands closed stopped; and it must be left, after it is voided, half a foot in clean water. If water be plenty, the oftener it is used, and opened, the sweeter; but if it be scant, once a day is enough, for a need, though twenty persons should use it.''
PAGE 29
"An excellent rule to keep a chimney from smoking, and a privy from stinking; viz. to make your fire in your privy, and to set the close-stool in the chimney." — Sir John Harrington, The Metamorphosis of Ajax (1592).
"Aqodly father, sitting on a draught To do as need and nature hath us taught, Mumbled (as was his manner) certain prayers, And unto him the devil straight repairs,
And boldly to revile him he begins,
Alleging that such prayers were deadly sins And that he shewed he was devoid of grace to speak to God from so unmeet a place.
"The reverent man, though at the first dismayed, Yet strong in faith, to Satan thus he said:
Though damned spirit, wicked, false and lying, Despairing thine own good, and ours envying, Each take his due, and me thou canst not hurt, to God my prayer I meant, to thee the dirt.
Pure prayer ascends to Him that high doth sit, Down falls the filth, for fiends of hell more fit.''
Harrington's toilet building
"I dare promise a form, and prefer an invention, where (by the help of wind, as he by water) I will build you a privy, without Houlden's wifes privy fault, that shall neither f—t, foist, nor stink, as she doth in her sleep; and how say you by that, sir? Marry, sir, my privy shall be a round (one of the five regular bodies in geometry), built like the tower of Babel, and upon vaults too, well tarrass'd after the finest fashion: now for the tunnel, I mean to raise it in the midst, provided that divers doors and windows shall be made on every side, that if never so little wind blow (if a man be weatherwise) he shall be able to empty his belly without diseasing his nose."
— all quotes from Sir John Harrington, Metamorphosis of Ajax (Chiswick: C. Wittingham, 1814).
PAGE 30
DECORATING (AND HIDING) THE CHAMBER POT
Despite the invention of the first flush toilets, they are very slow to take hold. Throughout the 18th century, the elite holds dear to the chamber pot. Defecation and urination can be concealed, and their products temporarily and discretely sealed, in a range of faux furniture and plush boxes.
1600 Royal Close Stool at Hampton Court: "These special individuals, having paid up to fifteen thousand louis d'or for the honor, watched as the king began the next ritual, the petit coucher. His Royal Highness bared his royal arse and sat upon the chaise percee, closestool, for the final royal movement of the day."
— Horan, The Porcelain God, 56.
1700s Louis XIV's novelty chamber pots, disguised as more dignified items, like the Red Maroquin travelling close stool In the form of a foldout book, featuring the coat of arms of the Grand Dauphin, spine stamped with Histoire Natural des Pays Bas fait par Painsun.
ca. 1750 Bidet designed by Simon Oeben complete with decorative cover, fashioned to blend in with other exquisite furnishings.
17th century Chaise bath bain de Cabinetmakers in trance went to great lengths to camouflage baths within pieces of fine furniture.
ca. 1790 Mahogany night table with pull-out commode.
18th century George Ill's chair depicting a lavish hunting scene on the exterior, hiding a chamber pot within.
1741 Positioning a chamber pot under a voluminous dress requires a tip-toe standing position - in a very un-private place, possibly a tavern - in François Boucher's La Bourdaloue. The Bourdaloue is the name of the small, gravy-boat shaped chamber pot, possibly named after the preacher Louis Bourdaloue (1632-1704), a Jesuit priest so captivating that his congregation could not leave their seats...
Tee Flowers of Edihbtrgh.
tlunnn /tin i //,/ /ton t/rt	ftr lotn Jtljt J**n V tit >■/	h/
ful' .Mff! //(V ¿r JLanfA^n S*BnJt* Pffiy FMSbrtl.	<
Typical fate of a chamber pot's contents. "Gardy loo" Is the warning cry for passersby, from the French gardez I'eau, or "watch for the water."
Below, a man walks the streets of Edinburgh offering two buckets for relief and a cloak for privacy. The same service in Berlin is provided by the abtrittanbi-eter, literally, the "poo final destination provider."
1857 The implementation of more modern water closets, with devices for flushing, does not halt the trend for integrating the chamber pot into furniture: the Cabinet d'aisances, literally a water closet, installed by Viollet-le-Duc for Napoleon in the Château de Pierrefonds, hidden inside a cupboard, which presumably must remain open while the device is in use. Behind: a secret door?
PAGE 32
INTEGRATION INTO ARCHITECTURE
In Yemen, the toilet is already a part of architecture rather than an elaborate or hidden pot. In a multi-floor building, probably pre 19th century, toilets are stacked, gradually shrinking in size towards the ground floor, sacrificing enormous space to the chute for free-falling waste.
Pre-19th century Toilet and washroom drainage in traditional Yemeni structure (illustrated in Friedrich Ragette, Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region (American University of Sharjah, 2006).
The same building, with a growing part of the section dedicated to the soil chamber.
PAGE 33
Liquid-solid separation in Yemen toilet, a practice lost in modernizing Europe.
Elevation of similar or same building, with later addition of external drain pipes, presumably liberating the section and minimizing smells (inside the building).
PAGE 34
VICTORIAN ENGLAND
FIRST FLUSH, GREAT STINK, EXALTED PLUMBER
Over the course of the 19th century, new technology for the toilet takes hold in London, with drastic consequences for public health, and the design of the city.
1775 Alexander Cummings receives the first patent for a water closet. Most important in his design is the introduction of the s-trap, a bend in the pipe creating a water seal that blocks sewer gases from escaping the toilet. His valve toilet features a lever that releases water and simultaneously opens a metal trap door for waste to be washed down. It immediately becomes popular in bourgeois and aristocratic English homes, but...
1815 Becomes illegal for London households to connect their cesspools to common sewers. The modern water closet takes off before the infrastructure to support it can be put in place.
1820s "The terraces, squares and crescents that sprang up in Bath, Brighton, Bristol and Tunbridge ... were almost certainly the first housing projects anywhere in the world to include water closets as a standard item: they appeared in advertisements for 'gentlemanly residences.'"
(Last Taboo, 14).
1848	Cholera, bourne by faecal matter, kills 14,000 in London and 55,000 throughout England. The first Public Health Act makes it compulsory for a fixed sanitary arrangement to be included in every new or refurbished household. The arrangement may be a "water closet, privy, or ash pit, furnished with proper doors and coverings."
1849	Nuisance Removal Act makes it a misdemeanor, in the case of new houses only, to cause "any sewage, drainage, soil, filth, or any matter of thing of a noxious or offensive nature, to run or flow into or to remain in any open ditch, gutter, drain, or watercourse."
1850	65 percent of homes in wealthy St. Dames's parish are now endowed with water closets. "This proliferation was a disaster in public health terms. The overflow from cesspits made its way into 'sewers' that were, for the most part, natural streams and rivers that emptied directly into the Thames." (Barbara Penner, Bathroom (Reaktion Books, 2013), 52.)
1850 Henry Roberts, Honorary Architect to the Society for Improving the Condition of the Labouring Classes, presents to the Royal Institute for British Architects ideal plans for housing laborers. Even in (ideal) architecture for the poor - tenements, boarding houses, or family cottages - every plan contains at least one water closet, as a private room or cubicle.
1775 First s-trap. Alexander Cummings' valve closet has two defenses against the stink of the cess pit below: a releasable metal flap (the "valve") and a water seal created by the s-trap curve in the waste pipe, a revolution in plumbing that enables the toilet - its odors now reduced or even eliminated - to be welcomed into architecture.
PAGE 35
PART
Henry
of the
OF THE PLAN
Roberts, Honorary Architect to the Society for Improving the Condition Labouring Classes, plans homes for the poor with toilets built-in...
1850 Plans for "double cottages with one bedroom," with one WC each, next to the scullery and the fuel storeroom.
Right, from top:
"Plan of Two of the Tenements in the Dwellings for Labourers at Birkenhead" featuring first floor water closets, pipes, and sinks.
"Ground floor plan of renovated lodging house, Charles Street, Drury Lane, to accommodate 82 single men," with bathroom but no water closets mentioned.
"Plans of the model lodging house,
No. 76 Hatton Garden, to accommodate 57 single women," with generous common lavatory.
A Living Room. B Bed Boom.
C Bed Room.
D Cupboard.
E Sculler?. F W. ClOJet, G Pipe».
1 Sink.
L Lobby.
U Staircase Lauding. N Entrance.
PAGE 36
1851	Amidst the inventions and exhilaration of London's Great Exhibition, public health campaigner George Dennings unveils a fundamentally new design: the "monkey closet/' which does away with the metal trap door (prone to breakage) and the metal bowl, instead using sturdy porcelain, more elegantly shaped, and a water seal that sits much higher in the bowl. The most advanced toilet in the world is, in the beginning, a public toilet: each day, 1,540 people (out of the 11,000 daily visitors) pay a penny for the experience of using it (the origin of the English euphemism for urination, "spend a penny").
1852	London embraces Dennings's model of the flush toilet, but its popularity exacerbates the city's sewage problem.
In an attempt to protect citizens from the filthy water of the Thames, an act of parliament makes it illegal to draw water from the river below Teddington Lock, in west London,
20 kilometers upriver from the Houses of Parliament.
1853	Second cholera outbreak kills 10,738. Epidemiologist and statistician William Farr later recounts that flush toilets had "the advantage of carrying nightsoil out of the house but the incidental and not necessary disadvantage of discharging it into the rivers from which the [water] supply was drawn." It is generally believed that miasma - a pervasive deadly smell - is at the root of the epidemics.
Mid-1850s 200,000 flush toilets now operate in the city, increasing household water consumption by 325 liters per day by 1856. At this exact moment of stress on water supply and expulsion, the London Metropolitan Commission of Sewers decommissions 30,000 cesspools, which at least hold waste water in place rather than letting it drain towards the Thames.
1851 "These Cocks have met the approval of all who have seen them": Dennings advertises his advanced flushing mechanisms at his stand at the Great Exhibition.
1851 Dennings's catalogue still features the valve-type, semi-circular water closets with exposed mechanisms -the model that his monkey closets, In use as public toilets, will soon supersede.
PAGE 37
1851 Toilets play a crucial (though backstage) role in the triumphant modernity of the Great Exhibition.
"The civilization of a people can be measured by their domestic and sanitary appliances."
— George Dennings, 1810-1882.
1851 "Retiring rooms" at the Great Exhibition feature Dennings's revolutionary s-trap flush toilets for public use. Over the course of the exhibition, 827,280 visitors pay one penny to use them, for which they also get a clean seat, a towel, a comb, and a shoe shine. The "toilet" is thus not only a device or a process of expulsion, but a mini restoration designed to boost physical appearance and mental and spiritual well-being. Whereas the term "spend a penny" takes hold, retiring room" - redolent of the American restrooms" - never catches on.
1851 Monkey Closet: Patented by George Dennings, the toilet features a preliminary shelf - the "wash-out" - for inspection and collection pre-flush, and s-trap for blocking odor from the drain.
PAGE 38
1856	Frenchman Joseph Bazalgette is appointed chief engineer of the Metropolitan Board of Works, which takes over the Metropolitan Sewer Commission, indicating the beginning of a more infrastructural, city-wide approach to the sewage problem.
1857	Charles Dickens writes in Little Dorrit: "Miles of close wells and pits of houses, where the inhabitants gasped for air, stretched far away towards every point of the compass. Through the heart of the town a deadly sewer ebbed and flowed, in the place of a fine fresh river." (Book 1, Chapter 3.)
1858	The Great Stink: the hottest summer on record exacerbates a smell from the Thames so foul that in the House of Commons the curtains are doused with chloride in an effort to block the stench.
18 June The Times reports: "What a pity it is that the thermometer fell ten degrees yesterday. Parliament was all but compelled to legislate upon the great London nuisance by the force of the sheer stench. The intense heat had driven our legislators from those portions of their buildings which overlook the river. A few members, indeed, bent upon investigating the matter to its very depth, ventured into the library, but they were instantaneously driven to retreat, each man with a handkerchief to his nose. We are heartily glad of it."
2	August Emergency Act is announced "to extend the Powers of the Metropolitan Board of Works for the Purification of the Thames and the Main Drainage of the Metropolis." To protect the population from miasma, Joseph Bazalgette is asked to extend London's sewers, which already by year's end leads to "a remarkable diminution in the prevalence of fever, diarrhea and other forms of disease commonly ascribed to putrid emanations."
1859	Most of the Jennings-style toilets are finally connected to the sewers.
(Porcelain God, 88).
1860	"First, let me record, that water-closets are not yet fifty years old; and a friend of mine, an eminent physician, told me that, some years after the introduction, Sir Herbert Taylor, in the course of a conversation, used this remarkable expression: 'England has never prospered since they turned the water-closets into the Thames.' So soon did the thoughtful and observing man foresee whither we are hurrying. But even then, they had cesspools; and only the surface-water passed off by small drains into the sewer. Water-closets introduced the sewers. In 1800 the City of London had only 7 miles of sewers; it has now 49 miles. ... lam informed that in St. Margaret's, Westminster, in 1854, the numbers emptied and cleansed were 282 privies and 1,015 cesspools; in 1855, 366 privies and 853 cesspools. Similar returns might be obtained from all London, and would show how very recent a thing it is to have turned this mass of dung into the Thames."
— Rochfort Clarke, The Reform of the Sewers, Where Shall We Bathe? What Shall We Drink?, Or, Manure Wasted and Land Starved.
1872 Metropolis Water Act performs two vital actions: it condenses eight separate water companies into one, rationalizing the job of the taking care of the city's nascent sewage system, and it forbids Londoners from leaving their toilets constantly flushing - a common practice, turning the toilet into a fountain, wasting vast quantities of water.
1875 A new Public Health Act mandates that all homes have access to water and proper sanitation.
1825 Fleet river, before being overun with sav" and conversion into an official sewer...
1844 Fleet Ditch, illustrated in Mr. Crosby's "Old and New London: Volume 2": river banks replaced by brick housing; pipes crossing the river presage its imminent transformation into one big pipe...
1845 Covering the Fleet river to complete Fleet street...
1874 Iron conduit for the Fleet installed under b • Pancras station.
PAGE 39
1858 "Your money or your life," cartoon from Punch magazine during the 'Great Stink.'
Flow of pollutants (left to right) into the Thames, a major sources of London's drinking water. (Roger Hansen, waterhistory.org)
PAGE 40
1877 Plumbing emerges as a profession and the figure of the plumber as a savior, bringing health, cleanliness and protection from foul smells. Edward VII, Prince of Wales, while recovering from a near-fatal fever, is recorded in Harper's Monthly Magazine as saying: "if I were not a Prince, I would be a plumber." S. Stevens Hellyer publishes the treatise The Plumber and Sanitary Houses: A Practical Treatise on the Principles of Internal Plumbing Work, or the Best means for effectually excluding Noxious Gases from our Houses, so popular that it is revised and reissued in four editions over the next decade. By connecting homes directly with nascent sewage systems, plumbing, at the same time as promising swift evacuation of waste, offers easy entry for all kinds of new dangers into the house: cholera, rats, methane gas...
"Interior of an old pan closet" - an argument for the new generation of wash-down porcelain flush toilets, sealed with an s-trap.
1877 S. Stevens Hellyer's treatise on the virtues of plumbing. Featured on the title page is Greek goddess of health, Hygeia.

"A dangerous water-closet ... walls and floors must be Isolated from the closet lest they become ventilation shafts for effluvium and other noxious gases."
1
PAGE 41
HL A year later, the American Dr. T. Pidgin Teale anatomizes the multitude of B" 'ble faults in modern plumbing systems, lacking traps for every connection P°?ainage pipes and with insufficient consideration of the health effects of *n oC|0rs. Arrows, usually signifying positive flow - of air, or people - '
bad
architec
tural drawings here indicate the movement of insidious poison...
Cistern on roof left exposed to sewer gases, polluting the water that serves the house...
Top of gutter pipe, connected to sewer left open under a window for its odors to enter the house.
Highlighted: Strapped drains.
Fireplace draws air froi the drain into the room
PAGE 42
1883 Joseph Bazalgette plans the addition of 1,200 miles of tunnels underneath London, demanding 318 million bricks and the redistribution of 3.5 million cubic yards of earth. His combined system carries rainwater, waste water and sewage. Meanwhile Haussmann's system in Paris, under construction at the same time, only (reluctantly) accepts human waste much later - much like Rome's Cloaca Maxima, it is conceived as a sewer that will remain clean...
Sewers are just one small component of Haussman's subterranean Paris.
1883 Punch magazine celebrates Bazalgette's obsessive work on the city.
PAGE 43
PAGE 44
GENEALOGY OF THE FLUSH TOILET
The development of the flush toilet Is agonizingly slow and anything but inevitable. A gap of 171 years between Harrington's design for a flush toilet and the next iterations, none of which is widely used, is followed by another 100 year gap before a flurry of new types in the late 19th century. This is the toilet's golden age of invention, led by England thanks to the strength of its earthenware and iron industries. Out of it emerges the dominant toilet type still used, fundamentally unchanged, in the 21st century: the all-porcelain wash-down flush model, based on Frederick Humpherson's Beaufort, a synthesis and improvement of inventions by his peers and predecessors. Between 1596 and 1885 though, using a toilet is an unpredictable experience in which one would be confronted by myriad models systems, and materials, with varying degrees of performance...
1870 IMPROVED VALVE + DECORATIVE CASING
S. Stevens Hellyer, Optimus Valve Closet
Improved flushing mechanism, and could be concealed In wooden box (above left) or "Moreton" chair enclosure. Installed in Buckingham Palace, Windsor Castle, Hampton Court Palace, also owned by the king of Thailand and Alexander II of Russia.
1870 TWIRL-FLUSH + CONICAL METAL BOWL
The Hopper Closet
Less expensive than the valve closet, but the stream of water circling the bowl is unable to force all waste through the s-trap.
1870 ONE-PIECE PORCELAIN T. W. Twyford, Washout Closet
Early earthenware water closet, contains no metal parts, reducing the price of the device (10,000 are sold in a single year) and launching the shape favored in northern Europe.
1596 FLUSH + VALVE Sir lohn Harrington
First flush water closet, using a valve as a trap and water flowing through a pipe from a cistern.
1852 WASH-OUT
PLATFORM George Jennings th„ Monkey Closet '
Showcased at the Great Exhibition features shelf of shallov water - the "wash-out* -for collection prior to flushing, and proves wildly popular among visitors despite the one penny fee for use.
1775 S-TRAP Alexander Cummings,
Patent 814.7 is for the first flushing water closet to use not one but two mechanisms for blocking the smell from the pipe: a valve, opened by a lever, and an s-shaped pipe, creating a water trap that odors cannot penetrate.
1778 HINGED VALVE Joseph Bramah
A new valve mechanism operates via hinged flap rather than sliding panel, which often freezes shut in cold weather. Lifting handle simultaneously opens valve and releases water from overhead tank into bowl. Bramah, a cabinetmaker and inventor, claims to produce 6,000 of the devices by 1797, and later designs the hydraulic press and the lock. His toilet becomes the standard W.C. for the next 100 years. All metal parts (overhead tank, bowl, spreader, inlet pipe, overflow outlet, valves, levers, counterweights, valve box, soil pipe) are concealed in a wooden cabinet, for sitting on. (Barbara Penner, Bathroom, 95.)

PAGE 45
1870 SIPHONIC DOUBLE FLUSH John Randall Mann, Syphonic Closet
Mann, an American, designs three-pipe siphonic flush action - one feeding the I pushing rim, one discharging into the basin, triggering the siphonic action,
4	and the third providing after-flush,
" guaranteeing passage of waste around the s-trap; syphonic flushing will jf, become the American standard.
1884 SIPHONIC WASH DOWN George lennings, Pedestal Vase
Switching to wash-down - where the water from the trap sits high, entering the bowl rather than sitting on a shallow isolated platform - increases the force of the flush. Wins gold medal at Health Exhibition, successfully flushing the following with 7.5 liters of water: 10 apples of 1 'A inches in diameter, one flat sponge, four pieces of paper "adhering closely to the soiled surface."
1884 ELEVATED CISTERN
Thomas Crapper, Valveless Water Waste
Preventer
"Pull and Let Go" flush action reduces waste of water caused by inferior valves. The system is developed in response to the 1871 Metropolis Water Act, which mandates a two-gallon (9 liter) flush, meant to eradicate the perpetual flush, left running by profligate users to guarantee cleanliness.
PORCELAIN PEDESTAL Twyford
hreaKuii^M'.	¡s designed by a potter,
ft®? b's. Their brochure boasts: "Unlike ordinary basins, it is not enclosed with woodwork but •fully exposed, so no filth nor anything causing « nsive smells can accumulate or escape a taction." Features first hinged seat (carved ¡Tm mahogany, walnut, or oak) allowing dual «Rg urinal. Can be decorated (in handsome ^tterns or blue painted images of trees) and Sed (into lions, dolphins, flowers etc.) Some odels contain porcelain paper holder (perforated peris popularized in England in 1880). There is ¡ttle interest initially, except in medical journals; Queen Victoria's endorsement and installation • Buckingham Palace after using a Unitas in a Doncaster hotel in 1886 launches the model commercially. Exported internationally, its impact ¡ssuch that in Russia the word "unitas" (yHMTa3) Stillstands for toilet. The first sanitary fixture made of porcelain, stuck to the floor, and plumbed in: the device becomes a part of architecture...
1884 ONE-PIECE
wTsh-out The Unitas J-W.
1885 FIRST ALL-CERAMIC ONE PIECE WASH-DOWN The Beaufort, Frederick Humpherson
After a four-year apprenticeship with Thomas Crapper (the Humphersons lived opposite Crapper's Chelsea showroom), Frederick Humpherson designs the Beaufort, soon the standard toilet from which all subsequent Anglo models derive. Water seal is raised to within the bowl. In England, the wash-down style prevails over the wash-out style partly because of offense taken at waste left visible on a plinth preflush, but also because the technique uses less water. Above: the deep, almost-vertical bowl of the washdown system. Photographed by the editors in ATP Bathrooms showroom in London, owned by Humpherson's great-grandson, Geoffrey Pidgeon.
PAGE 46
FINAL TOILET: FREDERICK HUMPHERSON'S BEAUFORT
Humpherson's stand at the 1855 International Inventions Exhibition, on Exhibition Row in Kensington, London. The Beaufort wins the Bronze Medal at the exhibition (and also the Certificate of Merit at the Sanitary Institute) and soon becomes the most popular style of toilet. (Humpherson makes more money though on his Patent Pipe Joints, widely needed as more and more houses link up to the city's sewage system.)
PAGE 47
■■ I he Beaufort, "suitable for cottages or servants' closets, where an inexpensive but thoroughly efficient Pedestal Closet is required." Price: 28 shillings, with range of add-ons, including hinged oak seat for 18 shillings. Combined with the "Premier" Syphon Cistern for flushing, Humpherson defines the formula for the toilet that will remain largely unchanged.
TRADE MARK.
This Closet, unlike the ordinary form of basin, is not cased with woodwork, but forms a solid fixture by itself, so that the enclosure under which a receptacle is so often formed for dirt and filth is entirely dispensed with ; free access is thus given to all parts so that both the floor and basin can be easily kept clean, while the air can circulate freely round it. The mahogany seat being hinged, may be lifted, and the basin used for either a slop sink or urinal, and thus a wet seat, which is so objectionable, can be easily avoided.
All connections being above the floor and within sight, any leakage can be at once detected, and if the joint to the soil pipe is made with our Patent Pipe Joint an escape of sewer gas becomes almost an impossibility.
The basin and trap are constructed similar to our well-known flush down Closet, which gained the Certificate of Merit of the Sanitary Institute of Great Britain, 1885, and has met with such general approval wherever fixed.
The outside of basin may be had with a raised ornamentation of ivy leaves, either plain or coloured.
Far excels any washout closet, and it has been highly recommended by Architects, Sanitary Engineers and others. It is made in one piece with either S or P trap.
Our Syphon Cistern is specially suitable for this closet, as it has a full ij-in. water way so can be used with either ij-in. or i jr-in. pipe, and has no valves to get out of order.
HUMPHERSON & CO.,
Patentees and Manufacturers of Sanitary Appliances, 297, FULHAM ROAD, LONDON, S.W.
"Far excels any washout closet." As well as superior flush performance, the Beaufort boasts the absence of wooden casing around the porcelain, notorious for trapping dirt; for sitting on though, one may now opt for a mahogany seat.
PAGE 48
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FINAL TOILET
In the space of 20 years at the end of the 19th century, all the ingredients of the modern hygienic toilet reach a satisfactory stage of evolution, achieve wide public acceptance, are firmly embedded within architecture and plugged into functioning infrastructure. The standard components for managing excreta will not change substantially for more than a century. The western system - in which the toilet is "wet" and the cleansing is "dry" - will begin to spread around the world, reversing cultures in which the toilet is dry (or uses less water) and the cleansing is wet...
BEAUFORT WASH-DOWN TOILET
ELEVATED CISTERN
1885 All-porcelain one-piece bowl, wash-down style, built-in s-trap.
1884 Thomas (Wrapper's Valveless Water Waste Preventer is the model for the water-saving elevated cistern, with gravity-assisted flush.
<*♦ 11*4*1.)
No. 486.588.
TOILET PAPER
s. WHEELER.
TOILET PAPEB BOLL.
Patented Deo. 32, UQi
F«?f
1880s The roll, already widely in use in the US and England before the model is patented by S. Wheeler in 1891.
PAGE 49
private room
SEWAGE CONNECTION
FINAL TOILET
1877 Sanitas toilet, raised on a plinth, adjacent to sink, in well-I- appointed bourgeois ; ■ home, illustrated by S. Stevens Hellyer in The Plumber and Sanitary If. Houses.
1884 Standard connection from the home to the municipal sewage system (Drainage and Sewerage of Dwellings, W.M. Paul Gerhard).
2017 Fast forward to the 21st century: components of the toilet remain the same, except for the lowered cistern. The most generic - and normative - possible toilet, from Wikipedia's 'Toilet' page.

1901 Following Vanderbilt's lead, the English bathroom unites the toilet and the bath In a single room, a modern arena for Venus.
PAGE 50
TOILET + BATH IN ONE ROOM
George Vanderbilt's 1885 bathroom in New York features water closet, wash stand, and bathtub all adjacent. Slgfrled Gledion remarks in Mechanization Takes Command (1948): "In contrast to the principles of the ruling taste, the nickel-plated pipes and even the lead plumbing are left unconcealed in the Vanderbilt bathroom. Its compact arrangement seems to announce the future American bath cell." In Vanderbilt's estate in Asheville, North Carolina, he has 57 bathrooms installed.
PAGE 51

g5 poulton's -Improved trough closets" for schools, factories, j Dublic toilets, automatically flushed, erases the distinction between the Jet and the plumbing...





DOULTON & CO., LAMBETH, LONDON a.*., PAISLEY & PARIS.
DOULTON’S IMPROVED TROUGH CLOSETS.
(In Salt Glazed Stoneware or Enamelled Ware), with
PATENT AUTOMATIC FLUSH TANK.
rrHIS Closet i. flu.hed by moan. of an Automatic Tank which can ho regulated to diachargo at any rcauirad interval according to the number «ring the apparatus The cistern lent with each range i, „f 6ufL ” capacity to thoroughly clear tho trough, and to ronow the water that lion in it.
The water area i. large and ofSufficient depth to prevent tho noil being objoctionablo.
Ring Seats may be hied to thin doeot, no riser boiug necessary, and it can tliorofore bo easily kept cleat,
SPECIALLY ADAPTED FOB USE IN
SCHOOLS, FACTORIES, AND PUBLIC PLACES.
lulu ONS PA T K NT ffi AUTOMATIC | FLUSHtKG YANK

No. 161.
DOUBLE THICKNESS PINE SEAT.
No. 112
No 125
8ECTION OF CLOSETS.
•—•••ÿ'.o*—-I"—-IfZ o*-|—-■—["■;
For Prit*«**, *w» pajra

216
PAGE 53
jTWYFORD RANGE: TRIUMPH OF MINIMALISM
jjJL the slogan, "A place that's all yours. For life." Twyford launches the latest all-white range cept for the art-deco inspired Clarice, with black seat), free of the decoration that routinely edorned the toilet bowl a century earlier - as if minimalist design can combat the inevitable dirt 3he toilet will confront. Elaborate molded shapes like the lions and dolphins of the Unitas have =n eradicated in favor of minor variations on a single shape...
|p 6°'1
PAGE 54
AUSCHWITZ'S COMMUNAL TOILETS
1941 Prisoners' toilets, Auschwitz-Birkenau
"The latrine is an oasis of peace. It is a provisional latrine which the Germans have not yet provided with the customary wooden partitions to separate the various divisions: "Nur für Engländer', 'Nur für Polen", "Nur für Ukrainische Frauen", and so on, with, a little apart 'Nur für Häftlinge'. Inside, shoulder by shoulder, sit four hollow-faced Häftlinge [prisoners]; a bearded old Russian worker with the blue stripe OST on his left arm; a Polish boy, with a large white P on his back and chest; an English POW, with his face splendidly shaven and rosy and his khaki uniform neat, ironed and clean, except for a large K G (Kriegsegefangener) on his back. A fifth Häftling stands at the door patiently and monotonously asking every civilian who enters loosening his belt: Êtes-vous français?"
— Primo Levi, Survival in Auschwitz, 1947.
1941 Washbasins in Auschwitz sanitation block: painted on the walls are German messages telling the prisoners that they must wash to keep clean and healthy.
"I suddenly see Steinlauf, my friend aged almost fifty, with nude chest, scrub his neck and shoulders with little success (he has no soap). [He] sees me and asks me severely why I do not wash. Why should I wash? Would I be better off than I am? Would I please someone more? Would I live a day longer?.... Does Steinlauf not know that after half an hour with the coal sacks every difference between him and me will have disappeared?....
[Steinlauf says]"...even in this place one can survive, and therefore one must want to survive, to tell the story, to bear witness; and that to survive we must force ourselves to save at least the skeleton, the scaffolding, the form of civilisation.
"We are slaves, deprived of every right, exposed to every insult, condemned to certain death, but... ... we must certainly wash our faces without soap in dirty water and dry ourselves on our jackets....
... for dignity... We must walk erect, without dragging our feet... to remain alive, not to begin to die."
— Levi, Survival in Auschwitz.
PAGE 55
1940s Anne Frank's toilet, decorated porcelain.
IHtiFrank family toilet, Hporcelain. The toilet role	quoti
elamily in Iiiding... ,
■day Mr. Dussei was here, Kne all sorts of questions -Be, what time the cleaning lies to the office, how we've c use the washroom Shallowed to go to the
though he's usually quiet, ¡tally pives rise to hilarity, he misfortune of adoring Lords without knowing ~
■ mean. One afternoon (n't use the toilet because »re visitors in the office. Hirait, he went to the m but didn't flush the toilet, us of the unpleasant odor, id a sign to tne bathroom i>yp - gas!' Of course, he )anger - gas!' but he »SVP" looked more iHe didn't have the faintest t it meant 'please reply.'...
his morning the toilet was land Father had to stick in ooden pole and fish out pounds of excrement and |ry recipes (which is what or toilet paper these days), ad we burned the pole....
in no longer flush the toilet ■thirty at night... We've pngly reminded of the fact re lews in chains, chained pot, without any rights, but ousand obligations."
Frank, Diary of a Young Girl •1942-1 August 1944), 1947.
PAGE 56
THE OUTHOUSE
In the countryside, the toilet is still isolated from the body of architecture, a miniature architectural typology of its own: the outhouse, which, like the messy sewage systems in cities, is a bearer of disease. In the US in 1910 John D. Rockefeller sets up a commission to find out why the population of the American south are being underproductive to the point of being accused of having a laziness disease. Sickly pale and thin, the commission guesses they are anaemic and sets out on a survey of the land. The farmers with fertile soil are anaemic; farmers with hard soil are not. The cause is found to be hookworm, which crawl 30 centimeters a day for four days, before stopping and dying on the seventh day. A campaign is launched to create sanitary outhouses, with pits at least six feet deep.
1920 "Unhooking the Hookworm": silent educational film created by the International Health Division of the Rockefeller Foundation.
"An 'always tired' feeling is one of the signs of a mild case."
"Under a microscope, they look like this."
1908 Sidney Morse, in the chapter "Prevention of communicable disease" in his encyclopedic Household Discoveries, warns: "Privy vaults and wells which connect underground lead to funeral processions." House on the right is already tainted...
PAGE 57
Diseases of the outhouse: "tuberculosis, typhoid, etc."
1908 "We must destroy the breeding places; the disease will then disappear. Replace this unsanitary out-building with the various types that protect against Hookworm Disease. Your health officer can tell you what type to use in your particular community... The clean home is usually a happy, healthy and prosperous one."
— Sidney Morse, Household Discoveries.
. ar)( the outhouse is a place of repose 1933ln tfr at least for Jun'ichiro Tanizakl in and be,3L|on on his country's absorption of his ¡nt0 architecture, In Praise of Shadows: modernlIy
K«rdscan describe that sensation as one sits '*?. light, basking in the faint glow reflected ¡(1 the s^0ji( lost in meditation or gazing out at from tn ’The perfect place to listen to the the 93lrof’¡nsects or the song of the birds, to Hz moon, or to enjoy any of those poignant vieW 1 (s that mark the change of the seasons, monne suspec( ¡s where haiku poets over the ^ere'have come by a great many of their ideas. s9f. one could with some justice claim that ■fog elements of Japanese architecture, the it Is the most aesthetic. Our forebears, making 1 trv of everything in their lives, transformed h tby rights should be the most unsanitary 'min the house into a place of unsurpassed ance replete with fond associations with the duties of nature."
PAGE 58
GLOBAL DIVERSITY
A vast range of adaptations exist to accommodate the toilet in architecture, traditional practices that remain unchanged until globalization and urbanization intensify in the late 20th century; described in the 1985 manual Sanitation Without Water...
LADAKH "... most houses have Indoor latrines which are on the upper floors. On the floor of a small room next to the kitchen / living room there is a thick layer of soil from the garden. In the floor a drop hole leads to a small ground-floor room This room can only be reached from the outside People excrete on the soil which is on the floor. Then they push soil and excreta together down the drop hole. They may also add ashes from the kitchen above. The household members bring loads of soil into the room when necessary. For the long winter a supply Is piled Into one corner of the lartine room upstairs. A spade or shovel Is also kept in the room. Normally there Is no anal cleaning."
BHUTAN "The traditional farmhouse ... usually has two or three floors. Pigs, cows and horses are on the ground floor... The latrine consists of a hole in the floor of the entrance platform and/or first-floor balcony. The excreta fall on the ground or on the floor of an enclosed pig-pen. People use short pieces of twigs for anal cleaning."
CHINA "The Chinese have made compost t i» human and animal excreta tor thousands of °n'
In 1952 an estimated 70 percent of all human^' excreta produced in China was collected and38^ used as fertilizer. In 1956 this figure had incre } to 90 percent, altogether some 300 million tonsB ... In rural areas people often combined the lar 11 with a pig-pen in such a way that the pigs co ij16 feed on human excreta. The Chinese do not d° 1 this any longer. The authorities decided it was hygienic, and besides some of the fertilizer val00* of the human excreta is lost."	"
PAGE 59
AFRICAN STANDARDS
A""1 baths, and sinks, widely available in many styles, are fixtures in the Toilets' _ falling under the jurisdiction of The American Architect, which bat^3°5 begins the standardization of the devices of cleansing and relief...
PAGE 60
THE ONE PIECE
After the standardization and device-ification of the fixtures of the bathroom - toilet, bath, sink - the next step is to do the same to the entire room. One of the first to take on the challenge is Buckminster Fuller, who presents a prefabricated bathroom as part of his Dymaxion house. The prefab bathroom does not take off in the domestic setting, but catches on for high-tech contemporary public toilets...
1938 R.B. Fuller,
patent application (granted 1940):
"Attempts have been made heretofore to provide prefabricated bathrooms with the object of lowering the cost of building a bathroom into a dwelling. Such bathrooms, however, by reason of their great weight and more or less conventional construction, have involved relatively high costs by the time they have been shipped and installed ready for use. Furthermore, such bathroom units as heretofore known have been largely designed for introduction into a new building under construction and have not been particularly practical for installation in a dwelling already built without involving too great an expense.
"A further object of my invention is to provide prefabricated bathroom sections of sheet metal having bathroom fixtures formed integrally therewith.
"It is an object of my invention to provide a compact, light, prefabricated bathroom which may be readily installed either in a dwelling under construction or in a dwelling that is already built.
"It is another object of this invention to provide a prefabricated bathroom of such a compact construction that it can be separated into a few sections which may be readily carried by hand through a doorway and up a staircase of the average house.
"It is another object of this invention to provide a prefabricated bathroom fashioned from a relatively few units made of sheet material to provide an integral structure light in weight but having the requisite strength and rigidity when assembled.
"Another object of this invention is to provide a two chamber prefabricated bathroom, one chamber being suitable for use as a lavatory and water closet, and the other chamber being useful as a combined tub and shower, and either of these chambers being useful alone."
PAGE 61
^Kj»rchitecture from now on will increasingly 19?Z t)ie character of equipment," Metabolist take.o Kish0 Kurosawa writes in his "Capsule 3,cf11 ...¡„n.' In his Capsule Tower In Tokyo, built
0^arat,°Sear, the toilet, bathtub (and also the the sat11 ^television, and telephone) are embed-ded'inWthe architecture.
2010 Capsule toilet: a continuous surface encompassing various
i. Photos: Charlie Koolhaas.
PAGE 62
WET WALL
Enabling modern toilets / bathrooms is the wet wall, combining the plumbing for all three fixtures - toilet, bath, sink - into a single wall; on the other side, the kitchen can plug into it.
July 1888 Wet wall: "Safety in House Drainage," W. E. Hoyt, C. E., in Popular Science.
PAGE 63
1908 “Bed and bath for a dollar and a half": the State Hotel, Buffalo, Is designed to accommodate private bathrooms In every room. Smaller windows every two bays (right) reveal the rhythm of plumbing cores within.
tEl toilet
I standardization of the private bathroom / toilet as the concentrated space for cleansing K evacuation of waste is accelerated by new construction that accommodates these rooms ail ^atically in their plan. One of the first typologies to integrate bathrooms is the hotel: lines h llways* passing strangers by the (shared) bathroom door, will start to feel an unacceptable Ration of Privacy...
PAGE 64
TYPICAL TOILET
In the featureless, empty, stacked open plans of mid-20th century New York, the toilet and the elevator are the only Intractable objects...
toilets are the only items drawn into the typical plan, any activity is possible on this floor, but the activities of the toilet are certain.
1972 489 Fifth Ave.
1905 111 Broadway.
1972 100 William St.
PAGE 65
f -«PROVISION in the endless plan
OV gven _ 0r especially - in a utopian endless interior, there must be toilets. Archizoom's ^ Stop City 'n *act conta'ns a 9enerous four toilets in each of its infrastructure bars / thickened on|y gesture towards partition), serving approximately 20 people each, judging by the ^3 ounding free floating furniture of beds, couches, and dinner tables.

Bathroom in the back, fireplace in the front.
GLASS HOUSE
Philip Johnson's Glass House (1949) confronts the issue of the toilet in the transparent open plan with a circular brick core.

PAGE 67
Enson's plan for the combined fireplace/ room in his glass house is a weird mixture donism - the combination - and pragma-- the containment of all ducts and flues in a e curved wall gives the plan a Gropius-like ison's teacher at Harvard) timidity...
PAGE 68
THE BATHROOM: ALEXANDER KIRA'S MANIFESTO FOR INTIMATE ERGONOMICS
A professor at the Center for Housing and Environmental Studies at Cornell University, Alexander Kira, an architect, embarks on a 10-year study, from 1966-76, of "perhaps the most important private place in the house." Inventing a method of intimate, empirical ergonomics - models test sinks, toilets, urinals, baths, showers, nearly always naked; hitherto unmapped regions of the body are unflinchingly diagrammed - and historical analysis of other cultures (he notes countries where women stand and men squat to urinate), Kira makes highly rational design recommendations for our most intimate devices, which he is well aware will most likely not be taken up - for irrational, cultural reasons. His principal recommendations regarding the toilet are that squatting is indisputably the anatomically correct position in which to defecate and that toilet paper is appalling at cleaning the perineal region - one of several unfamiliar terms Kira employs.
The first edition of The Bathroom: Criteria for Design (1966), reporting the results of a survey of
1,000	middle class consumers, sold 100,000 copies, according the New York Times. Kira becomes a consultant for American Standard and other bathroom fixture designers. The second edition, published 10 years later, aims for even greater market penetration. It features all new illustrations and photographs (now, the models do not wear anonymizing white sheets of card over their faces) and consumer products that are on the right ergonomic path - bathtubs with handles, the "Atlantic" bidet / water closet (an early washlet from Zurich). The general inertia in bathroom design is due to two factors: ingrained habits that cannot be changed through the presentation of rational evidence (though the book is nothing if not a valiant attempt to do just that) and the fact that, Kira says, the user of the bathroom is typically not its original buyer, which is the builder, the developer, or the architect.
Glossary
Unfamiliar terms introduced or used by Kira:
Anogenital: compound word, used in relation to cleaning.
Astrovac: toilet for astronauts resembling a handshower, "contains a sponge fed with water and a cleansing agent," and a vacuum line to remove waste.
Elimination: blanket term for defecation, urination, menstruation, but also shaving and every other form of relieving the body of substances.
Genitourinary: relating to the genitals and urinary organs.
High-rise water closet: all western water closets are high-rise, meaning they force a sitting position rather than the more natural squat.
Kenophobia: fear of large open spaces, possible manifestation of which is found in the reported need to lock the bathroom door even when no one is in the house. Perineal: region of the body around the anus and genitals, never cleaned effectively by toilet paper and neglected by modern bathroom fixtures except the bidet, which is mostly shunned in any case.
Sudatorium: Roman type of saunas using dry heat to stimulate perspiration.
Urinette: urinals for women, designed to be used in the "hover" position.
Wohnbad: the living bathroom, for any purpose as well as cleansing.
PAGE 69
According to the US Department of Housing and Urban Development, 275,000 people are injured each year in baths. Consumer activist Ralph Nader endorses Kira's book on the back cover (of a different edition than the one below) calling it an exposé of the "inadequate safety, hygiene and convenience features in bathrooms." Nevertheless, Kira maintains a disinterested, non-ideological tone throughout, free of exasperation.
The publication of the second edition, despite the design flaws it highlights, marks a new period in the American bathroom, in which people begin to embrace the room as a place of luxury, privacy, and an opportunity for home decor. Kira tells the Times: "People want more modern bathrooms. Hammacher Schlemmer's bath department subsists on the inadequacies of the average bathroom. Sales are booming on storage caddies, mirrors, robe hooks, towel bars, hampers, medicine chests and hand showers. In the end by buying this way, one pays far more than if these devices and accessories were part of the basic bathroom design."
From the preface:
"Finally, I would like to recognize all those persons who wittingly or unwittingly contributed to my investigations. Some are anonymous to me; some prefer to remain anonymous to you. To all I would like to express my appreciation."
— Alexander Kira Ithaca, New York May 1974.
0
PAGE 70
URINE TRAJECTORIES
52 / COMPARATIVE MALE AND FEMALE URINATION POSTURES
Figure 52, a flaccid adult penis undirected or, more accurately, unheld will not project a stream any farther from the vertical axis of the point of origin than the distance achieved by a standing female. An erect penis will not readily permit uri-nation^ tjgcause the engorgement closes off ttie ureters. In small boys, however, the situation is different, for the penis of an infant assumes almost a horizontal attitude with the familiar and
144
results in short bursts of urine that are unpredictable as to distance.
In the male, the urethral opening is located in the penis and thus lies outside the body envelope, permitting approximate control of the urine stream within the entire volume circumscribed by its possible trajectory. This control (and trajectory) is, however, achieved only by manual manipulation of the penis. In point of fact, as illustrated in
ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF URINATION
. possible urination stances for men and women (disregarding clothes bunched around haunches / ankles)...
by now so familiar that we overlook its significance with respect to the apparent differences in the behavior and capabilities of the sexes:
A man and wife have a urination contest. They draw a line on the ground, and the husband prepares confidently to win. "Uh uh, dear," says the wife, shaking her head; “No hands!"5
■when I first came to Cornell in the summer of '72, Radicalism" was rampant. In Willard Straight Hall, thi r eo-^wiic student center still showed many signs of the »n ored Student occupation of the year before... "Killing me softl r" »as the soundtrack for an almost complete segregation of the Kudent body. Foucault was around, teaching, but ofteb n the lyi'd, picnicking in the ' gorr One of the professors jat the School of Architecture was a certain Alex Kira - notorious for the book on 'bathrooms' that he published in 1966. In feet, he (was preparing a new edition; 1966 had been just a few years »>o early for the clinical honesty with which he had waited to ¡pre-empt once and for all the delicate subject of what N xa!led, comprehensively, "evacuation." Typically taggic as 'humanistic, always slightly doubting its legitimacy ariong Jme plethora of the true sciences that defined the camnus of »prnell, Kira showed what a genuinely scientific approach in »chitecture would look like. A ruthless objectivity wolhc! take Bje human body Kira precisely inventorized the anatqmical Idiosyncrasies of men and women - as a beginning, focus Burely on the processes of "elimination," and define tlfe Correct dimensions, positions, and angles to rewrite thf rules »the toilet. Like a second, more focused Muybridge Hi reordered the most intimate actions of his naked models -We woman apparently one of Cornell's librarians - in Sequential series, and measured the most ideal dime^iiions g accommodate them, discovering that all devices on fie inarket were totally inadequate. Culturally blind, non-western ^Bns of elimination were included and praised for tndfr »eater efficiency. As students, we never knew where tiese photographs were taken... A separate laboratory? In sdhool? At home...?
§ I, tfiat he pees straight out between ;litaf|er , t^e bowl when seated on a water sea* a	on the seat or lid when held up.
^t o' p forced by the circumstances of their ^.,¡115 ^^ever, to handle the penis, men then ._-thih9- ^on|y contjnue to do so throughout the -js,c°'r' This facet of men’s urinary behavior is
PAGE 72
THE CLEARANCE PROBLEM
sitting, typical toilet:
"conventional water closet at a conventional 380/400-mm (15/16-inch) height" leaves no space for wiping at the back and no space for overshooting at the front.
37/PLAN VIEW OF SITTING POSITION ON A CONVENTIONAL WATER CLOSET AT A CONVENTIONAL 380/400-MM (15/16-INCH) HEIGHT
therefore, that, by beginning with a conventional-height water closet and equipping it with some form of footrest so that one could assume a squat posture after being seated, one could resolve both problems. Indeed, several such fixtures have been tried over the years, as Illustrated in Figure 40. Unfortunately, however, the matter is not so simple, as we shall see In a moment.
If we assume a conventional fixture approximately 405 mm (16 inches) high equipped with Integral footrests at a height of 205 mm (8 Inches), similar to the Illustration In Figure 40, we have theoretically established the proper relationship for a full squat as described earlier. It proves to be virtually impossible, however, to assume such a squat posture after one Is once seated—except perhaps for a trained gymnast. In order to assume the posture and lift one’s feet up into position, It Is
necessary first to lean back, bring up the feet, position them properly on the footrests, and then try to rise from a leanlng-backwards position forward to a balanced squatting posture, without tumbling over forward In the process. Even when possible to execute, this maneuver is more awkward and strenuous than getting up and down from a simple squat posture, particularly in terms of balance.
Clothing again provides a further complication. With one’s feet effectively bound by lowered clothing one must either try to lift both legs simultaneously or else disrobe in order to lift one leg at a time. Shoes aggravate matters even more since the feet must be lifted higher In order to hook the heels behind the footrests.
Another approach in this situation is not to assume a horizontal squat position but to remain
126
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DEFECATION
problem areas: no clealance
PAGE 73
38/PLAN VIEW OF NECESSARY dimensions ■r and clearances for a semi-squat
WATER CLOSET AT 255-MM (10-INCH) HEIGHT
In a rotated 45 degree squat position. This, in some ways, is similar to the position assumed, for example, when one is using some temporary form of footrest in conjunction with a conventional closet, as has sometimes been recommended, or when one is using some of the "health closets,” which are based on the idea of simply having the knees higher than the pelvis. Theoretically these are all based on the assumption, as illustrated in Figure 32, that once a tight squat posture is assumed it can be rotated. This is true but only within limits. The difficulty with many of these rotated positions is that they are rendered ineffective as a defecation posture because one's energy and musculature are working to maintain one’s balance and cannot at the same time be employed for “Pulsion, nor can one relax the anal sphincter wtlile in a strained posture. In order for the pos-
ture to be effective one must first be relaxed, comfortable, and properly balanced; only then can one fully bring into play the musculature for defecation. The most important relationship is between the trunk and the thighs; the positioning of the legs is of secondary benefit.
One rather extreme way in which such a rotated posture might be made to work is to provide a full backrest that would effectively lock one into position so that maintaining one’s balance and posture is no longer a problem (see Figures 41 and 32). In such a case, one would not only be locked into the proper posture but would also be free to devote one’s efforts to the task at hand. For greatest ease of assuming such a posture, the backrest could be made adjustable so that one would sit, lean back, place one’s feet on the footrests, and then raise the back, bringing one into proper posi-
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DEFECATION 127
Ief: ample arance it and
|^^H||uatting, ideal toilet:
^^^■nimum overall inside front-to-back dimension should ^■Uproximately 455 mm. The height from the floor to the ^^Hpnt of the seat can be established at approximately In order, however, to contain seated male urination ^Hberly> the front lip of the container should be raised ^Ker than the level of the seat."	___
i_______420_______i
PAGE 74
SQUATTING MADE EASY
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DEFECATION
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY
For the purposes of analysis we can divide the activity of defecation into several distinct phases: adjustment or removal of clothing: assumption of a squatting or sitting position; initiation of defecation by straining and relaxing the anal sphincter; defecating, urinating, and farting; wiping, cleansing, flushing; and readjusting one's clothing. While this sequence may be more or less complicated by incidental activities such as reading or by personal idiosyncrasies such as repeated flushing or examination of one's feces, these do not essentially alter the basic pattern. From a design standpoint, the major variable in this activity is the particular posture assumed for which the fixture will have to be designed. The management of clothing, wiping and flushing procedures, and so on are secondary, and the treatment of specific applications will vary, depending upon the precise posture and fixture involved.
The ideal posture for defecation is the full squat, which provides the stomach muscles with the
proper support during the strainlng/expulsion process, as contrasted with the familiar casual "sitting-on-a-chair” posture so often assumed on a standard water closet, particularly by those who read there. In this posture the individual is essentially passive and unable to do much to aid the body's natural mechanisms. Conversely, it is possible, by doubling over, folding the arms across the stomach, and drawing the feet back, to assume a fair approximation of the desirable squat posture even on a standard closet. As Figure 32 illustrates, the squat posture can thus be assumed in a variety of attitudes, particularly since the most important relationship Is that between the trunk and the upper leg. Stressing the legs is also helpful and can be achieved by drawing the legs back, which automatically transfers some of the body's weight from the buttocks to the legs. In this respect the concept of a water closet as a "throne" is particularly invidious in terms of its suggestion about sitting posture, particularly when the water closet
has been encased in a chaise percée, a decorative marble shroud, or some other bit of disguising cabinetwork, since in all such instances one Is prevented from drawing one's feet back.
Although we can postulate that the free full-squatting posture for defecation practiced by most of the world's population is ideal from the viewpoint of physiological functioning, this posture is an unaccustomed and difficult one for most Western people to assume, let alone maintain, for any length of time, particularly if unaided. While this difficulty can easily be overcome with sufficient practice and exercise, a more serious impediment to its adoption is the problem posed by contemporary Western clothing. In large measure the problem of clothing is responsible for the gradual shift In Japan from their traditional squat closets to Western-style water closets. Having largely adopted Western dress, they also have to adopt the Western closet. In societies where some version of a loose gown is the traditional costume for both men and women, this can easily be gathered up around one's waist, out of the way, leaving the legs free. Western clothing, in contrast, almost invariably involves some form of under or outer garment—trousers, shorts, girdles, panty hose, and so on—that must be lowered around one’s legs or else removed entirely. If simply lowered, as is now customary, these garments would Interfere with the assumption of a properly balanced stance, which involves spreading the feet. Furthermore, they would be in danger of being soiled in the fixture or by one's own actions. Urination, for example, would be impossible In this situation. In addition, one is liable to lose the contents of one’s pockets, as many unfortunate souls can wryly testify. In short, the only satisfactory way to use the traditonal form of hole-in-the-floor squat closet is to disrobe completely from the waist down. Given our accustomed habits and in light of the practical, not to mention the psychological, difficulties,
32 / POSSIBLE ROTATIONS OF SQUAT POSTURE
118
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DEFECATION
Rotatable squat: "The ideal posture for defecation is the full squat," which can theoretically be assumed "in a variety of attitudes," though toilets are not designed to accommodate them comfortably.
Concepts for adapted toilets, allowing a modified squat, since "Most Western people unaccustomed to the posture cannot begin to achieve the position commonly achieved by most primitive peoples..."
Right: Le Corbusier's "posture closet" for Pozzi, Milan: raised bar under the bowl serves as footrest to elevate legs, allowing a semi-squat.
Squatting fantasy: "One rather extreme way in which ... a rotated posture might be made to work is to provide a full backrest that would effectively lock one into position so that maintaining one's balance and posture is no longer such a problem ... In such a case, one would ... be free to devote one's efforts to the task at hand. For greatest ease of assuming such a posture, the backrest could be made adjustable so that one would sit, lean back, place one's feet on the footrests, and then raise the back, bringing one into proper position."
lean-on water closet
MODIFIED CONVENTIONAL SEAT
MODIFIED CONVENTIONAL WATER CLOSET
PAGE 75
138	DESIGN CRITERIA FOR DEFECATION
ch to a semi-squat water closet" or: the perfect toilet
rganic and inorganic deposits and precipitates. ”»nding upon the relative hardness of the water
. whether or not It has been treated i n a munici-*al treatment plant, the precise composition of these deposits will vary rather substantially, hard water resulting In the greatest proportion of inorganic scale build-up. In addition, many of the cornas |n (to water react chemically with the urea in the urine and Produce ideal conditions for bacterial growth. This is particularly true in areas such 3S the underside of the rim, which retains splashed urine. Is alternately wet and dry, and is rarely cleaned. Allowing urine to stand in the bowl In order to conserve water, as is sometimes done, accelerates bacterial growth, which in turn provides more base for the adhesion of inorganic solids. There appears to be little that can be done In these respects except to clean the fixture regularly, preferably with a cleaning product formulated for the purpose.
From a design standpoint, however, there is a good deal that can be done to Improve the cleana-blllty of fixtures as far as configuration and accessibility are concerned. Placement of the fixture can also be important since often a fixture that appeared easily cleanable in Isolation proves virtually impossible to clean after installation because of inaccessible spaces in and around the fixture.
Perhaps the most important criteria are the simplicity of the shape and the simplicity of the joints the fixture makes with the wall and the floor. In this respect, the wall-hung fixture possesses the one considerable advantage of eliminating the most bothersome juncture. Its use is, however, limited by the additional costs involved in providing the special mounting arrangements necessary. One of the simplest, most direct, and effective approaches to this problem is illustrated in Figure 48, where the base and back of every fixture is straight-sided and modular with respect to i, common tile dimensions; this permits the fixtures to become integral with the wall and floor surfaces instead of being applied to the surface as is commonly done. A further refinement of this approach would be to provide a cove at these junctures so
that the finished joint is rounded and the surfaces flow smoothly together.
Probably the worst configurations as far as cleaning is concerned are those found in the inexpensive European water closets that resemble Rube Goldberg contraptions where every turn of the trap Is left exposed (see Figure 49). The complexity of these shapes renders them virtually impossible to clean properly. Such fixtures are actually no more complex than others; the problem is that the enclosing shroud normally used has been omitted, presumably for cost reasons, leaving the functioning parts exposed. While this may raise, in the minds of some, the aesthetic arguments about form following function, it can
Includes nozzle for water spray cleaning of perineal region
Low-rise (semi squat): 255 mm (10 inches)
139
The ideal toilet: "any fixture designed to accommodate defecation should observe the following criteria: encourage and permit the comfortable assumption of a squat-like posture; provide appropriate and adequate support; have an opening adequate to permit hand access to the anogenital region; incorporate provisions for anogenital cleansing; have functional, easily accessible controls from both a seated and standing position; minimize soiling problems and permit ready cleaning; and be conceived of as a part of a comprehensive modular system of personal hygiene facilities."
nozzle extends to spray perineal region
Close to Ideal: the Swiss "Atlantic" bidet / water closet designed by Closomat, an early washlet.
"Possible approach to a high-rise water closet": similar provision of greater front and rear perineal clearance, but for a more conventional sit toilet.
High rise (sit): 400 mm (16
PAGE 76
URINATION: ARC AND SPLASHBACK STUDIES
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR URINATION
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR URINATION 149
Problem: typical urinals in public toilets result in excessive splashback, here causing rust on adjacent stall.
Culprit: typical urinal configurations that do not take physics into account.
Analysis: Variations in splash effects according to angles between stream and contact surface.
Solution: Empirical approach to a public male urinal.
"One is seldom aware of this problem, however, because clothing keeps one from sensing the back splash."
water closets the bowl configurations are such that these areas are small and difficult to hit with any degree of accuracy. Because of the necessity to stand up close to the front of the bowl to catch the dribble at the end of the action, the possibilities are further limited to the sides and back. Since, however, the back wall in most cases is vertical or nearly vertical, the target area presented is small and is useful for only a brief period since the length of the stream trajectory conti nuously varies. This leaves only the side walls as a feasible elongated target. Since this area rarely exceeds 50 mm (2 inches) by 180 to 205 mm (7 to 8 inches), it becomes obvious that not only is the proper trial-and-error maneuvering difficult to accomplish successfully, but also half of the cone of the urine stream inevitably falls on or outside the bowl, no matter how careful and accurate one may be in the process of continuously repositioning the stream. Jiggling the penis after urination results, of course, in more urine droplets going astray—onto the rim, the seat, the floor, and one's clothing.
Still another problem that arises in the use of the water closet is the back splash resulting when the urine stream hits a hard surface. While this is a potential problem with any container, it poses particular difficulties with the water closet since this fixture has obviously been primarily designed to accommodate defecation, and urination has, as it were, been left to be a hit-or-miss affair. Any stream of relatively nonviscous liquid hitting a hard surface (including a body of liquid) will result in a considerable splash. The direction and extent of this rebound, or splash, Is determined not only by the force with which the stream strikes the surface but also, and more importantly, by the configuration of the surface and the angle at which the stream hits it. Proper manipulation of this latter factor can appreciably reduce the quantity of splash and can control its direction. Perhaps the worst problem is posed by the use of the old-fashioned flat-pan wash-out closet so much in
53/STREAM DISPERSION CHARACTERISTICS OF MALE URINE STREAM
favor still in many parts of Europe. Aside from its unhygienic aspects as far as defecation is concerned, it is undoubtedly the poorest urinal of any water closet still on the market. Because of Its configuration (see Figure 47), the only comfortable or feasible target is the horizontal shelf, which generally holds 10 to 20 mm (% to % inch) of pan water. A urine stream striking this ledge results in the maximum possible back splash.
Table 2 and Figure 55 indicate the extent of back splash resulting from various combinations of stream velocity and Intercepting surface angles. In every instance, the full extent of the spray could be measured within a 30-second period, the assumed average time of urination. Perhaps the most common duration is from 15 to 20 seconds, though the range can extend all the way from 10 seconds up to a minute and a half, or in extreme cases even longer, depending upon a given individual's bladder capacity and habituation. Graus cites 45 seconds as the average time in military situations.' This figure appears to be high and is undoubtedly due to the lack of opportunities for urination available In such circumstances. In the home situation a shorter duration tends to be more common. These dispersion figures are for a controlled steady-state simulated stream and can vary from one extreme to the other, depending on the particular circumstances.
Size and Shape of Container The particular combination of size and shape may vary over a considerable range so long as certain criteria are met.
When we consider that the stream assumes the form of a warped conical solid with a shifting base (see Figure 54), it is obvious that the size and shape of the necessary container or enclosure are directly related to its distance from the point of origin in order to contain the stream completely. The closer the container is to the point of origin the more compact it can be and the less danger of
54 / CHARACTERISTICS OF MALE URINE STREAM
PAGE 77
r
_,D WATER CLOSET-URINALS HnR MEN AND WOMEN
earlier measurements of the ln ]Sga\ region, Kira finds a mismatch ■P* en body shape and the shape of be toilet: made for the body, the toilet P p0t actually conform to it. When <^eS to urination, the problem itCts worse: men need a larger target 9e women need less contact with BEceat The only hybrid feature of the * pventional water closet is the ability C raise the seat, which converts it into |f°poorly functioning (too small) male ^¡nal. Kira designs a genuine hybrid device for urination and defecation, one for men and one for women...
Modification of high-rise water closet to accommodate male urination. "By further modifying the contours of the back of the bowl, as illustrated in Figure 57, and by incorporating a valley on the center axis, it is possible to nrovide a natural and positive target area and a shape that serves better to contain the stream and minimize back splash. ... Raising the back even further improves its utility as a urinal, but the higher the back is raised the more difficulty it poses with respect to the arrangement of clothing, particularly in the case of seated females, who generally gather their outer garments up around their waist."
The hover position: "In one survey conducted in Great Britain, almost 96 per cent of the women interviewed indicated that they never sit on a water closet in a public facility. Instead, they hover over the water closet... in order to avoid any contact with the fixture. Such a posture is, however, awkward and difficult to maintain and more often than not, especially when one is in a hurry, results in urine being dribbled on the seat, the bowl, and the floor. Obviously, each successive user feels, in turn, even more justified in avoiding contact with the soiled fixture and puddle on the floor and so tends to assume an increasingly extreme posture with the inevitable result that her performance is, in turn, increasingly poor."
WOMEN
Small side pads allow supported hovering, "desirable from the standpoint of coping with clothing and would also tend to force the user to remain in the proper position.... Such a posture would be equally suitable for defecation and would resemble that assumed on the proposed high-rise closet."
PAGE 78

For the male, little is ever said about genitourinary hygiene and, consequently, little is ever done."
7
DESCRIPTION OF ACTIVITY
Perineal hygiene is the general term used to describe the cleansing of the genital, urinary, and anal regions of the body, both male and female. Of all the normal body cleansing activities these are undoubtedly the least understood, the least discussed, and the least performed.
Although it is convenient for purposes of discussion to group these areas together, each must be examined separately in terms of its own unique problems and requirements.
Genitourinary The principal concern here from the viewpoints of hygiene, health, and aesthetics is the external cleansing of the vulvar region of the female. This comprises the area surrounding the urethral and vaginal openings, the mucous membrane of the labial folds, and the pubic hair.
Unlike other areas of the body, the vulvar region poses particular hygiene problems, chiefly because the labial folds and hair that protect the body openings also retain urine and other body secretions from urination, menstruation, and coi-
PERINEAL
CLEANSING
tus. This makes effective cleahsing difficult and often results in odors, irritations, and discomfort. In addition, the hairy parts of the body a’re inherently difficult to clean.
In terms of cleansing, vulvar hygiene may be divided into two separate components: after urination and during and after menstruation, pregnancy, and coitus. The first stage is fairly simple and rarely presents any particular problem since women tend, by and large, to keep themselves reasonably clean by blotting with tissue—a practice men would do well to copy—or by using the bidet to wash the vulvar region. In addition, regular washing of the region as a part of the normal bathing routine is generally sufficient in most cases. Topical cleansing following coitus or pregnancy or during menstruation poses a greater problem in that positive washing is generally indicated. This again is commonly taken care of by use of the bidet, by partial or complete bathing in the tub or shower, or by vaginal irrigation.
Reflected ceiling plan of the human body, showing both male and ^Tlf'e.Ptnne1al re9i°n- "mhe length of the perineum from the cleavage of the buttocks to the front of the genitals ranges from a minimum of approximately 150 mm (6 inches) to 305 mm (12 inches). Conventional water closets ... often meet these dimensions exactly with no roomfo' error, wiping, or a slightly erect penis."
Medical opinion is divided on the advisability or harmfulness of using the various recent “feminine •hygiene” deodorants. The argument against them rests on the point made earlier—that a normal healthy vagina needs nothing more than normal care with soap and water and that such deodorant sprays can mask a more serious sign of possible infection and generally lower the body’s inherent resistance to infection by destroying the normal resident bacteria. As with many of the bactericidal soaps and underarm deodorants, there are numerous people who have developed severe allergic reactions. Somewhat ironically, women are also cautioned not to use these sprays immediately before coitus in an effort to be more alluring, because this use has resulted in a number of Instances of genital irritation in both partners.
For the male, little is ever said about genitourinary hygiene and, consequently, little is ever done. Several matters, however, deserve attention. One is the blotting of the penis after urination—and after “jiggling”—to remove those last drops of urine that otherwise are absorbed by the clothing. Contrary to the age-old and universal jingle: “No matter how much you jiggle and squeeze, those last few drops always go down your knees!”, more times than not those last few drops are simply absorbed by the underwear and soak through to the trousers, particularly if they are tight-fitting. (“Speaking of the Mahometans,” Tournefort says, “when they make water, they squat down like women, for fear some drops of urine should fall into their breeches. To prevent this evil, they squeeze the part very carefully, and rub the head of it against a wall; and one may see the stones worn in several places by this custom.”)1 In this respect, tight-fitting underwear, jockstraps, “jock-ey”-style shorts, and the like pose a special problem since confinement of the genitals tends to result In more perspiration and to hinder evaporation of both urine and perspiration so that “jock itch” and chafing are common if cleansing is not frequent and thorough. In this respect loose-fitting underwear is preferable, if unfashionable at the nnoment.
Thorough washing of the genitals is also par-
ticularly important in uncircumcised males. Although circumcision is still widely practiced today as a hygienic measure, it is by no means universal, and careful washing under the foreskin is essential. Indeed, some physicians observe that if one can be taught to brush one’s teeth, one can be taught to wash one’s penis and that circumcision is a wholly unnecessary bit of ritualistic mutilation in the guise of hygiene.
Vaginal Irrigation Internal cleansing, or vaginal douching, has long been a part of “feminine hygiene" though it is not nearly as widespread today as in the past. This internal irrigation is sometimes accomplished by using the spray (douche) feature of the bidet but more commonly is accomplished by means of a syringe inserted into the vagina. (The word douche, which is not quite polite these days, is simply the French word for shower and refers not only to the spray in the bidet but also to any shower; this term was, in fact, in common usage in this context in the last century, even in the English-speaking world.) Although plain water is most commonly used, various other solutions, medicated or not, are also used for special purposes. Until fairly recently it was popularly believed that douching immediately after coitus with a mildly acid solution was also an effective means of contraception. Modern medical opinion holds this to be totally erroneous, and, in fact, appears to be divided on its desirability or necessity under any circumstances. In general, its use today seems to be recommended largely for therapeutic reasons in the treatment of vaginal infections, which are quite common, and occasionally for just plain cleansing after coitus or menstruation. The arguments against regular douching rest on the fact that the body normally produces certain acid substances that have a bactericidal action and that would be washed away and thereby lower resistance to infection. Even its therapeutic use is opposed by some physicians on the grounds that douching merely removes the evidence of infection and relieves the symptoms so that patients are tempted to discontinue treatment.
Anal Hygiene The anus and the area immedi-
PERINEAL CLEANSING 87
PAGE 80
ALTERNATIVE UNIVERSE: THE LIVING BATHROOM
Kira features a German concept for the "wohnbad," launched in Rohm, Darmstadt: a room for drinking beer, playing with children, making notes, and entertaining visitors (in conversation pit)...
customary in order to accommodate the additional equipment and space necessary for one to enjoy it as a “live-in bathroom.”14 The biggest problem here is with architects and builders who persist in ignoring the bathroom and who continue to treat it as one of the least important spaces in the home. In contrast, clients who build or remodel almost invariably tend to opt for larger and more personalized bathrooms.
Although we generally tend to think of large multipurpose bathrooms as “master bathrooms," as they most often are, in some instances they are also conceived of as “family rooms," as in the case of the German Wohnbad illustrated in Figure 59. The "living bath” is here conceived as a space and an activity to be shared by the entire family as a natural part of daily living, a concept similar to the Scandinavian sauna and the Japanese bath. This concept has had a long history, though it has rarely been acknowledged during the last several centuries, in what some might regard as an even more extreme form, the living bathroom also assumes the role of simply another space in the home where one might even entertain friends when appropriate. Again, there is considerable historical precedent for this. Elsie DeWolfe, for example, entertained her friends in the bathroom on occasion, and Yves St. Laurent is reported to do his best designing in his bathroom, which he has outfitted as a studio. Indeed, there is virtually no limit to the aesthetic, philosophical, or functional approaches that can be taken toward the bathroom once one frees oneself from the shackles of stereotyped thinking. One can find examples today of bathrooms that are treated as family rooms, private sitting rooms, libraries, offices, formal drawing rooms, art galleries, garden rooms, beauty parlors, gymnasiums, and so on. This new interest in bathrooms is also evidenced by the recent appearance of two splendid picture books by David Hicks and Mary Gilliatt, which illustrate a number of these more imaginative approaches.15 The mere existence of these books is also evidence that, at least in some quarters, the bathroom has even become fashionable. During the past year or two a number of sanitaryware manu-
facturers, both in Europe and the United States have brought out bathtubs large enough for two and also twin washbasins (see Figure 60). Purely sanitary considerations aside, there is no question that this represents a major step forward from the not-too-distant past when, for example, ladies would take a bath in a linen shroud so as notto see themselves naked and thereby experience all manner of distressing feelings.
What we might regard as the body/sex liberation of the past several years is also producing some changes not only in our attitudes toward the bathroom but also in its character. One of the most persistent and curious myths of the modern Western world has been that good taste with respect to home furnishings is somehow the natural birthright and exclusive prerogative of the female sex-most particularly with respect to the bedroom and bathroom. Nothing could be further from the truth, but the result has been a nearly complete feminine domination of these areas until very recently. In an industry speech, fashion designer Bill Blass argued for at least a more classic, if not masculine, character for the bathroom and noted that for years a full half of the population has been totally ignored in this matter.16
This new interest in bathrooms is also apparent in the rapid growth, particularly in the United States, of a sizeable bath products industry supplying every conceivable kind of decorative bathroom accessory. In addition, many plumbing contractors are opening associated “bath boutiques" to be able to supply the consumer with a completely furnished bathroom package. While this represents a major advance in many respects, there is still vast progress to be made. Unfortunately, a substantial portion of accessory items sold can only be charitably described as “decorative shlock," and one cannot help but wonder whether the bathroom has really become more acceptable or whether more people have simply
59/APPROACHES TO A "LIVING BATH”
172 SOCIAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF BATHROOM DESIGN
wohnbad
PAGE 82
«•< ■ THE BATHfiOOM
FIGURE». ALTERNATIVE “SiTTINCr METHOD OF EM-KMINC AND LEAVING A HIGH BATHTUB. Skirtawl 35 ini'li U.l? \rt \iilli lint 29 iinJu s in an Soot iilJuvs ■* pencil to Lan Don rim, wt, and -.Lkle in.
anonymity to enjoyment
1966 First edition.
Cultural revolution: a sequence of photographs in the 1966 4 edition, showing a clothed ana anonymized woman apparently: struggling to extricate herself from a bathtub, is reshot alm|l identically a decade later, thn time with the model nude and |

PAGE 83
outset when one is still standing and until one is sitting. This support can be furnished by the outer rim provided it is narrow enough to be easily grasped and by either a special rim configuration on the wall side or by a horizontal bar. With such support, it is possible to loosen one's grip sufficiently to allow the hands to slide along the support and thus ease the body down gradually and securely from a squatting to a sitting and then a reclining position.
During the raising phase, the process is essentially reversed. After pulling the body up to a sitting position, one can push the body up sufficiently to allow the legs to take over.
In both of these cases the effectiveness of the approach is obviously dependent upon the inside depth of the container. If the depth is about 305
body weight from a balanced vertical sitting position to tS reclining one. Whereas this maneuver | can be accomplished by using the legs as a counterbalance, similar to a "sit-up," this is not an easy | task for most people. Again, most commonly, the weight is transferred to first one elbow and then both until finally the weight is borne by the back | and the buttocks in a semi-reclining position. I Reversing this process and getting up again is generally more difficult (as suggested in Figures ! 15and 19), largely because the muscles must now | do all the work rather than merely cushion the I effect of gravity.
p‘During the lowering phase, it would be desirable [.'fb provide support that would be used throughout the process, in other words, horizontal support on J two sides that could be grasped almost at the

mm (12 inches), It is not possible to get sufficient leverage. Conversely, If the depth is 510 mm (20 inches) or more, it is impossible to do more than exert a pulling force.
Another approach sometimes suggested is a pulling approach using a sloping bar on the side wall. The premise seems to be that one can pull oneself up hand over hand to a standing position and vice versa. Such a technique is, however, totally dependent upon a secure footing since the feet act as a pivot point about which the body is caused to rotate. Bathtubs, by and large, cannot be counted on necessarily to provide such secure footing.
Needless to say, support devices are only as effective as the solidity of their construction and security of mounting. In this respect, the matter of
integrated and comprehensive design becomes important once again for, in attempting to install such devices after the fact, one often finds it impossible to locate a suitable anchorage where necessary. Similarly, inadequate support devices can break a fall, but they also can give one a dangerously false sense of security; unfortunately there are inexpensive devices on the market that are adequate for holding on to but not if one is in the process of falling and bringing one’s entire body weight to bear under conditions of dynamic loading.
Wafer Supply The first, most obvious, and traditional source of water is that necessary for filling the tub. In addition, however, a second source is needed for properly rinsing the body with clean running water at the conclusion of the
64 ¿.DESIGN CRITERIA FOR CLEANING - HE eODv-BAI.i
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR CLEANSING THE BODY-BATH 65
PAGE 84
the american flush: a primer www.youtube.com/watch?v=8ppfrv8e37o
Verbatim transcript of military style informational short film on the inner workings of the American siphon-flush toilet.
This is an ordinary water closet. Or was, until we cut it down the middle with a diamond saw. The exposed side has been covered with clear plastic to contain the water.
So don't adjust your set, and don't call a plumber.
When the handle is pressed, a lever Inside It lifts It pulls a rubber stopper called a flapper valve from the bottom of the tank. Instantly, tank water Is released to gravitational forces, which draw it down the water closet's main channel toward the base
As water circles the bowl's upper rim, some is forced through holes called "rim slots." They flush tiny jets along the sides to clean the bowl.
Most of the water, however, rushes down and through a narrow opening near the base.
There, In a carefully formed mix of air and water, an eductor, or pulling action, is generated.
When the flow ends, so does siphonic action. Water trickling down from the tank now rises in the bowl and siphon channel.
Its presence seals noxious sewer fumes below the gas trap.
Meanwhile, back at the tank, two things happen. As water drains from the tank, the flapper valve drops, resealing the main channel. The ball fl°a -having reached the bottom of its swing down t * tank, has fully opened the inlet valve attached to the other end. Water begins to flood the tan again.
PAGE 85
,t ¡he same time, the release of tank water pushes It has nowhere else to go, but out the sewer line. The double action process continues until bowl water up the siphon channel and over the lip.	water levels are too low to run over the lip.
Its spill pattern creates a siphon along the underside. Together, the eduction and siphonic action (j,aw water and waste from the bowl.
As the tank refills, the ball float rises, until somewhere near the top, it closes the inlet valve. Cycle complete.
In the great tradition of army training films, let's look at this process one more time, [chanting...]
flush-start start
START- FLUUUUSH-START FLUSH-START
sim-flush
sim-flush
SIPH0N-3ET
SiPHONOET
SiPHONOET
s!du0N0ET
SIPHONOET
SIPHONOET
SIPHONOET
SIPHONOET
SIPHONOET
SIPHONOET!!!!!
VACUUM
VACUUM
VACUUM
VACUUM
VACUUM
SIPHON!
SIPHON!
SIPHON!
SIPHON!
SIPHON!
SIPHON!
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAL
RE-SEAAL
REE-SEEAAALLL
SEAL
SEAL
SEEEAAALLL
PAGE 86
WHOLE EARTH CATALOGUE
In 1968, Stewart Brand launches "a Low Maintenance, High Yield, Self Sustaining, Critical Information Service," the Whole Earth Catalogue, a prot0 internet in print, a bridge between hippies, nascent techies, and DIY enthusiasts. Each issue contains "tools" for living, from new ideas about organizing society to instructions on how to build your own house, including methane extraction and composting toilets - a low-tech and age-old closed loop system, requiring none of the infrastructure or aesthetics of the modern bathroom. "Don't pass your load on," writes Steve Durkon of the Lama Foundation. "We are all one. What's yours is mine ... There is a good solution-put it in the ground. Give it back to mother nature; she can use it."
The use of anaerobic digestion of organic waste materials, such as farm manure, litter, garbage, and night-soil, accompanied by the recovery of methane fuel, has been an important development in rural sanitation during the past 10 to 15 years. This development is basically an extension of the anaerobic process for sludge digestion used in municipal sewage treatment to small digestion-tank installations on farms. These farm plants comprise one or more small digesters and a gas-holder. Manure and other wastes are placed in a tank which is sealed from atmospheric oxygen, and are permitted to digest anaerobically. The methane gas, which is produced during the anaerobic decomposition of the carbonaceous materials, is collected in the gas-holder for use as fuel for cooking, lighting, refrigeration, and heating, and for other domestic or agricultural purposes, such as providing power for small engines.
"Sanitation and health" chapter, including guide to building a human waste composting pit, which, after a few months of decomposition, "will provide a good fertilizer which can be applied immediately to the fields or stored..."
Guide to extracting methane from anaerobic decomposition of human waste.
CROSS-SECTION OF INDIVIDUAL DIGESTER UNIT
Either single or multiple family installations can be provided, the choice depending on whether the single family has sufficient manure and other wastes to operate a unit. A minimum single family installation would normally include a digester tank of about 4-5 m^ capacity and a gas-holder of at least 2 m capaci y-Two or more digesters are desirable so that there will not be an interruption of gas production and so that one tank may be lo while the other is digesting. A single gas-holder can serve more^ than one digester unit. If two or more families living in adjac compounds have not more than one farm animal each, it maV advantageous to combine their wastes in one digester installs • from which the gas could be distributed to each dwelling.
Composting
PAGE 87
Still an option: the "minimum plumbing" guide.
$5.00 postpaid
* Excreta Disposal for Rural Areas and Small Communities
E G. Wagner & J. N. Lanoix £ 1968: 187 pp.
$5.00 postpaid
* Water Supply for Rural Areas and Small Communities E. G. Wagner & J. N. Lanoix 1959; 340 pp.
$6.75 postpaid
all three from;
The American Public Health Association
1740 Broadway
New York, N. Y. 10019
or WHOLE EARTH CATALOG
A reasonably safe way for a villager to prepare excreta for use as fertilizer is for him to compost it in a privy pit. After the required period of composting, the pit can be emptied, thus eliminating the handling of the raw excreta. . . .
1.	Dig a pit of required size, the bottom of which should always be above ground-water level.
2.	Before the slab is placed, cover the bottom 50 cm (20 in.) of the pit with grass cuttings, fine leaves, garbage, paper, etc.; but allow no rubbish such as metal cans, glass bottles, or similar materials to be deposited therein.
3.	Place slab, and complete superstructure, keeping in mind that they will both be moved periodically to another site.
4.	In addition to depositing human excrement, throw the daily garbage into the pit, along with cow, horse, sheep, chicken, and pig manure, as well as urine-soaked earth or straw. The latter materials are important, as urine is rich in nitrogen, an essential plant nutrient.
5.	About once a week throw a few kilograms of grass clippings and fine-texture leaves into the pit. After some experimentation, one can arrive at a pit mixture which will provide a good fertilizer.
6.	When the pit's contents reach a level of 50 cm (20 in.) below ground, a new pit is dug 1.50-2 m (5-6.5 ft) away (more if desired), and the superstructure and slab are moved over it. The first pit is leveled, finally, with 15 cm (6 in.) of grass clippings and leaves, and the top 35 cm (14 in.) with well-tamped earth.
7.	When the second pit is filled as indicated above, the first pit is uncovered and the compost removed. It should be stable, and will provide a good fertilizer which can be applied immediately to the fields or stored. . . .
Before applying or recommending this method in a rural area where it is not familiar, it is desirable to try it first on a pilot scale under adequate control in order to determine the proper operating schedule and materials suitable and available in the area under consideration. The collaboration of agricultural officials and of local leaders among the farmers of the area is necessary.
Excreta Disposal
MINIMUM
HLUMEUNft
AR.R**Mi£M.ÉI
4.- wet w.jl^
/Utteit 3t*t

ÎYïvt
Oam tu**
frf1»
The Canadian Department of National Health and Welfare puts out a free simple book on sanitation, intended for remote northern areas. 11 has good clear diagrams of septic tanks, privies, and chemical toilets. There is also information on heating, lighting, water supply, and sanitation. Funky.
* Sanitation Manual for Isolated Regions
1967, 64 pp.
free
from:
Department of National Health and Welfare Ottowa, Ontario, CANADA
Notice calling for composting of human waste, Posted at the Lama Foundation commune in New exico, consisting of adobe brick and straw bale structures.
"Funky": Sanitation Manual for Isolated Regions, issued by the Canadian Department of National Health and Welfare.
PAGE 88
BEIJING'S PUBLIC TOILET DRIVE
1933
future China that I dream of is that everyone can have the opportunity of taking a shit on a flushing toilet."
—	Zhou Gucheng, Vice-Chairman of National People's Congress.
1934	Chiang Kaishek, leader of the Kuimintang, publishes the New Life Movement, with 96 rules to civilize the people of China, including:
no urinating, sneezing, or spitting in public, no smoking, no wearing tight clothes or holding hands in public.
1950s Rats, flies, mosquitoes, and cockroaches are dubbed the "Four Harms" by Chairman Mao.
All property is nationalized under the Chinese Communist Party and the first generation of public toilets are constructed.
1959 "For the work you do as a night-soil collector you are a true servant of the people. And as the state president, I'm also a servant of the people."
—	Chinese president Liu Shaoqi, while shaking hands with night-soil collector Shi Chuanxiang.
Early 1960s All outdoor public toilets are banned.
1966-76 Cultural Revolution: all single-family courtyard houses are dismantled. Some have their plot converted into a public toilet.
The lowliest laborers (like night-soil collectors) are, in the Chinese Communist Party's value system, the most virtuous.
1980s Second generation of public toilets constructed - all are mandated to have flush capabilities.
1987 Beijing Tourism Association is created. One third of their complaints are related to the unbearable conditions of public toilets.
1950s Traditional toilet near Beijing University.
"Imperial" style toilet near Lama Temple, Beijing.
1959 Shi Chuanxiang, night-soil collector.
"Where should I look? What is considered rude? Is it obligatory to say ni hao? I have no idea, because this is turning my concepts of public and private upside down ... I like doors."
— Rose George, The Big Necessity, 146.
PAGE 89
1994	Beijing loses bid for the summer Olympics. A survey by Beijing's Municipal Bureau of Tourism shows that more than 60 percent of overseas travelers are dissatisfied with the city's toilets.
1995	China's "public toilet revolution": rapid refurbishment of facilities, "typically involving aluminum framed windows, glazed tile and brick veneer, new roofs, a paint job and new fixtures."
t|ngs (given by the Chinese Tourism As-S<a'rt|0n): "three and four-star bathrooms must soCiato||et paper available in each individual stall.
while one and two-star facilities must Bye toilet paper, the paper can be located in position in the room rather than next to
the toilet.'
Many of,he star‘ratin9 Points are 9iven for Sties traditionally rejected by the Chinese -■Kujfgnt has only been sold in recent years, and tands for changing diapers makes little sense Shen Chinese toddlers have instead a flap in their dothes, to relieve themselves anywhere.
1998 Beijing public toilets are permitted the presence of up to five flies.
2000 2,000 public toilets exist in the hutongs of Beijing.
2002 Beijing wins bid for the 2008 Olympics. "W.C." as the official signifier of toilet is replaced with "toilet."
2004	Odor inspectors in Beijing are required to go through a qualification exam and training. "One of the tests is to distinguish five odors: flowers, sweat, mature fruits, feces and sweet gum."
2005	Government, in anticipation of the Olympics, launches program to build 2,000 public bathrooms in the capital. Over ¥400 million is invested in the program. The city also dispatches 8,000 maintenance staff for the toilets.
2008 For the Olympics, the city has 5,333 public toilets.
2010 Number increases to 12,604. In its six central districts there are 6,782, designed for 500 users per day.
2012 Two-fly policy enforced.
Two-star toilet -Minimum 60sqm
Three-star toilet
-	Minimum 80sqm
-	Must have platform for diaper changing
Four-star toilet -Minimum 100sqm
-	Must have platform for diaper changing
-	Plants in wash area
-	Lotion and deodorant provided
IL'hutong' neighborhoods within •In*® seCond ring road, in an area about 8ej'n9 S ¡ze of Manhattan there are over two ha|f ,he j of these conveniences, bringing them thoufn ¡ty of about one per acre. A large 10 3 tape of Beijing's hutong-dwelling populate6” uses only these facilities, since most of ti°"Sh mes are not equipped with plumbing. The sewage lines generally do not branch into pubho egc(1 public toilet has its own refuse the '"i . ^st be manually emptied periodically." pitJL*, Toilets in Beijing, Tim Geisler.
PAGE 90
NEW YORK'S DISAPPEARING PUBLIC TOILETS
In 1940, 1 public toilet in a subway served 4,343 New Yqrke In 2010, the rate increases to 1:112,500.
(service capacity: 96 percent decrease)
US Census Bureau, American Restroom Association
In 1984, 4,285 people are summoned in NYC for "noxious M emission of liquids," mostly involving public urination. In 201 the number is 14,281.
(333 percent increase)
Nick Ravo, "Perplexing Problem: When Streets Become Public Urinals,"
New York Times, December 29, 1986, The New York World (www.thenewyorkworld.com)
In 1994, one Starbucks toilet serves 7,300,000 New Yorkers In 2010, the rate decreases to 1:29,000.
(service capacity: 252 percent increase)
starbucks.com
Starbucks toilets
Sources:
Dow Jones Index US Census Bureau American Restroom Association Starbucks.com
2014 Barred and locked former subway toilet.

PAGE 91
MANHATTAN: STARBUCKS TAKES OVER AS PUBLIC TOILET
Shuttering the subway toilet: woman's toilet turned into kiosk at Astor Place.
Starbucks as public toilet: line outside Starbucks; this branch signposts its toilets on the outside.
STARBUCKSIZED
"Finding a restroom in New York City was once the most harrowing of urban experiences. There are no public restrooms on the sidewalks and most bathrooms In subway stations were closed long ago. Things were so bad that books were published telling New Yorkers how to navigate lobby mazes to find the powder rooms hidden in hotels. But these days finding a bathroom in many New York neighborhoods is as easy as spotting the nearest Starbucks. Or Old Navy. Or Gap. Or Barnes & Noble. Or Virgin Megastore."
— "Commerce Fills a
New York Need: Toilets," New York
Times, September 7, 2002.
REVOLT OF BARISTAS
"For many workers at Starbucks in New York City, the worst part of their jobs may not be the hordes of demanding tourists.
Or the irritation of making ever-more-complex skim Frappuccinos and green tea lattes. ... It is having to serve as janitors for the city's de facto public toilets. Now, it seems, some of these baristas have had enough. Tired of customers - and noncustomers - leaving bathrooms messy or worse, they started to lock them at some Starbucks..."
— "Baristas Lock Restrooms, but the Revolt Doesn't Last," New York Times, November 22, 2011.
PAGE 92
CODIFICATION
The toilet is not just a toilet, especially when it's for the public. Myriad considerations - toilet paper dispenser height, urinal height, door clearance, toe gaps under partitions - are the product of codification. The Americans with Disabilities Act, signed into law by George H.W. Bush in 1990, pioneers the standardization of public toilets to ensure universal accessibility...
1990 Stall size: 42.50 feet2/ 3.95 meters2
stall type
2010 Stall size: 45.50 feet2 / 4.2 meters2
605 Urinals, 605.2 Height and Depth: "Urinals shall be the stall-type or the wall-hung type with the rim 17 inches (430 mm) maximum above the finish floor or ground. Urinals shall be 13V4 Inches (345 mm) deep minimum measured from the outer face of the urinal rim to the back of the fixture." While 17 Inches is extremely low, only one urinal needs to be at that height, so If there's more than one in a grouping then the rest will be mounted at a more normal mounting height (24 Inches). If there's only urinal, It must be hung at 17 Inches.
604.7 Dispensers "Toilet paper dispensers shall comply with 309.4 and shall be 7 inches (180 mm) minimum and 9 Inches (230 mm) maximum in front of the water closet measured to the centerline of the dispenser."
604.5	Grab Bars, 604.5.1 Side Wall "The side wall grab bar shall be 42 Inches (1065 mm) long minimum, located 12 inches (305 mm) maximum from the rear wall and extending 54 inches (1370 mm) minimum from the rear wall."
adult
children
604.8.1.4 Toe Clearance "The front partition and at least one side partition shall provide a toe clearance of 9 inches (230 mm) minimum above the finish floor and 6 inches (150 mm) deep minimum beyond the compartment-side face of the partition, exclusive of partition support members."
PAGE 93
2014 Urinal in office building occupied by OMA in Rotterdam, used by male editors of this book: 30 inches / 76 centimeters floor-to-lip height, too high even for the tallest nation in the world. In the US, standard urinal height is 24 inches (as long as one urinal in the array is set at the ADA maximum of 17 inches, per the 2003 and 2009 ANSI 117.1).
PAGE 94
THE AMERICAN STALL: THE FIGHT FOR PRIVACY
A tourist visiting an American public toilet can be just as shocked as an American confronting a Beijing public toilet ^ the US, toilet stalls are notoriously porous, with doors 30 centimeters off the ground and large gaps around the doors Whereas the 2011 International Code Council stipulates "[wjherever possible, all... cubicle partitions should extend to within 5cm (2 inches) from the floor," in the US, the Uniform Plumbing Code dictates that "partitions shall be ... separated from the floor by a space not exceeding twelve (12) inches (305mm)." But this maximum gap seems to be taken as a minimum, and "has been the norm for 30, 40, or 50 years now," says a maker of toilet partitions, noting that the trend is now towards larger doors and greater privacy. The default minimalism of the American toilet cubicle miqht u motivated less by codes and more by assumed expectations of convenience (to see if a stall is occupied), surveillance 6 (activities in the stall other than defecating are easily detected), and cleaning (the gap provides a very high clearance for floor-mopping).
"Toilet partition manufacturers make every effort to produce doors and partitions with minimal gaps, but, somewhere in the installation process, these gaps seem to grow ... The Privacy Cover was designed to minimize and, in most cases, eliminate the offending 'gaps' at either side of the privacy door or between dividing panels."
Narrow Gaps In Bathroom Stall Doors To Be Widened Monday
The Onion, August 23, 2013.
WASHINGTON—Introducing a new measure set to be implemented nationwide, officials announced that gaps in restroom stall doors in American workplaces, restaurants, schools, theaters, and all other public places will be made wider by the start of business Monday morning. "We ask citizens to bear with us as we modernize every toilet stall in the country by doubling the width of the gap between each door and its surrounding frame," Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius said of the sweeping, mandatory initiative. "The inconvenience should only last a few hours—just long enough to reduce the overall height of the stalls by several inches and retrofit the doors so they are slightly translucent and feature no locking bolt. Then you may all 9et on with your lives." Sebelius added that her department unfortunately does not have room in its budget to pay for the lubrication of the countrys glory holes, but said an effort would be made to sand down any sharp edges that are found.
PAGE 95
er THE STALL DOOR
^KTits of users in American cubicles, squeezed between competing yirements of privacy and surveillance, by Flickr user "Sam."
Each lunkspace is connected, sooner or later, to bodily functions: wedged between stainless-steel partitions sit rows of groaning Romans, denim togas bunched around their huge sneakers....— Junkspace, RK, 2001

PAGE 96
"HIDDEN MOVIE CAMERA USED BY POLICE TO TRAP SEXUAL DEVIATES AT PARK HANGOUT, 17 ARRESTS CLIMAX PROBE"
Mansfield NewsOournal, August 22, 1962
"Spurred by a sex deviate's [sic] confession that he wantonly murdered two little girls who cried out for help when he attempted to molest them, Mansfield Police are completing one of the most spectacular investigations of homosexual depravity ever undertaken....
"a months-long investigation directed by Police Chief Clare W. Kyler [into] homosexual activity in the men's washroom in Central Park ... was photographed on color movie film by a hidden camera ...
"... The public toilet, long suspected as a meeting place for male sex deviants, has been permanently closed. Officials said although they suspected such activity in the toilet facility, no one expected to witness the bestial scenes which the cameras recorded ...
"The hidden officer would notify an outside man via radio when an abnormal act had been witnessed. The outside officer would then follow the offenders and obtain identification in various ways. ...
"County Prosecutor Rex Larson yesterday and today filed sodomy charges against 11 Mansfield and area men... Chief Kyler also commended the men of his department for 'one of the best investigations I have ever seen in over 30 years of police work.' Some of the suspects reportedly seemed 'relieved' at being caught."
PAGE 97
r
POTTY
parity
modate far fewer users than a men's facility of the square meterage, for the simple fact that urinals take uch less ft°or sPace than cubicles, so you can have more of them. The result: huge lines at women's
HP ¡t comes to public toilets, architecture has been Whenof constantly recapitulating what on the surface guilty i^g an inherent inequality: a women's restroom can
S*'*'	__-far	i icorc than a mon'c far'ilitx/ of tho
a ccow same upr
Pnryoms, while men breeze past on their way to their reS | Broadly but grudgingly accepted until the recent url 0f the "potty parity" movement (which in 2010 resulted ® Women's Restroom Equity Bill being debated but not in ssed in US congress), this arrangement, under inspection, •^anything but inherent. The fairly arbitrary current cultural ' orrns dictating that men stand and women sit to urinate flight be gradually undone with a modicum of innovation and education. Male sitting is increasingly encouraged in Germany (no splashback), and there's no reason women couldn't have the same communal experience men do at a bank of (adapted) urinals. But given the current norms, achieving true potty parity demands bigger female toilets than men's. This creates an asymmetry in floor plans for public buildings that's difficult for developers and architects to deal with, and requires that more usable or rentable floor space must be sacrificed to the toilet. Ironically, the very first modern public toilets, at the Great Exhibition in London in 1851, had an instinctive awareness of potty parity that has subsequently been lost: women there were provided with 47 W.C. cubicles, men with 22.
"... public life [is] subject [to] laws of urinary segregation" — Jacques Lacan, Yale French Studies, No. 36/37, Structuralism (1966), 112-147.
Typical toilets: long line for the women's toilet, no line for the men's.
The other side of the "potty parity" debate: urinals aren't necessarily the
privilege they might seem, forcing strangers into close proximity for an act requiring intimate exposure. A new psychological barrier emerges: paruresis (also known as "pee shy" or "shy cock"), where the sufferer cannot urinate in public. Seen here: a kind of shock outdoor therapy for paruresis sufferers in Charlie Brooker's documentary Screenwipe, titled "Konnie's Great British Wee."
TRANSGENDER TOILETS
Another solution to the potty parity issue - ungendered toilets - is also a possible solution to the transgender toilet issue. The ultimate equal public toilet would be one large room for all, featuring many individual toilet stalls, each with a full height closed door, where only hand washing and drying is done in a shared space. No designation is needed on doorways and no binary, limiting, or dictatorial segregation of genders is required. The downside: we are simultaneously lumped together, but then put in private boxes, with little chance for conviviality or group identification. The combination of complete exposure and systematized individuation in the "ideal" genderless toilet echoes what social media does to identity, now reflected in a floorplan...
2011 Transgender toilet, Bangkok - a haven for collective grooming, replenishing, and solidarity that could never arise in the "ideal" genderless public toilet imagined in the US (from Colors magazine, issue 82: "Shit.")
2017 Toilet for all designed by Laura Noren, ethnographer at the Center for Data Science, New York University. Includes urinal area preserved for efficiency, baby changing (or "family") area, and a line of toilet stalls for everyone.
PAGE 98
HIGH-TECH PUBLIC TOILETS
Twenty minutes of privacy, emergency button, self-cleaning device... price: ca. $1 million (in case of a Seattle public toilet, 2008). Increasing expectations of perfect hygiene, respectfully absent (therefore digital) supervision, guaranteed comfort, and constant cleaning makes the future of public toilets in cash-strapped Western municipalities untenable...
2008	Seattle decommissions its automated toilets: "It seemed like a good idea when the free-standing toilets were installed around Seattle in 2004. After all, they opened and closed automatically, and scrubbers in the floor cleaned any mess a user made. Eventually, jammed scrubbers had to be turned off because of trash accumulating on the floors. Prostitutes and drug users enjoyed the short-term privacy of a door that would remain closed for up to 20 minutes. The five toilets soon became more of liability than a convenience." (Parks & Recreation Dept., September 2008.)
"Seattle has officially washed its hands of the five self-cleaning toilets. The toilets cost the city $5 million. They sold on eBay Thursday evening for $12,549."
— Seattle Times, August 16, 2008.
2012 Parisian Sanisette: self-cleaning, perfectly sealed replacement to the art deco pissoirs of the early 20th century, where the user was in the open air, shielded by a curl of ornamented metalwork.
2010 Toronto, claiming to have learned the lessons of Seattle, launches its new range: "Users must insert a quarter or a token and will then have 20 minutes of privacy in the automated outhouse. The time remaining is counted down by a three-step audible warning and a blinking light.
Once the person exits, the unit seals Itself and begins a cleaning cycle. ... City officials say sensors in the unit will be able to detect If anyone remains in the unit past the 20-minute mark, and help could be summoned in the case of an emergency. ... units will be placed in high-traffic areas and officials say the pay-for-use model should reduce undesirable activities."
— CBS News, May 19, 2010.
PAGE 99
In the global overview, the northeastern US fares best; India fares better than Europe.

New York: Bryant Park's public toilet Is the city's best kept secret ("There's always been toilet paper, soap and even flowers...") Subway toilet: "only use if desperate"; yet receives the "sit" rating.
Paris: not bad, considering its reputation...
Tokyo: Mostly red "squat" ratings. Toilet in Taito neighborhood reminiscent of Dun'ichiro Tanizaki's poetic outhouse.
CHARMIN 511 UK 5UUAI Arr
20'z. n Toilet paper giant Charmin (slogan: "We all go. Why not enjoy the go?") launches "Sit or t^e „ a smart phone app (one of about a dozen already existing) for locating, logging and rating S?u|a 'toi|ets - and also toilets in bars, restaurants, and cafes. The app is based on two globalizing Pjbh'ahly dubious western notions: that sitting is the optimal way to go to the toilet (and anything t,ut -s ¿¡rty): users vote for "SIT (if you enjoyed the bathroom) or SQUAT (if it could be better)"; and e|s®ong association of toilet paper with efficient cleaning. So far, one hundred thousand toilets 3 Sund the world have been added to Charmin's world toilet map, with far more "squat" ratings that f°t" ivleanwhile city bureaucracies around the world are let off the hook for the inspection of sl T toilets... and publicly accessible toilets in bars and restaurants are exposed to greater utiny, the threat of being named and shamed...
PAGE 100
20TH CENTURY: ONE IS NOT ENOUGH
Once established in the American home, the combined bathroom / toilet - only referred to as the former, even in the case of needing the latter - is immediately under pressure to replicate itself. Encounters and lines in the corridor are supposedly embarrassing moments...
1920s "An extra bathroom will stop the annoyance and embarrassment of the morning scramble."
— Speakman Showers Bathroom Illustrated.
■
Spearman showers
fate util»« titmpoi
»« •	* «MOW*«
PAGE 101
Is your bathroom a family room?
A bathroom and a family get-together don’t go together ...
For your family’s greatest good you need enough bathrooms for everybody’s wants, without waits . . . equipped, of course, with fixtures by Kohler of Kohler.
Kohler Co. Established 1873 Kohler, Wis.
The Fixtures in Cerulean Blue are as refreshing to use as they look . . . the Dynametric bath, symmetrically styled for roomy luxury . . . and Carvel lavatory with smart, convenient, angle-mount fittings . . . Five other pastels, and white, are available . . . Kohler Fittings, All-Brass, are durable, reliable, with chrome-finish of starry brilliance. Consult your Kohler dealer or write for illustrated booklet J-51.
KOHLER of KOHLER
ENAMELED IRON AND VITREOUS CHINA PLUMBING FIXTURES • ALL-BRASS FITTINGS • ELECTRIC PLANTS • AIR-COOLED ENGINES
PRECISION CONTROLS
^K0s-40s
^Bathroom and a family Hp-t&v ather don't go together...
PAGE 102
TAKING OVER THE AMERICAN FLOOR PLAN
-!AL CRISIS;
TOmes built pu% portion with thr? ^ iihra°™sre^
; of grey:
r of bathrooms per
2011 Culture vs. toilets: from 1986 onwards, most newly built single family homes in the US contain three or more bathrooms. The growth of the three-or-more-bathroom house explodes during the mid-2000s property bubble; fluctuations in number of new homes built and their respective number of bathrooms reflects market trends and random indicators of individualism... (United States Department of Commerce, "Characteristics of new Housing," 33.)
2013 Of Builder Online's list of top 10 house designs purchased that year, six have at least one bathroom per bedroom; one has more than one bathroom per bedroom. As well as multiplying, American bathrooms are growing in size: the average square footage triples between 1944 and 2004 (The Dirt on Clean, 266).
“Fairytale Fantasy"
4 bathrooms for 4 bedrooms.

PAGE 103
Diagram by Victoriana magazine showing how six extra bathrooms can be fitted into a home: "A bathroom can be squeezed into an amazingly small space. An area 3 feet by 5 feet handles a sink and toilet; 3 feet by 8 feet is enough for a shower too. Architects maintain that a second or third bathroom can be squeezed into almost any house."
k^'ry Neo-Prairie Style 5h,aPed Home"
'fooms for 4 bedrooms.
"Hill Country Fusion Home"
4 bathrooms + 1 W.C. for 5 bedrooms.
"Soaks up the
5 bathrooms for
PAGE 104
THIRSTY TOILETS
Fluctuating flush capacities since 1900...


PLU8HINO OP WATBB-C'LOSKTS.
A water-closet should have a copious supply of water completely to wash at each use the bowl and trap as well as all surfaces coming in contact with foul matter. I do not, however, wish to lie understood as favoring reckless icnsle, for it is well known that allowing the water to run continuously through a water-closet cannot be regarded as flushing. Two or three gallons properly applied at each use will cleanse a water-closet more thoroughly than an uninterrupted, trickling flow of water. In order to be effi-
1900 7.5-11 liter gravity flush
A "copious supply of water."
1900 7.5-liter gravity flush
Because tanks are attached to walls high up, gravity propels flushing water for a high-powered, low water flush.
FLUSH TYPOLOGY
An evolution of techniques...
1930s 30-37 liters
Popularity of "free standing" toilets means the tank can no longer be fixed high on the wall, resulting in weaker flushes. To compensate, more water is used.
1950s 26 liters
Toilets account for up to 50 percent of total water use per day by a family of four.
1975 Early water-saving fixtures begin to be marketed
1970 22 liters
In New York, the "toilet flush tank ... in most cases uses about 6 gallons (22 liters) per flush." (Merril Eisenbud, "Environmental Protection in the City of New York," Science, November 13, 1970, 706.)
1980s 13 liters
New generally accepted maximum flush volume.
onjer saves water
Toilets, showerheads, faucets reduce normal water use 30 to 50%. Efficient K.
PAGE 105
--».mandated 6-liter flush
,992 EpA
„ Policy Act (EPAct) ine%2 SEC. 123
ePAtaNDARDS FOR WATER cl0SETS and
(k) SfA g _ (1)(A) Except as provided in subpara-LlRlNA maximum water use allowed in grapd' A	(or any 0f the following water
gallons P ufacfured after January 1, 1994, is the close® m®
fol|oV'|"fank-type toilets: 1.6 gpf. (6.1L per flush) Graul¥meter tank toilets: 1.6 gpf. (6.1 L per flush)
Electromechanical hydraulic toilets: 1.6 gpf. (6.1L
¿ouftoilets: 3.5 gpf. (13.2L per flush)
i . houqh manufacturers were producing ULFTs ■ to the passage of EPAct 92, product detriment by many of those manufacturers was nfined to fitting 3.5 gal / 13 Liter models with ggfjad tank trim. That trim merely reduced the K volume of the old model by moving only a rtion (usually around one-half) of the water from [he tank into the bowl."
wWW.map-testmg.com/maximum-performance/
background.html.
“Toilet Smuggling Law”
Tough To Enforce
Qlumbing contractors who cross the Canadian border to purchase 3.5 gallons per flush toilets are breaking the law, a federal official said, They are getting away with it because the 1992 Energy Policy Act is difficult to enforce.
The EPAct makes it illegal for U.S. toilet Bfjnanufacturers to manufacture and distribute 3.5 gpf units in the United States. The law also sets the standard for newly manual factured toilets at 1.6 gpf. The newer toilets are designed to save water, but consumer £ reports of poor performance have increased • demand for older versions.
In Canada it remains legal to sell 3.5 gpf toilets for retrofit and remodeling jobs, which is what draws U.S. contractors and other customers over the border. It also is legal for individual U.S. citizens to purchase the 3.5 gpf units for installation, and not for resale, said Mike Lamb, energy manager of the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Network Clearing House, a contractor of the DeDartment of F.nerev.
“Homeowners can buy the toilets in Canada and bring them back for installation in their homes," Lamb said. "But a contractor crossing the border and purchasing the toilets for resale to a customer, which essentially is what they’re doing, is illegal. Those contractors are the people who are falling through the cracks.”
1S38 "Toilet smuggling law' tough to enforce," Supply House Times.
Americans make runs
to Canada to buy toilets
2000 "Americans make runs to Canada to buy toilets," Toledo Blade. Americans are still smuggling toilets from Canada.
2013 Ultra low-flush ROCA uses only 1.5 liters per flush.
2014 lota rotating toilet uses 2.5 liters per flush.
PAGE 106
"I think most homes make a bathroom into far too much of a secret. They say 'excuse me... do you know where the bathroom is?' Where they would never say 'excuse me...do you know where the dining room is?' in the same way - soft-spoken secrecies. There's nothing more relaxing than sort of being in a bath and pondering things and doing a bit of work pleasing yourself, and pleasing the body. I don't see any reason why the bath should be a very hospitalized, cleansed, secret room. There's absolutely no reason why they can't be a normal part of the household function. There's no need to be ashamed of the bath. I think It's important to not make the body into a kind of purely erotic object. I think it's much nicer if you can just use It as a vehicle to staying alive and being comfortable In."
PETER GREENAWAY'S 26 BATHROOMS
In 1985, four years before The Cook, The Thief, His Wife & Her Lover painter and filmmaker Peter Greenaway makes a 30-minute documentary of bathrooms in (mainly bourgeois) London and Oxfordshire homes, featuring 26 people (the film is organized around the alphabet) who use the most repressed room in the English home in imaginative ways. In 1985, the idea of the bathroom as a place for liberal cultivation of the self is new enough that the film is surprising, but widespread enough that Greenaway finds plenty of willing subjects...
D Is for Dental Hygiene
E Is for Exercise in the Bathroom
"I think we want to make a place that is a natural part of the home and no more different than the bedroom or the living room or the drawing room is ... I've noticed that couples spend a lot of time talking to each other in the bathroom, and yet it never seems to me to be taken into account, there's nowhere to put the drinks, nowhere really to sit, given that that's part of the function of the bathroom and It's the one time when you really can be private and you don't have to justify the fact that you've closed the door and don't want to see people."
H is for Hi-Tec.
I is for Italians
"David comes In from his office and quite often I finish bathing then - I've got myself all kind of tidied up, and then I sit over there, where normally we have a chair... and I talk to him, and maybe we have a drink, or maybe he's having a cup of tea, and bread and jam, and he sits in the bath, and we talk about all the recent scandals."
PAGE 107
Sis for the Samuel Beckett Memorial Bathroom
"I don't bathe as a habit, I have had baths in my time, but I prefer to wash or shower. That's a history very easy to explain. Since I was a child in the war, my father was, what one might describe as a glutton for austerity, and any kind of privation that the government recommended that people should indulge in, he leapt upon with great glee ... and in our bath at home he fixed a knot in the chain of the plug which suggested the kind of recommended level the bath should be, which just about covered an eighth of a buttock, and since I was the youngest and smallest in the family, I was the last to bathe. We shared the same bath water so by the time I got around to it and my filthy brother had been in it, there wasn't much left for me. I see pictures of bathrooms in Sunday supplements with great regularity and it obviously Points to the fact that this bathroom does not memorialize trends in design.
I suppose this bathroom could easily be described as the Samuel Becket Memorial Bathroom. It's not a room in my life so to speak."
U is for an Underused Living Space
"I do think a bathroom is very underused living space. I mean, we all meet our friends and relax in our sitting room, but the bathroom is a very important area perhaps just to relax with one's self, and just to indulge in one's body and to pamper one's body with body lotions, and just generally perhaps to lie in a bath and listen to music ... I think bathrooms should have books and plants and all the sort of things that we surround ourselves with in a living room."
X is for an Expert on Bathrooms
"All our plumbing regulations, apart from some modifications after the Second World War, are exactly as the Victorians invented them."
Q is for a Quiet Smoke
L is for Lost Soap
J^for Jacuzzi
PAGE 108
MINIMAL /MAXIMAL
Contemporary domestic spas, in reality and rendering, veer from reduced, clean detailing to ornate luxury. Some designs imagine a hybrid bathroom-living room - the presence of a Mies van der Rohe Barcelona chair, a small library, a log fire - but none imagine the bathroom as the venue for a communal or family experience.

PAGE 109
PAGE 110
BATHROOM AS STAGE
Performative ad by Ikea in Paris, 2013, proclaims "At last a bathroom that rises above (the rest)," inadvertently revealing the role of the bathroom in the formation of self-approval. What is usually a stage with an audience of one becomes a public event...
SïoÇj©/ s
'--—if' ,* «
fl
PAGE 111
PAGE 112
WASTE MISMANAGEMENT: DUBAI
Like London and New York 150 years earlier, the growth of Dubai between 1990 and 2008 overtook the capacity of its sewage system, as output increased by 25 percent a year until the financial crisis hit. About 20 percent of Dubai's daily sewage - 100,000m3 - arrived for treatment at the Al Aweer treatment plant in trucks, which could line up for 10 hours (according to the Wall Street Journal) and stret,ch for seven kilometers (according to calculations by the editors, based on Google Earth images). The transfer to a western system - sit (an^ flush) toilets, paper rather than water (though most toilets are still installed with adjacent hose) and a centralized sewage system - proves expensive: a new $500 million sewage treatment plant at the Debel Ali port is opened in April 2009. By 2013, 70 percent of the»waste arriving at lebel Alimis is via the sewage system; 30 percent by truck.
2009	Sewage trucks line up outside Al Aweer Sewage Treatment Plant (the only sewage treatment plant in Dubai until 2009), which receives 380,000m3 of sewage from the city's piped system, and 100,000m3 by tankers -2,500 daily.
February 29, 2008 Visible on Google Earth, sewage trucks wait in line (in yellow) to unload their supply at the Al Aweer Plant. Stretching in all directions, this line measures 6.75 kilometers. After the new facility at lebel Ali is completed a year later, lines drastically reduce...
PAGE 114
BUR] KHALIFA: TOILET TALK
Dubai's credentials as a "real" city are ritually met with skepticism by critics in the west. Shortly after the tallest tower-the world, the Burj Khalifa, is completed there, a story goes viral. Apparently, the tower harbors a shameful secret. Th ln rumor begins in 2011 after Kate Ascher, author of The Heights: Anatomy of a Skyscraper, is interviewed on NPR ¡n ^ 6 US talking about Dubai's historically inadequate sewage system and how many of its apartment blocks and new tow» rely on septic tanks and trucks. Though she does not mention the Burj Khalifa as one of them, the internet runs with th'S version of the story: the world's tallest tower must have "seven tonnes of poop" (Gizmodo) removed by truck every hS Leftwing (Alternet) and rightwing (Gateway Pundit), eco (Inhabitat) and techno (BoingBoing) all unite to decry Dubai's hubris... The story proves untrue: completed in December 2009, the tower is plugged into the upgraded sewage systertl leading to the new plant at Debel Ali, finished nine months earlier. Hyder, the tower's plumbing consultants, confirm in a interview with the editors in 2014 that "The final sewer pipe connects to a manhole located in the trench of the loading0 dock and then connects to Dubai Municipality's (DM) main external sewer network."
npiiiiitininc
Without Trucks, the Tallest Building In the World Would Become the Tallest Mountain of Poop (Updated)
uB£B	Delicious food.
Delivered fast.
What happens when you flush a toilet in the world's tallest building
When I saw the Burj Khalifa in real life I was truly stunned. The tallest skyscraper in the world defies belief. Today I learned something that also defies belief: all the poop produced there has to be removed by trucks.
— RELATED
GATEWAY PUN|(t)IT
Gross. UAE Forgot to Add Adequate Sewage System to World’s Tallest Building - All Poop Must Be Trucked Out (Video)
I by Jim Hoft January 30,2013	5 Comments
f S66 Share
Nice central planning.
The world’s tallest building, the Burj Khalifa in Abu Dhabi, was not built with an adequate sewage system. All of the human waste in the 829 meter tail building has to be removed by trucks.
NEWS b POLITICS
World's Tallest Building Has One Major (Stinky) Problem
The Burj Khalifa in Dubai has its raw sewage removed by trucks that then must idle in line for up to 24 hours.
By Lauren Kelley / AlterNet
abitat
The Incredible Story Of How The Burj Khalifa’s Poop is Trucked Out of Town
l>W!a!l"*	W ifSkTi-.-.a
0 11/29/2014 under Architecture, News f| 10 Comments
amDnip
PAGE 115
0nnm with a view Z°°9 Rheit of the Burj theKg 000 toilets,
Pff 156th floot/'in
o" th®,e office of a
theCicr0,ficial
^ " according to
■Lutor of the #fI'ho wishes to
P^an0nym0HS' The is snapped in
Phot° L an unknown
instruction worker.
2009 Hyder wins Mechanical-Engineering-Plumbing Consultancy of the Year award In Dubai for its work on the Burj Khalifa, which includes, despite the rumors, connecting it to the city's sewage system.
PAGE 116
GLOBAL TOILET TYPES
Despite the growing dominance of the sit-and-flush "final toilet" familiar in the US and Europe, a large percentage of the human population are yet to be exposed to it, and a plethora of (much cheaper, but often much less hygienic) methods perseveres...
Hanging latrine
Porcelain squat
toilet; §

GLOBAL TOILET AVAILABILITY
Source: UN World Health Organization & UNICEF
1 billion	1.6 billion
Open defecation: in fields, forests, bushes, bod- Vessel or hole to defecate in. ies of water or other open spaces, or disposal of human faeces with solid waste.
1.6 billion
Toilet with untreated sew*
2.6 billion
Unimproved sanitation facilities: Facilities that do not ensure hygienic separation of human excreta from human contact. Unimproved facilities include pit latrines without a slab or platform, hanging latrines and bucket latrines.
PAGE 117
American Standard two-piece flush toilet: $160
Porcelain Prize
Toilet manufacturing has become a global business, led by Toto and Lixil of Japan
Global toilet sales
2012
Top toilet makers by 2012 revenue, in billions
2012 World's toilet industry is growing in value, and dominated by two Japanese companies.
Swarovski crystal studded toilet: $75,000
2.8 billion
Toilet with treated sewage
4.4 billion
Improved sanitation facilities: Facilities that ensure hygienic separation of human excreta from human contact.
PAGE 118
THE INCOMPLETE GLOBALIZATION OF THE WESTERN TOILET
In 1993, hoping to better understand markets they want to enter, Japanese toilet manufacturer Toto researches how toilets are used around the world. Three key categories are accounted for: "style," "howto wipe," "treatment of waste." The map reveals that, despite the creeping takeover of the western seated flush toilet, toilet diversity is still remarkably rich...
toilettes a la turque
The "Turkish" squat toilet has been disappearing from France, but can still be found in bars, car service stations and rural areas. position: squat cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
The Continental Shelf
In continental Europe, the wash-outl toilet prevailed over the washdown model, featuring a signature "shelf" on which one's excrement - here simulated with a sausage -may be inspected. position: sit cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
Sweden
Italy j	
Germany!	
U.K. |	
France	I
Denmark	
Switzerland	
HE	D^ XXL
	
DOSTO train toilet
Wheelchair accessible, with a fold down table for nappiechanging. position: sit cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
Squat toilet, Turkey
Aversion to bodily contact with a toilet fixture, solved by squatting; still a water-and-paper based system. position: squat or sit cleaning: water disposal: piped sewer
Hybrid model, Khajuraho, India
Extensions on the side of the bowl (grated for grip) allow a sit toilet to function as a squat toilet, if the user prefers.
position: squat or sit cleaning: water
disposal: fish bait, compost, animal bait, or sewers
Cod®
E#JI
□ Ott**
Toilet Truck, Bangkok
Moving public amenity containing
metal toilets, plus buckets of water for
cleansing.
position: squat
cleaning: water
disposal: septic tank, then piped sewer
PAGE 119
[Mongolia
fli ha° {'he"°') to'let'
""'^linalism perseveres
C^hutong public
inlts design^ for side-
b/-s'de us!
"rjfiitifiQ- SCiLia^
&»ile,paper<
E»al: composer bury
Washlet, ]apan
As of 2003, 52 percent of Japanese households have a washlet, a toilet where a bidet is integrated into the bowl. position: sit or squat cleaning: toilet paper or spray disposal: piped sewer
style
how to wipe
treatment of waste
¡sitting down
ill
B	paper	©	bait of animals
HI	water	■•¡a	bait of fish
	pebble	m	burying
i—i	rope	O'"	compost
ñ	leaf	*5	sewerage
4	spraying		exposure
Thirsty flush,
Canada
A country with an abundance^sfwater, the stapdcird toilet in Cansraa uses 6-20 litess of water per flush. sition: sit
cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
Canada
Americart Standard
"H20ptio\Siphonic\N Dual Flush R^ght, Heigmlj] Elongated Tw^-^jece\ Toilet" - both official model nam5mj||| and a decent desCTicHa§ of the type's creepinggg! hegemony over the worffi of toilets: the two-piece, sit (high up), flush, washdown, syphonic toilet. position: sit cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
Dual-flush, Australia
Since 1994, Australia has required dual flush toilets - a 3 liter flush, and a heavier 6 liter flush. Resisting the mandated 'low-flow,' "People clung to their old pre-1994 toilets or bought them used at garage sales,'' according to HGTV. position: seated cleaning: toilet paper disposal: piped sewer
Australia
[Ñ
Doirtffush the paper, Brazil
A hose is used for the first ¿phase of cleaning, toilet ¡paper to dry. Because ¡sewage pipes cannot 'handle paper, it goes into a trash can instead. position: seated cleaning: hose, toilet paper
disposal: piped sewer
Zealand[
ew
B

Co
it/Room)
tiered an method, so a rater with a e user pours
pino
unsanitary cTsMiil > method, sc tabo-a buckewWiater with : handle - is usedrTjje user pou water and soap orfto the hand which is used to wipe. The (afi often doubles as a means of flushing the toilet.
BfiSilion: sit or squat 5|83ning: water and hand feposal: piped sewer ■Mr -	am *
is fa fí/í
INAX
TOTOtbffi
\L0 MI/^K
V V • ral? h -í L/ ■ ~7- a.
h-í U • U V/ QA ’88/5 fliy
¡ftp «f 35
PAGE 120
"A testament to these austere times, this bathroom is constructed entirely from other houses' dead space, overhang, and stairwells."
"Come on in! Pass the toilet paper and I'll be with you in a minute."
"This listing will be part of my keynote presentation to a forthcoming sociology forum entitled 'Toilets in kitchens - What is wrong with people?"
ECCENTRICITIES EXPOSED
Domestic toilet arrangements photographed by real estate agents, collected and captioned by the blog terriblerealestateagentphotos.com.
"It always seems a shame to leave your guests on their own while you go to the toilet. Problem solved."
"Ideal for those of you with a particularly fast metabolism."
"Despite modernisation, the owners have retained the toilet's original listening booth • an unusual feature seldom seen nowadays.
PAGE 121
HYBRIDS
2013 Toilet found in department store, Paris: an apparent hybrid between a traditional French squat toilet (called a "hole in the ground" by English tourists) and a contemporary Anglo-Saxon sit-toilet, requiring supreme thigh strength for a semi-squat due to lack of a seat.
2013 Domestic urinal, found next to a shower in a house in Rotterdam, brings aura of the public toilet to a private bathroom.
PAGE 122
ADAPTATION AND THE PRESSURE TO SIT
The introduction of western-style sit toilets in cultures that typically squat, like Thailand, is encouraged as a sign of modernization, and supervised by government: a public toilet committee is formed to alert people to the health benefits of sitting (alleging that squatting places too much stress on joints), though users still consider squat toilets more hygienic (no bodily contact is necessary)...
The world's window on Thailand
Toilet plan fails to sit flush with squatters Parltta Wangkiat, February 23, 2013
A government plan to encourage Thais to switch from squat toilets to Western-style seated thrones has been poo-pooed by respondents to a Bangkok Post survey. The survey found that many people prefer the squat models. Under the Public Health Ministry's plan endorsed by the cabinet last Tuesday, all public toilets would be replaced with seated ones within three years.
The ministry says the use of squat toilets contributes to degenerative joint disease. About 90 percent of Thai households use squat toilets, and about 6 million people nationwide suffer from the disease, according to ministry figures.
The ministry said it would promote the use of sitting toilets across the country to help deal with an ageing population. A public toilet committee will be set up to implement the plan.
... Some people, especially women, said they would squat on the toilet seat anyway because they thought it was unhygienic to share seats with other people at public loos. Domkwan Kongchoke, an office worker, said: "I will never sit on a public toilet seat unless I feel It's really clean. But I don't think public toilets are clean." She said she usually squatted on seated toilets. Chonlatee Sinhakarn, a petrol station owner, said he did not agree with the idea of replacing all squat toilets with seated ones because it will place a financial burden on the business sector. "No one would help us pay for the equipment and maintenance," he said, adding that petrol stations would need to change the water supply system if they are going to Install a seated toilet with a flushing system....
Suthi Chanri, a 50-year-old housekeeper at the Bangkok Post building, said squat toilets are much easier to clean than the seated version. "The seated toilet is complicated and has many parts that I have to clean. I spend only one minute cleaning the squat loo and need over three minutes to clean the seated one," Ms Suthi said. "In terms of cleaning, I prefer the squat loo, but as a user, a seated toilet is much more comfortable."
... According to the 2005 Buildings Accessible and Usable for the Elderly and Physically Disabled Act, at least one seated toilet must be provided in public buildings and fuel stations. Deputy Public Health Minister Cholanan Srikaew, who is pushing for the seated toilet scheme, said the plan was not only about changing the type of toilet people used but also about improving sanitary conditions and safety at public toilets ...
PCSM-24939
2012 No squat sign, Thailand.
INAX Squat toilet converter (¥36,400 / $296) turns traditional squat toilet Into a high-tech seated toilet.
Resilient squatting: telltale footprints on a sit toilet, Guangzhou.
PAGE 123

2010 Culture clash: communal squatting on Roman slt-tollets, documented on a trip to Newcastle by the blogger "Wlndchaser": "Ancient Communal Roman Toilet. No privacy at all! That's not actually how you use It, we're just answering nature's call the Malaysian way.''
2013 The choice: sit or squat, Aswan, Egypt.
PAGE 124
PRESSURE TO SQUAT
While the momentum is towards sitting in developing countries, for the health-conscious westerner, squatting is making a comeback, assisted by quick conversion devices. "We were not meant to sit on toilets, we were meant to squat in the field," says Michael Frielich, proctologist. Seated defecation is cited as a cause of hemorrhoids, constipation, colitis, appendicitis and colon cancer. Meanwhile sit toilets grow ever-taller: "At American Standard, the throne has been modernized by making it even higher, the better to take the strain off ageing baby-boomers' legs. It's now an astonishing 16.5 inches from rim to floor, even more ergonomically nonsensical than usual..."
(Rose George, The Big Necessity, 70.)
Anorectal Angle
Of-M III IV- ICI
squany pony :j
2013 The squatty potty - a plastic platform on which to raise the knees and simulate a squat -arrives on the market to redress the ergonomic disaster of the western toilet. The makers explain: "When we're standing or sitting the bend, called the anorectal angle, is kinked which puts upward pressure on the rectum and keeps the feces inside. The sitting posture actually keeps us in 'continence mode'. This makes elimination difficult and incomplete, creating the need to STRAIN. Some researchers have compared the anatomical predicament created by sitting on a toilet to trying to defecate through a kinked garden hose. It just doesn't work." (squattypotty.com)
Squatty potty:
30 degrees as ideal angle...
... versus "Nature's platform," the more extreme toilet converter, allowing for a complete squat over the sit toilet.
PAGE 125
2013 The toilet in Werner Sobek's House R138 in Stuttgart, photographed by the editors, contains an injunction to sit rather than stand in order to urinate, presumably to avoid splashes.
„ urinating, sit again...
^Kwhile, especially in Germany, sitting is gaining ground as the polite way Knate for men. Leaving no splashback, it is felt to be more considerate to t°unext user and the person who cleans the toilet. Though the new courtesy . rowing in popularity, standard toilets are as badly designed for a seated 's urination as they are for anatomically correct defecation: the front of ^ howl has a distinct lack of clearance, already pointed out by Alexander £in.he197°s.
PAGE 126
THE WASHLET: DEFECATING AND CLEANSING IN ONE DEVICE
The Japanese toilet, with its inbuilt water jets (and heaters, and deodorizers, and music, and lighting, and sound masking) is the apotheosis of the centuries-long tendency towards the unification of shitting and bathing. First the fugitive actions, anathema to each other, were brought together within the dwelling, then within one designated room, and finally into a single device so competent in its dealings with the body that we trust it both with the evacuation of our waste and the cleansing of the body, without us having to move a muscle. After excreting, the user touches a button, usually on an armrest replete with other buttons, to activate a stream of water emitted from the upper / rear of the bowl (power, trajectory, and temperature of the water may also be adjustable on the control panel). The device is so magical that it requires the introduction of yet another word into the vocabulary of the toilet / bathroom, this time a perfect hybrid: the washlet, part washing device - a mechanical bidet - and part toilet.
The bidet-toilet is actually invented in the US, in the early 1960s, as the "Air Wash Seat," designed for hospitals, where a spray-wash function would be helpful for the physically incapacitated. When exported to Japan in 1964, the Air Wash Seat flounders - most homes still did not have connection to the sewage system, and most Japanese squatted. The first Japanese model, the "Shower Toilet" by Inax, manufactured in 1967, functioned by pedals and "didn't sell because it cost the price of
1964 "Mr Bidet" of the American Bidet Company unveils the Air Wash Seat in the US, "the ultimate bathroom fixture," designed initially for hospitals. TOTO immediately imports the device to Japan, where it initially makes no impact.
1966 Made in America: patent for the "Hygienic Apparatus for Use on Toilet Bowls" by H. M. Umann, meant "to be mounted on a toilet bowl in place of the conventional seat, and which is arranged to direct a jet of warm water of small diameter at the anus or adjacent body openings in such a manner that the water is confined essen-
PAGE 127
a new car" (Big Necessity, 57). The real takeoff came in 1980, its growth coinciding with Japan's property boom. The rapid introduction of the washlet is like skipping entirely a process - the invention and uptake of the flush toilet - that took 282 years in England. By 1995 though, 23 percent of Japanese homes have a washlet, and most of them are made by Toto. Installing a washlet and upgrading to new models with more features is made easy by the fact that the device is not the entire porcelain toilet but just a very hi-tech toilet lid, connecting to the power and water supply and plugging into the hardware of the toilet itself.
In 1995 Toto attempts to penetrate the US market (the old Air Wash Seat never making it out of a handful of hospitals) with the Zoe, going for $595. Extensive research into the American market prompts Toto to make the seat warmer optional (because people associated it with someone else having just sat on the toilet). Advert: "When a shower is a masseuse, and a bathtub is a whirlpool, a toilet should do more than just flush." Toto has a showroom in New York's upscale SoHo neighborhood, indicating that the toilet may be accepted at the high end of the market as another tool in the arsenal of devices to foster personal wellness and planetary sustainability (washlets have advanced flushes that use less water and potentially require less or no paper depending on if the user chooses to use hot-air drying); pages and pages of washlets are available for order on Amazon. Although they are in closer proximity than ever before - in fact, basically overlapping - the critical separation of excreting and washing is maintained with the washlet, and in fact emphasized: the user never has to come close to touching their shit, even by using paper...
Whereas in the west the toilet is considered by market researchers as a "distress purchase" since they are only replaced when urgently necessary (Big Necessity, 46), in Japan, the washlet presents an exciting range of constantly updated features, and can be upgraded like software, plugging into the hardware of the existing porcelain toilet.
he bidet-toilet was actually invented
Air Wash Seat," designed for hospitals, ^^^Kpray-wash function would be cipful for the physically incapacitated. Vhen it was exported to Japan in 1964,
‘Cl Ati WBsn oeai iiounoerco *■ mosi omes still did not have connection tc ‘sewage system, and most Japanese
PAGE 128
PRIMARY ELEMENT
2003 Pre-emptive: in Leboeng, South Africa, toilet cores are built in advance, staking out plots for a future settlement Toilets are the most difficult and expensive part of a house to build, so the government takes care of it under the Reconstruction and Redevelopment Program; the rest of the building work can be left to the settlers. Years later, the houses predicted to spring up around the toilet cores never materialize...

PAGE 129
PAGE 130
21 ST CENTURY: END OF THE "FINAL" TOILET
At the moment that it threatens to take over entirely, the worldwide westernization of the toilet looks increasingly untenable, given its reliance on plentiful water and expensive infrastructure. The globalization of the western toilet and its attendant practices - sitting, defecating in clean water, using paper - is especially alarming since all three aspects are fundamentally dubious. Sitting is anatomically incorrect; shitting in clean water is wasteful and there are plenty of alternative "grey water" or "dry" toilets; paper is ineffective as a cleaning tool, and presumably terrible for the world's forests. In sum, the US and most of Europe use the toilet the wrong way around: dry (paper) for cleansing, and wet for excreting into. Logic suggests reversing the process: water is better for cleansing the body and wasteful to sully by excreting into. Might future toilets in the west follow the traditional model of hotter climes, and flip round wet and dry?
ACCESS TO IMPROVED SANITATION
"More than 1.2 billion people worldwide gained access to improved sanitation between 1990 and 2004. However, even with this progress, some 41 per cent of the world's population - an estimated 2.6 billion people, including 980 million children - lack access to proper sanitation facilities." — Maggie Black and Ben Fawcett, The Last Taboo, 2008.
Indonesia
Without improved sanitation
Columbia
10.404,970
Mexico
17,246,250
Brazil
41,857,410
South Africa
10,250,100
<1=100,000,000
With improved sanitation
Nigeria
117,385,560
1
Tanzania
42,221,700
2012 1 billion people practice open defecation. Percentage of global population using shared sanitation:
1990: 6 percent 2012: 11 percent (762 million people, 60 percent of whom live in cities)
World Bank, "Access to Improved Sanitation," 2013. "Improved sanitation facilities include flush / pour flush (to piped sewer system, septic tank, pit latrine), ventilated improved pit (VIP) latrine, pit latrine with slab, and composting toilet."
PAGE 131
T time to kill off the flush toilet?
IS fhursday, November 6, 2008.
Duncan
Ku or not to flush. That was the question that designers and ecologists To A35 |/ng each other this week as hundreds of people - who spend a lot nie<e 3 ^¡^¡ng about these things - convened for the annual World Toilet 0ftim® ^ Expo in Macau.... The World Toilet Summit and Expo is like S#pl Convention of the waste management and sanitation world. the show run the gamut from a cardboard box complete with a hole, T0'lets ^ g anc( pouch of waterless magic pathogen-busting dust ($50), tech 'uber-toilet,' featuring an in-seat warmer/cooler, male and ,0 3 | water jets, an in-bowl light (why, oh why?) and a USB port so you ferna ecf your mp3 player for your soothing tune of choice ($1,200). cancon
¿^Luring out how to wean the world off the flush handle took center ^^■tiough the common flush toilet has remained largely the same since invention ¡n 1596, the world it inhabits has changed drastically. City 'tSlll|ations have mushroomed, sewers have become overburdened and
popui;
has become scarcer. Now, the flushing loo - that human innovation 't lifted the industrialized world out of its own dirt, cholera and dysentery ffjuickly becoming one of the more egregious instruments of waste in fl (¡^e of acutely finite resources. "The world can't sustain this toilet,"
® iack sim, the founder of the World Toilet Organization - the other So-an organization that advocates for sustainable sanitation solutions "This 'flush and forget' attitude creates a new problem which we
have to revisit."
.f u are( as Sim's said, one of the millions who tends to 'flush and forget' on a regular basis, chances are you're dumping up to 22 liters of drinkable water every day, one three- to six-liter flush at a time. But the problem doesn't stop there. What follows - the 'forget' part of the toilet experience - is the long and costly process of sanitizing the water that was clean before you answered nature's call. In the developed world, the flush toilet is our only direct link to the enormous - and exorbitant - engineering feat that ;s the modern urban sanitation system: the sewers, filtration plants, water treatment facilities, and finally, treated water disposal channels that send the scrubbed water into our rivers and lakes.
AFRICA «REVIEW
ZIMBABWE CITY ORDERS SYNCHRONISED TOILET FLUSH
By KITSEPILE NYATHI in Harare I Friday, September 21, 2012 at 14:16
Zimbabwe's second largest city of Bulawayo has told residents to synchronise their toilet flushing to minimise sewer pipe bursts after the local authority introduced 72-hour water cuts a week.
The city's one million residents would flush their toilets at 7:30pm on the day the water is restored to their homes. Last month, Bulawayo started rationing water after two of its five supply dams dried up because of drought.
"Every household is requested to flush their toilets systematically at 7.30pm, the very day after the 72 hours of water shedding," council spokesperson Nesisa Mpofu said. "This is done to prevent any sewer blockages as we anticipate longer periods without water in the reticulation system."
She said the 'Big Flush' was in addition to the normal flushing that would occur during the day. Council has warned the water shortages could get worse as two more dams may dry up before the rainy season begins in November.
"Water rationing may be extended to 92-hour periods. The situation is very serious," Mrs Mpofu said. Zimbabwe's urban areas have been battling water shortages for the past decade due to lack of new investments.
Bulawayo had its last supply built in 1979, a year before Zimbabwe's independence from Britain. In Harare, the water shortages have resulted in intermittent outbreaks of cholera and typhoid.
The worst outbreak that was contained in 2010 resulted in 4,293 deaths and 98,741 cases were reported. President Robert Mugabe's government declared the outbreak a national emergency, and it was described as the deadliest African cholera outbreak in the last 15 years.
Using so much water per flush unnecessarily increases the volume of our waste and the cost of its transportation and treatment, ecologists say. If you don't put waste in water in the first place, then you don't have to spend money to remove it at the back end. The process also leaves a huge carbon footprint, says Rose George, author of The Big Necessity: The Unmentionable World of Human Waste and Why it Matters. In the UK, she says, "the sewage system uses as much energy as what the largest coal fire station in the [country] produces" - about 28.8 million tones of carbon dioxide a year.
But the fundamental shift in how we think about our waste, and by extension, dispose of it, needs to be to stop mixing liquids and solids, says the WTO's Sim. "The human body is designed to separate solids from liquid waste," and we should follow suit, he says. By separating fecal matter from urine at the source in what's called a "urine diversion toilet," a wider ecological system of waste disposal becomes possible. Solids can be composted for fertilizer and harvested for methane gas. Urine can be used to produce phosphorous and nitrogen and clean, drinkable water. (The question is, will people bring themselves to drink it?)
Ecological sanitation, as this call to arms is known in toilet circles, is already up and running in many spots around the world. In rural China, 15.4 million ■»p convert methane into power from what normally went down the Pit behind the house. Household waste is stored in a state-subsidized "di-gester," a kind of metal stomach that breaks down the matter and releases Ptethane gas which is trapped for reuse. In the French city of Lille, a small fleet of ten buses are also using methane, gleaned from the city's poop.
ip some Indian villages, simple latrines have been built that separate WSte and use it to produce compost and fertilizer at a per capita cost Wmitesimally lower than any waste management budget in the West.
Pa reversal of the traditional one-way innovation highway - from the West We rest of the world - many of the best ideas in sanitation are coming U the developing world. And for now, the gap between these initiatives . “we large-scale urban sanitary solutions of tomorrow is being filled by j^Ptors and dreamers like lack Sim and others who gathered this week Macau. Among their larger visions for collective waste disposal and ^B"ent on display was a network of low-water toilets that separated
from liquids and assigned them to reservoirs shared by an apartment ding or block of houses. Those reservoirs would then produce fertilizer, conditioner and energy producing methane - and dramatically cut the st to the public of waste disposal...
"Our leaders are a joke," said Petros Ncube. "What they should be doing is finding money from donors to buy new sewer pipes," he said.
2012 "Skeptical third world kid" meme points out the fundamental strangeness of using drinkable water to bear away human waste.
PAGE 132
NEW TOILET TYPOLOGY: COMMUNITY TOILETS, DHARAVI, MUMBAI
Dharavi - or any of Mumbai's slums, but Dharavi, with roughly a million people, is by far the largest has about one toilet for every 500 people. In the early 2000s, the Society for the Promotion of Area Resource Centres (SPARC), were contracted by the World Bank to plan, design, and build 320 community toilet blocks in Dharavi, to be maintained by locals. The new generation of toilets were meant to be bright, well ventilated, with separate entrances for men and women. A decade later, 158 such toilets are successfully constructed. Here are the lessons learned since then, according to Keya Kunte, an architect and urban planner working for SPARC...
1.	THE URGENT NEED FOR COMMUNITY TOILETS
With homes of less than 10 square meters, populated by maybe eight people, usually with no sewer to connect to and an unreliable water supply, a toilet - especially one sited in a private room - is impossible, even if it was affordable. Says Keya Kunte: "I suspect that every household will have their own reasons to have or not to have a toilet within the house if they could. Some households rank it a high priority to have individual toilets, especially for women, who find it unsafe to go out after dark to defecate. For others, the dwelling size is too small to allow for an individual toilet, others prefer that toilets remain outside the home for hygiene purposes."
2.	OPEN DEFECATION PERSISTS
Because community toilets remain, despite progress, too few, and are poorly maintained, the habit of open defecation is hard to break - particularly since it becomes a norm from childhood. Kunte: "Children always lose out to adults when there are queues for a toilet; in addition, many young children are frightened of using conventional latrines, which are dark and often smelly, with large pits into which children fear that they will fall."
3.	COMMUNITY TOILETS, NOT PUBLIC TOILETS
Public toilets are owned by the state, located in gathering places like train stations, used by different passersby every day, and often charge a fee that would be prohibitively high if used on a daily basis. Community toilets, on the other hand, are built "for specific informal settlements and are managed largely by the community themselves"
- though this presents political obstacles, given that politicians prefer to maintain control of infrastructure, and like to profit (in elections, and also financially, through relationships with contractors) from the triumphant unveiling of a new toilet...
Children mug for the camera in front of a three-story purpose-built community toilet block (top storey likely serves as accommodation for the attendant and his family).
A child in Dharavi defecating or urinating* in the open air between a mid-nse tower block and a provisional school building sheathed in black PVC.
‘Here the limitations of English terms become clear: because there is no device, structure, room, or building, we cannot say, strictly speaking, that this child is "going to the toilet." And because there is no universal term to urinating or defecating, except the little-recognized "evacuation," we are stuck with having to list both possibilities.
PAGE 133
Water tanks on the roof of a block in Dharavi guarantee that water will be available for washing hands and cleaning the facilities; piped water is unreliable, and when it cuts out, conditions deteriorate quickly. Water on the roof is supplied by the municipality; it is much cheaper than black market water.
tun within an open sewer channel...
4.	CARETAKERS ARE IMPERATIVE
All community toilets implemented by SPARC have a caretaker as part of their set-up, and sometimes also provide a residence for him / her, "to incentivize the person appointed to take better care of the toilet premises." explains Kunte.
5.	TOILETS CAN BE PROHIBITIVELY CHEAP
"Donors prefer expensive projects because they reduce administrative burdens and staff costs per pound or dollar spent. A ten-seat toilet block that serves a community of 500 can cost as little as £500 or $800, especially if there is already piped water and sewers to connect to. This is less than the daily cost of most foreign experts." ("Community-designed, built and managed toilet blocks in Indian Cities,"
-	Sundar Burra, Sheela Patel and Thomas Kerr, Environment and Urbanization, October 1 2003, 15.
6.	INFRASTRUCTURE REMAINS A PRIORITY
Rather than creating community toilets with their own isolated septic tanks, which arguably alleviates the government of its responsibilities, NGOs and community groups often prefer to pressure the government to extend the overall sewage network.
7.	CRITERIA FOR SUCCESSFUL TOILETS
Kunte: "There are several factors that make a successful community toilet - a strong community based organization with members selected from the settlement itself who can oversee the construction and eventually manage the maintenance of the toilet block; participation in the design and location of the toilet block by the households of the settlement; presence of a caretaker room over the toilet block so as to provide an incentive to the caretaker to maintain the toilets; municipal corporation involvement to ensure connection to water, electricity and city infrastructure even later on in the maintenance stage."
Toilet blocks should contain any or all of the following facilities (as per the Mumbai Sewage Disposal Program):
-	toilets (separate for men and women)
-	urinals
-	washbasin
-	at least one disabled access toilet
-	at least one toilet open 24/7
-	bathing areas (separate for men and women)
-	storage for cleaning material
-	children's squatting areas
PAGE 134
DIVERSITY AND IMPROVISATION:
SOME DHARAVI TOILET COMMUNITY TOILETS
Documented by Madeleine Bouch with "action-research" group URBZ, as part of the mapping project to help SPARC document the fate of the toilets built under the World Bank program in the early 2000s...
Pour-flush latrine used in every toilet in Dharavi: despite the pressured circumstances, there is no appetite for innovation in toilet types, or for the adoption of western sit toilets.
Locked cubicles = private co-opting of community facility.
Shrine next to community toilet.
PAGE 135
Toilet blocks double as a garbage dump..
Toilet block adorned with drying laundry...
LOCATION PLAN
ELEVATION
SECOND FLOOR PLAN
FIRST FLOOR PLAN
SECTION A-A
GROUND FLOOR PLAN
Drawing’s'for the'Gangadar Chaw! block;, by QantiteyerCohsultants. Ladies on ground floor'ease ofaccess-given priority over greaterseclu^igi^^d^ are on first floor), j
iir IT

r New toilet typology: multi-story, f with caretaker's residence on top: Gangadar Chawl toilet block under construction.
PAGE 136
2010 Stacked toilet with green facade, caretaker's residence, community roof terrace, bamboo sunscreens, and solar panels to allow off-grid functioning.
2010 Mehrotra's toilet block in Saki Naka, Mumbai, is the tallest structure in the slum.
2011 Advertisements rather than vegetation grow on the facade; community terrace abandoned, and, confirming the project's failure, a conventional, mono-functional concrete toilet block is newly constructed alongside by the local government.

^ :5ii inr* H
S O í 1 I i«? B S

PAGE 137
LEGITIMIZING THE SLUM: THE ICONIC TOILET BLOCK In 2010, RMA Architects partners with SPARC to design and implement a new prototype for community toilets in the slums of Mumbai. A number of sites are identified, work begins, but only one toilet is completed. Rahul Mehrotra describes how even that one failed...
IN THE DARK
Rahul Mehrotra narrates...
We designed seven or eight toilets for SPARC at different sites, using a prototype that we developed. The one big limitation we had was the World Bank specs for the toilet - it had to be a concrete structure, based, I assumed, on the Bank's concerns for safe and robust construction. We did a lot of research, visited sites where local governments had put toilets up, found out why they were failing and why no one was using them. They usually had contractors to run the toilet, who charged a very small fee. But to save money they would remove the light bulbs at night to save on electricity, so women and children couldn't use it. We also found that a lot of the sites had a very small footprint and very dense activity around them, which made it hard to achieve safety for women and children. And most importantly the toilets were always designed as mono functional programs and thus always physically separated from the community.
MULTI-STORY
So we decided to stack the toilet: the ground floor would serve the men, and the women and children's toilet would be on the top, so they would have a little more privacy. And, because the caretakers are usually given a little room somewhere close by, we thought we should stack the caretaker's residence on top of the toilet. Then, we thought, since we are building relatively high in the slum, why not have a community center in an open veranda at the top? Our hope was that this additional program would give the community a new way to associate with the building. Furthermore we proposed to wrap the facade with creepers and flowers to shift its aesthetic associations.
LEGITIMATE / ILLEGITIMATE
When it came to construction of the toilets across all our designated sites, we found systematically that as we built it up to the plinth level the government stopped the construction. So we went to the municipality to pursue this. They saw the toilet buildings as being iconic and permanent while the slums they were designed to serve were seen as temporary. The government wanted to relocate the people in the slums very soon in the future. So investing in architecture and its articulation was an obvious mistake on my behalf - it actually worked against the project in a strategic sense. They said what we were doing was basically creating space for the organization of the community: the toilet would help galvanize the community and serve as space for them to get organized, which means they would eventually resist the government demolishing the slum. They realized that a toilet with a community center on top of it would legitimize the slum. So in a funny way, architecture and design was working counter to the intentions politically and socially. To put it another way: we came up against the limits of what design could really achieve, socially and politically. We did two or three more similar toilets - for each site the prototype had to be adapted. We put a lot of effort, money and time into developing the design and drawings. And we found failure, in the form of the government's resistance, all along the way.
COMPLETION
Together with SPARC we then built the first prototype in a remote location in the Saki Naka slum, next to the airport, where there the local government would be less likely to go. We were really impatient to build one, and so we just did it. It worked well for three or four months: the children began to use it, and the community center was much appreciated; we installed solar panels so the building was off the grid and this made the facilities usable in the night and safer for women and children.
PAGE 138
Ground floor commerce, possibly also medical clinic.
Care-taker - Entry Court
E
Community terme. Cam laker’s unit
First floor community terrace.
Children of Said Naka slum embrace the roof terrace, before its co-option by the contractors (right).
2012 Version #2: new typology of community toilet, "Project Sammaan," to be inserted into any given slum.
Community terrace adjacent to caretakers, residence, to be used for adult education, meetings, creche or school.
Community center with shop selling sanitary items for use in the block's toilets / showers.
PAGE 139
LOCKED
Then I went back six or nine months later and the government had built one of their normal toilet blocks next to it, the type they had been using before the World Bank initiative. It means our toilet in a sense had failed. When I went to the toilet, the door was even locked. The top space had been co-opted by the people who had constructed it, who now kind of owned it. The vested interests in the slum had claimed a piece of infrastructure meant for everyone.
VERSION #2: SANITATION HUB
We didn't give up: we entered an international competition run by a Delhi-based NGO that was going to do 500 toilets. They got money from the Gates foundation and they did the competition to generate ideas for models for the toilets. We won first prize. In this design we pushed the envelope a little more, and we asked how we could embed the toilet block even further into the community.
We wanted to avoid it being monofunctional infrastructure, so we put commerce at the base: people would be able to sell soap and shampoo and water; the toilet and shower block would be alongside, so it's a sanitation hub. You might even put a little medical clinic into it.
FAILURE #2
I went to meet them, and they said they were grateful for the ideas but before they did the competition they had already appointed the architects and the contractors, so they were actually going to build it based on some preconceived prototype design. So we failed again and felt trampled upon again. One hasn't given up, but one can only, in these circumstances, strive to fail better. I think for us as a community of architects it's productive to discuss failure.
REVERSABILITY
For me there are two or three takeaways. The first that for multifunctional infrastructure to be embedded in a community it has to develop a sense of ownership. I think in our case building in a remote slum where even the NGO we were building for did not have its own community base was a mistake and made the project susceptible to vested interests within the slum. Secondly, there is a question, when designing infrastructure like this, about how prominent the architecture should be. One could argue beauty is a fantastic device to bring a community and people together - but it can also be dislocating and threatening as it embodies aspirations very clearly. In this case to do a prominent building signaled for the government the legitimizing of that particular slum. Most importantly for me the material choices and mode of construction: if we had been totally free, we would have designed a building that implied reversibility, something light that might be dismantled. This would have allowed it to be nonthreatening to the authorities, but also would have signaled an optimistic tone: that the provision of public sanitation is a transitional moment in the history of our metropolis and not a permanent solution.
PAGE 140
OUTLAWED: DRY LATRINES
While foreign NGOs like the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation look for "dry" alternatives to the water-based, infrastructure-dependent toilet, India's remaining dry latrines are slowly being deliberately demolished. A 2014 law strengthening the 1993 banning of "scavenging," the profession of manually cleaning out dry toilets, contains the provision "offices of district magistrates around the country are required to survey existing dry toilets by Feb. 6, and their subsequent destruction must take place within six months of that date." After decades of struggle to eradicate scavenging, its association with the dry latrine may make it difficult for contemporary experiments with waterless toilets take hold.
There are no "dry" or alternative, self-contained toilets in Dharavi. All are squat, "pour flush" latrines - meaning users carry a jug of water with them to wash down their feces; the toilets contain a water-trap to reduce odors. Some toilets connect to the (minimal) sewage system, some to septic tanks. Any alternative toilet types would have to be easily maintainable by attendants, something that the high-tech toilets of the Gates Foundation's "Reinvent the Toilet" campaign are not.
Keya Kunte of SPARC comments: "Any innovation that can cut costs of toilet construction and is sustainable at the same time is welcomed. But solutions have to be replicable and not one-off products. These prototypes have to become accessible to municipal corporations, NGOs, and communities to be implemented on the ground."
"We Want Freedom": campaign video by the group Rashtriya Garima Abhiyan (Struggle for Eradication of Manual Scavenging) showing: 1 ritual burning of scavenging baskets by "liberated" women. 2 persistence of the profession 20 years after It is banned. 3 roving protest confronting the owner of a dry latrine which is still cleaned by scavengers. 4 destruction of the dry latrine.
scavenger scrapes teces out via a hatch in a wall, at the back of a dry latrine, while two bystanders observe.
PAGE 141
"DELIGHT" eTOILET:
ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE URBAN POOR
More than 400 eToilet units and over 200 Sewage Treatments Plants are in use across India, with 80 eToilets planned for Kerala.
"The unit can be set up in [4 square meters] of space and has an automatic sliding door system, automatic platform washing, self washing, etc. It has a water tank capacity of 500 liters.... Lights and fan will work only when the toilet is in use ...
If the user does not clean the toilet after use, it will autoflush the closet and platform. This can be done even by control room by accessing the machine using GPRS [which] can sense water levels and electricity availability. Machines will also self-check the functioning at given intervals. The unit can be connected and accessed through a website or mobile device. There is an audio system inside and a switch to raise complaints about the cleanliness of the unit. ... Delight can generate income from two sources: One, from usage charge collection and another, from the advertisement revenue.... enough income to manage physical cleaning and maintenance of the system in the future. Delight is a futuristic model that offers clean sanitation facilities, sustainable revenue, and employment generation. It can be considered as the resolution of the lack of sanitation infrastructure in urban and semiurban areas. ... Delight is an urban cosmetic that will facelift cities' ambience."
- text by DELIGHT eToilets, by Eram Scientific Solutions Private Ltd.
2013 The "she toilet," a variation of the eToilet designed specifically for use by women, has been installed in 20 locations throughout the state of Kerala. According to daily newspaper The Hindu, this female focused latrine has "features as varied as a coin-operated sanitary-napkin-vending machine, an incinerator to burn the napkins, diaperchanging stations for babies, an Indian-style pan, electronic display boards on doors, security features, FM radio, and SMS alert to controllers for cleaning the tanks." Women interviewed are concerned about the location of the toilets, saying they are not private enough. Instructions for use are not provided in Malayalam, the official language in the state of Kerala.
PAGE 142
PAGE 143
2013 Open defecation on the beach off ; ¿arter Road, Mumbai.
PAGE 144
SPACE: TOILETS WITHOUT WASTE
Cost: $23.4 million for the toilet. Distribution: 2 toilets per 3-10 ISS residents.
Astronauts select "urine" or "urine / feces" mode. NASA.gov explains:
"The astronauts have to position themselves on the toilet seat, using leg restraints and thigh-bars. The toilet basically works like a vacuum cleaner with fans that suck air and waste into the commode. Each astronaut has a personal urinal funnel, which has to be attached to the hose's adapter. Fans suck air and urine through the funnel and hose into the wastewater tank."
In 2009 the toilet on the International Space Station, provided by Russia, breaks down. "40 years ago we were walking around on the moon," writes one blogger on computerworld.com. "Now we are unclogging toilets in low earth orbit. Something doesn't seem right here."
2010 Closed loop toilet: NASA's water recovery system recycles 93 percent of the liquids it receives, including urine and sweat, into drinking water. Boiling alone does not remove contaminates without gravity, so the keg-sized distiller rotates as well as boiling, produce an artificial gravity field.
2010	Commenter "Mercato" on science.slashdot.org: "In the Apollo days, urine was just dumped overboard. The service module's fuel cells made more then enough water as a byproduct of electrical production. Pretty much the same setup for the shuttle; in fact, the shuttle will typically offload extra water onto the station before departing. The station uses solar panels for electricity. Good news: no need to haul up liquid hydrogen and oxygen to supply electrical power. Bad news: no more free water source, especially once we discontinue the shuttle. Orion, Soyuz, Progress, ATV, and even SpaceX's Dragon all use solar power. This means we now need to reclaim as much water from urine, rather then just dumping it, hence the toilet all of the sudden becomes a much more complex piece of equipment."
PAGE 145
PAGE 146
LOW-TECH
1992 "A Guide to the Development of on-Site Sanitation,"
World Health Organization: before urbanization explodes around the turn of the millennium, a guide to affordable toilets for the world's poor...
FIRST PRINCIPLES
4.2 Pit latrine or compost latrine?	4.1 Flush system or drop system?
Do people object strongly to the use of decomposed human excreta as fertilizer?
Do people use water for anal cleaning?
yes
l
0
yes
is the soil permeable?
Is water for flushing available all the year?
Options determined by cultural and environmental factors.
Questions apparently not asked by competitors in the Reinvent the Toilet challenge, 20 years later...
"The cost of a sewerage system (which is usually more than four times that of on-site alternatives) and its requirement of a piped water supply preclude its adoption in the many communities in developing countries that lack adequate sanitation. On-site disposal, dealing with excrete where it is deposited, can provide a hygienic and satisfactory solution for such communities. Safe disposal of excrete is of paramount importance for health and welfare and also for the social and environmental effects it may have in the communities involved. Its provision was listed by the WHO Expert Committee on Environmental Sanitation in 1954 among the first basic steps that should be taken towards ensuring a safe environment." (WHO, 1954.)
PAGE 147
HIGH TECH
BILL GATES: REINVENT THE TOILET
Seeking the biggest impact for their philanthropic investment, and citing the fact that 2.5 billion people do not have access to "safe, affordable sanitation" while the thirsty, infrastructure-heavy western-style toilet system is impossibly expensive (it costs $1,000 per person to install and maintain sewers), the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation call on some of the world's most prestigious institutions to reinvent a device that remains fundamentally unchanged since Humpherson's Beaufort model hooked up to a sewer line in 1885. Toilet 2.0 must be off-the-grid, a stand-alone mini-building, a high-tech 21st century outhouse achieving "unqualified freedom from inputted water [and electricity] and output sewerage connections of any type." Architecture and infrastructure are no longer seen as offering answers to the world's most urgent problems: the toilet, even in a high tech, ideal form, regresses, disconnecting from the dwelling. Despite the low operating costs mandated in the challenge, the reinvented toilets all rely on advanced systems, intimidating to maintain for anyone without a PhD: electrochemical reactors, thermal drying, biomass conversion to energy...
1 nuary 12, 2013 The Economist features on ts cover Rodin's thinker sitting on a flush toilet, with the headline "Will we ever invent anything this useful again?" But the toilet itself is overdue forreinvention. Once a lifesaver, triggering huge Improvements In living standards, the western model of the toilet and attached sewage system can no longer meet the demands of the world's rapidly growing cities...
2012 Artist's impression of Bill Gates at the Reinvent the Toilet Fair in Seattle, concentrating on a simulation by the University of Toronto team, which wins the $40,000 third prize for their smoldering, sand, and UV waste treatment system.
From Bill Gates's blog "Impatient Optimists," August 14, 2012
Today I attended what has to be one of the oddest summer fairs ever... where we have brought together about 200 grantees, partners, and others who are passionate about creating safe, effective, and inexpensive sanitation services for people without access to flush toilets. ...
The flush toilets we use in the wealthy world are irrelevant, impractical and Impossible for 40 percent of the global population, because they often don't have access to water, and sewers, electricity, and sewage treatment systems. Worldwide, there are
2.5	billion people without access to safe sanitation - including 1 billion people who still defecate out In the open and more than 1 billion others who must use pit latrines. ... Food and water tainted with fecal matter causes diarrheal diseases that kill
1.5	million children every year - more than the annual deaths from AIDS and malaria combined. Chronic diarrhea can impact the development of children's minds, bodies, and Immune systems. The consequences are especially stark for women and girls who are often forced to miss work or school when they are menstruating or risk assault when they have to defecate in the open or use public facilities at night. ...
When you think about it, the flush toilet is actually a pretty outdated sanitation solution. It was certainly an Important breakthrough when it was created in 1775 by a Scottish mathematician and watchmaker named Alexander Cummings. Over the decades, it led to a sanitary revolution that helped keep deadly diseases like cholera at bay, saving hundreds of millions of lives. But the fact that four of every 10 people still don't have access to flush toilets proves that - even today - it is a solution too expensive for much of the world. And in an era where water is becoming increasingly precious, flush toilets that require 10 times more water than our dally drinking water requirement are no longer a smart or sustainable solution. ... Inventing new toilets is one of the most important things we can do to reduce child deaths and disease and improve people's lives.
PAGE 148
LOW-TECH
"A latrine consists of a number of parts which people can combine in various ways."
— Sanitation Without Water (1985), 68.
Handle: A great help to those who have difficulty getting up from a squatting position.
Lid: To stop insects and rodents moving into and out of the receptacle.
Receptacle: The purpose of the receptacle is to receive and safely store the excreta and anything else which people normally put in it.
Aerator: The purpose of an aerator is to bring oxygen from the air into the middle of the pile in a compost latrine.
All captions from Sanitation Without
Shelter: The purD„ the shelter ¡ston,°S6of privacy and proles6
for the user and to*"
sunlight and rainWa> entering the recept'*
Seat: A raised seatis probably more con vement than a san,«-slab but Is neither ^ l healthful nor hygigfl
Baffle: The baffle directs the latrine input to one of the chambers.
Squatting slab: It
must have a hole large enough to take faeces and urine without the edges getting soiled, small enough for children not to fall in.
Solar heater: You can
increase the temperature inside a receptacle if you design it and place it in the sun in such a way that parts of it are heated by the sun.
"A pour-flush latrine with pan and water-seal trap directly above the pit," 25.
PAGE 149
HIGH TECH
Caltech's winning scheme: only two steps required to achieve decontaminated water.
FIRST PRIZE:
SOLAR-POWERED ELECTROCHEMICAL REACTOR SEPTIC SYSTEM California Institute of Technology
"When liquid waste in the holding tank reaches a certain level, it flows into the electrochemical reactor where it is disinfected. The clean water is then reused the next time the toilet is flushed. Other treated waste byproducts include H2 gas -which could be used for cooking or to power fuel cells - and fertilizers."
Michael Hoffmann, CalTech lead investigator: "They think that just digging a hole in the ground and putting a hut on top of it with something that approximates a squat toilet is sufficient, but that doesn't work. That's where some of the problems arise, because the waste doesn't get emptied, the place gets trashed very quickly, people don't use it."
"There is no doubt that these men [19th century hygienists] sincerely felt they were carrying out a revolution, or that they considered themselves pioneers of a new order, willing to brave public opinion, legal authority, even personal notoriety to further their cause. What drove them to speak so earnestly of 'a revolution of cesspool drainage,' to press for evacuation systems, particular modes of transport, formulas for purification? They expected nothing short of the eradication of all ills and, in the most sublime cases, the assurance of everlasting universal harmony. Essays and reports were drafted with prophetic faith. Not one of these revolutionary heroes doubted ‘wan instant that his invention of jf|*rator, a ventilation system, a toilet bowl, or a mobile transform the future of
7? bominique Laporte,
“'story of Shit (1978), 123.
"ew form of urinal would humanity."
SMOLDERING, SAND, AND UV WASTE TREATMENT SYSTEM
University of Toronto, Western University, and University of Queensland
"It's a squat toilet, which is what many people around the world prefer. The waste falls onto a sloped conveyor belt. Solids stick, and liquids run off into a bed of sand, which filters everything 10 micrometers or larger, including most parasites and their eggs. Then the liquid falls into a shallow trough, where an ultraviolet lamp - running on five watts from a solar panel on the roof - destroys any other pathogens in minutes. The sand filter's top layer will get clogged, so a corkscrew mechanism skims it off to join the solids, which another belt squeezes to remove moisture so they can be burned efficiently. The user would light the waste in a smolder unit every night, which would leave just a tiny bit of ash and sterile sand." — Jason Gerhard, engineer at the University of Western Ontario, working on the project with Yu-Ling Cheng, Mark Kortschot, and José Torero.
Conveyor belt acts as separator...
Reinvent the Toilet Challenge aims to create a toilet that:
e veS pathogens from human waste and recovers valuable resources such as energy, clean water, and nutrients.
*re teS "off the grid" without connections to water, sewer, or electrical lines.
' ts |ess than 5 cents per user per day.
,C°0motes sustainable and financially profitable sanitation services and businesses that operate in poor, urban settings.
* Pr truly aspirational next-generation product that everyone will want to use - in wealthy as well as developing nations." 'Reinvent the Toilet Challenge: Fact Sheet, November 2012.
PAGE 150
LOW-TECH
From: "A Guide to the Development of on-Site Sanitation," World Health Organization, 1992:
Ventilated double pit latrine
Where groundwater or rock lies 1-2m below the ground, a deep pit is substituted by two shallow pits lined with bricks, filled and emptied alternately.
Septic tank
Requires sufficient water supply to flush waste through pipes into the tank, where it collects until emptying. Disadvantages: relies on piped-in water, "regular dislodging required and sludge needs careful handling."
Septic tar*
Drainage 1 tench
'atnag
iTita
i 4 * * ♦ *
"The baffle directs the latrine input (excreta and refuse) to one of the chambers. When that chamber is full, you turn the baffle plate with a handle. The input then falls into the other chamber."
— Sanitation Without Water, 78.
PAGE 151
HIGHTECH
CONCENTRATED SUNLIGHT + NANO
MEMBRANE treatment
Cranfield University ($810,000 grant)
"Solids separation (faeces) is principally accomplished through sedimentation. Loosely bound water (mostly from urine) is separated using low glass transition temperature hollow-fibre membranes. The unique nanostructured membrane wall facilitates water transport in the vapour state ether than as a liquid state, which yields high rejection of pathogens and some odorous volatile compounds. A novel nano-coated bead enables water vapour recovery through encouraging the formation of water droplets at the nanobead surface. Once the droplets form a critical size, the water drains into a collection vessel for reuse at the household level in washing or irrigation ... Following release of unbound water, the residual solids (around 20-25 percent solids) are transported by mechanical screw which drops them nto a coating chamber lined with a replaceable hag. Once inside the coating chamber, the solid atatrlx is periodically coated with a biodegradable nano-polymer. The nanopolymer coating serves to block odour and acts as a barrier to pathogen transport. The toilet will be powered using a modular hand crank or bicycle power generator supplied for household use that can also power ™ter low voltage items (e.g. mobile phones). The 'splaceable bag comprising the coated solids is INcalty collected for transport to a locally y™ smaB scale gasifier sized to accommodate round 40 toilets. Both toilet maintenance and Mjcollection will be undertaken with a trained operative responsible for the franchised area."
Super hydrophilic nano-bcads
Fblymer membrane
Distillate store
Spray mist nano-encapsulation
Super hydrophilic coating
RTI's toilet: Waste drops directly onto a screw that feeds it into a combustion chamber; urine is treated by electrochemical cell.
Cranfield's toilet: super hydrophilic nano-beads, polymer membrane, distillate store, super hyrdrophilic coating and spray mist nano-encapsulation take care of everything...
Rotating trap.

■uirAL SOLAR, THERMAL DRYING; MECH.cc; CONVERSION TO ENERGY;
biochemical disinfection
ELEflrnation3|($1'300'000grant)
i jniversity
Duk0 do State University coi?At Arnes Research Center NAS^I Research Laboratory
K^rd waste drying process will use a com-'Ttie s° pgehanical, solar and thermal energy. binatl0rl ¡ca| screw-like device will separate out Am00" j begin the process of converting solid qUiClS,nto combustion fuel. Solar energy, natural *ast0 ' nd heat from burning waste will further aid draf® a. process. As it dries, the waste will be 1,161 down into uniform-sized pellets, which will broken ^	RTI-developed Thermoelectric
burced Cookstove Add-on device, a self-^"f-Lrl unit that captures a portion of heat and ffj^sit into electricity. This electricity will run blower and be stored in a battery 3 C° wer the water treatment functions. Liquid 10 P _ including urine and liquid that is removed *aS the solid waste - will be disinfected through ¡tactrochemical processes using diamond-based c trodes (to be developed in partnership with Advanced Diamond Technologies, Inc. and Duke Hniversity). The disinfected water will be suitable for use as rinse water for the toilet or as fertilizer."
PAGE 152
LOW-TECH
1992 Not reinventing the wheel: basic toilet construction - here the installation of the concrete slab over the pit - explained by the World Health Organization: "Concrete for floors of latrines that are not directly above the pits is cast in situ. A slightly weaker concrete mix of 1:3:6 may be used ... The outlet pipe and pan should be carefully laid to the desired level before the concrete is cast. Cover slabs for offset pits and floors and cover slabs of septic tanks are normally also made of concrete. Walls of septic tanks are usually constructed from concrete blocks or cement-plastered fired bricks."
"The concrete slab is given the shape of a dome by mounding up earth to the required profile of the underside of the slab. The earth is compacted and smoothed. It may then be covered with plastic sheeting or old cement bags, or coated in old engine oil to break any bond between the earth and the fresh concrete. A circular iron strip made from an oil drum is used as the edge former or mould."
r.rmor
PAGE 153
HIGHTECH
BLUE DIVERSION TOILET Eawag and EOOS
Reinvent The Toilet "award for outstanding design of a toilet user interface"
"The core of the blue diversion toilet is the back wall containing the compact water recovery technology. Faeces and urine are separately collected under the separating pan. The soiled water from hand-washing, pan cleaning, anal cleansing, and menstrual hygiene is also separated and fully recycled on-site to be used for the same purposes. The blue diversion toilet features an innovated dry source-separating pan, which can be cleaned with on-site recovered water without the use of mechanical parts for cleaning. The squatting pan can be transformed by 90 degrees rotation into a washing pan by foot activation."
Tove Larsen (senior scientist at Eawag): "We developed this toilet from the beginning so that form follows function. The designer... was always thinking in geometry: 'How can I put this technology Into a very small space that will fit into any toilet house around the world?"'
Working model Installed in two informal settlements in Kampala, Uganda in 2013; toilet is used around 1,200 times. "The general reaction was positive, but the test revealed the challenge of building trust in the recycled water and the collection service." Surveys of users "revealed a willingness to pay $11.50 per month per household, which is lower than the target fee of $15.50/ month. However, 2 households could use the toilet, a common practice in informal settlements, and thereby share the costs."
PAGE 154
DIGITAL TOILET: INAX SATIS
V'T'í X
TANKLESS: The Inax Satis, a tankless "integrated" model introduced by Lixil, Toto's biggest competitor in the washlet market, appears in the ideal bathroom with no visible plumbing.
FUNCTIONS: Controlled by a wall mounted unit, functions include: automatic seat opening and closing (triggered by a body sensor), automatic deodorizing (air in the bowl is sucked through a charcoal filter and pumped out the back) plus "Plasmacluster," an ion generator designed to create "fresh air [as] in a forest or near a waterfall," adjustable front and rear washing, music, nightlight, and emergency alarm. Inax typically features a nozzle that sprays at a 70-degree angle for "greater fire power and accuracy." (Rose George, The Big Necessity, 57.)
O Toilet seat lid B Seat unit
Q Indicator (refer to the details below)
□	Upper body sensor B Flush button
□	Power plug
B Water shutoff valve
□	Open/close handle
□	Water supply hose 03 Side cover
m Indicator (refer to the details below) £ Lower body sensor Tr Seat sensor
B Toilet seat lid release lever CE) Nozzle guard (E Warm-air drying duct B Nozzle (for rear washing)
¡0 Bowl
fS Nozzle (for front washing)
(E Toilet seat QD Toilet
HACK: In August 2015, data security company Trustwave issues an advisory, warning users of the Satis that anyone in Bluetooth range with the My Satis app could potentially take control of their toilet and activate any of its multiple functions, since the toilet's password is hard-coded to 0000.
VORTEX: "direct vortex" flush releases 70 percent of water from top of bowl (Fig. 1), and 30 percent from the "jet pipe" at the base (Fig. 2), forcing waste up and around the s-trap, finally refilling the bowl from the top (Fig. 3). Flushing action uses five liters of water (federal mandated low-flush toilets in the US use a maximum of six liters).
PAGE 155
Android app, "My Satis," the toilet can be prepared for use, remotely: the seat warmed, A^ued, interior light switched on, lid raised, deodorizer activated, even pre-flushed. Since none of Pr Cf'ons are automatic, predictive, recorded, or repeated, this toilet is intelligent but has not yet thefunC. "smartness" of some other elements of architecture - the ability to learn the user's habits to them in advance.
and *on
t	5:02 PM
•j tr— k
5 n— V "J 0 5	7 V
i 7_?<7haThe Rolling Stones
(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction 7/tnA« Rolled Gold+: The Very Best...
■4>
hv? d/vS/tCi?-
◄		2012^10^1				►1
B	8	*	*	*	&	±
	1	2	3	4 <?b	. \	6
	8 £33	9 Urn	10 Id	n	12	13
14 i#1	15	16	17	18	19	20 4«
21	22	23 £33	24	25	26	27
28	29 If	30 .... -	31		_ -	1 G _ J
©mm
Q af______________If 03 ,||| €1 'C 08:11
BBS 2013if01M24B (*)	08:11	0
0
(v) ttffi

e
e
Music choice: "(I Can't Get No) Satisfaction."
"Poop calendar": the app allows the user to log the quality of their faeces on a daily basis. The "icon" wearing a police helmet changes shape and color accordingly.
Shape: small and round Color: dark brown Comment: good evacuation
2009	Big data enters the toilet: TOTO's Intelligence Toilet II features a urine "sample catcher" that can measure glucose levels (useful ¡or diabetics), urine temperature, hormone levels for women trying to conceive). The washlet (which also has the standard features of spray-et and heated seat etc.) gathers data and communicates with the user's device by WiFi, compiling a health report.
PAGE 156

2013 Tacloban city, Philippines. A bathroom survives the typhoon, dislodged from its position in the house, and becomes refuge and a games room.

PAGE 157
PAGE 158
ULTIMATE ELEMENT
Under the regime of the factory farm, the toilet, or more precisely the cesspool, takes over buildings but also entire landscapes. Outside the small town of Milford, southwest Utah, the desert is turning into a circuit board of squares and circles. The circles represent agriculture. The squares, Malevich-black, are reservoirs of pig shit. There are 92 of them, in a sparse grid across the desert. Each serves a 300-meter long warehouse owned by the pork conglomerate Circle Four Farms, containing pigs for harvesting into cheap meat -1.2 million in 2013. Sometimes these facilities are in gridded colonies, sometimes lonely individual outposts, spreading further into the desert since the original 3-mile odor buffer zone proved insufficient (the smell spreads up to 9 miles). Heading west, down the valley, the Black Squares go on and on (further than this picture can allow), like something imagined by Superstudio, connected by a dirt road as thin as a hair. There are 53 of these clusters, forming a desert city consisting largely of cess pools. Recently purchased by the Hong Kong-based meat processor Shuanghui International, the economic model of factory-farmed meat is globalizing. The toilet-ification of Earth's surface may continue, managed in a much more rational and contained manner for animals than it is for humans in most of the world's cities...
Zoom in on one "farm." Below: typical primary / secondary reservoir system. Secondary lagoon for evaporation, designed for 20-year sludge accumulation, after which it will be spread on land or sent to landfills.
Interior view from Smf hfield's flickr feed, showing th 2 newly instituted "common aiea” outside freely exitabl^ pens.

PAGE 159
PAGE 160
TOILET LANDSCAPE
Waste reservoirs for cows, in satellite images selected by artist Mishka Henner, are not perfect squares (as they are for pigs) but more like wounds of outrageous colors. Cartesian grids of the feedlots are neighbored by enormous unruly reservoirs in which waste condenses and evaporates...
"Ninety-seven percent of the beef consumed in the United States will have been 'finished' on a feedlot: a vast and odoriferous empire of pens and troughs where up to
100,000	steers at a time spend the last three to six months of their short (12 to 18-month) lives gaining up to 4 pounds a day on a diet of corn, protein supplements, and antibiotics. Digestion at such an industrial scale produces equally colossal amounts of manure."
(Nicola Twilley, ediblegeography.com, August 2, 2013.)
2013 Tascosa Feedyard, Texas.
PAGE 161
I^PÇoronado Feeders, Dalhart, Texas, Mishka Henner.
PAGE 162

2014 Building under demolition in Rotterdam reveals section of typical plumbing.
PAGE 163
blbliography
fc. _ Katherine. The Dirt on Clean: An Ash®n ^zed history. New York: North Point
¡*^2007- Pr'nt- www'maP"test'n9'corr|/ P,eSSl m nerformance/background.html rnaxinflUnn r
K Georgios P. "Ancient Greek Af^H'rie® Operation with Reused Water." I3'13. . ujater Technologies. Dordrecht: Si ®,0. 67-68. P,in,.
Iv ■ ] Jhe Essential Whole Earth
8s , aue- Access to Tools and Ideas. New
2 Doubleday, 1986.
ard Anne. "Baristas Lock Restrooms,
‘f&rthe Revolt Doesn't Last." The New York
^ es [New York City] November 22, 2011:
11,1 n n y./Region. Web. October 2, 2013. n. pay-
Benn, Charles D. Daily life in Traditional China the Tang DYnastY- Westport, Conn.: greenwood Press, 2002. Print.
Black, Maggie and Ben Fawcett, The Last ■Eo; Opening the Door on the Global Sanitation Crisis. London: Earthscan, 2008.
Biair, Munroe. Ceramic Water Closets.
Princes Rlsborough: Shire, 2000.
Bloom, Dan. "Secondary School's New Unisex Toilets Will Be A Haven For Bullies And Even Underage Sex, Parents Warn."
Mail Online. Associated Newspapers, November 21, 2013. Web. May 5 2014. <www. dallymail.co.uk/news/article-2511184/ Secondary-schools-new-unisex-TOILETS-haven-bullies- underage-sex-parents-warn. html>.
Bradley, C. C. "Human Water Needs And Water Use In America: A Permanent Water Shortage Affecting Our Standard Of Living Will Occur Before The Year 2000." Science 138, no. 3539 (1962): 489-491.
Brand, Stewart. Whole Earth Catalog:
Access to Tools. Whole Earth, 1968.
Branzi, Andrea. No-stop City: Archizoom hssoclati. Orlelans: HYX, 2006.
Burra, S. "Community-Designed, Built And Managed Toilet Blocks In Indian Cities." Environment and Urbanization 15, no. 2 (2003): 11-32.
Bushman, Richard L., and Claudia L. Bush-^P"The Early History of Cleanliness in America." The Journal of American History 74'no. 4 (1988): 1213.
Byon, George Gordon Noel. Don Juan. ans: Galignani, 1819. Print.
Chadwick, Edwin, and Michael W. Flinn. Report on the Sanitary Condition of the Labouring Population of Gt. Britain. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1965.
"Characteristics of New Housing." United States Census Bureau. N.p., n.d. Web. May 5, 2014. <www.census.gov/construction/chars
Chun, Allen. "Flushing In The Future: The Supermodern Japanese Toilet In A Changing Domestic Culture." Postcolonial Studies 5, no. 2 (2002): 153-170.
Clark, Clare. The Great Stink. Orlando: Harcourt, 2005.
Clarke, George Rochfort. The Reform of the Sewers... Second edition, Enlarged. London: 1 H. & T. Parker, 1860. Print.
Clarke, T. H. M. "Prehistoric Sanitation In Crete." BMJ2, no. 2228 (1903): 597-599.
Corporation, New York, and William L. Olier. The Sanitation of Cities,. New York: Printed by the De Vinne Press, 1921.
Cosgrove, 3.1. History of Sanitation. Pittsburgh: Standard Sanitary Mfg. Co., 1909.
Delleur, Jacques W. "The Evolution of Urban Hydrology: Past, Present, and Future." Journal of Hydraulic Engineering 129, no. 8 (2003): 563.
Dickens, Charles. Little Dorrit. Copyright ed. Leipzig: Tauchnitz, 1856. Print.
Dobraszczyk, Paul. "Sewers, Wood Engraving and the Sublime: Picturing London's Main Drainage System in the Illustrated London News, 1859-62." Victorian Periodicals Review 38, no. 4 (2005): 349-378.
Dobson, Eric John. The English text of the Ancrene Riwle. London: Oxford University Press, 1972. Print.
Eisenbud, M.. "Environmental Protection in the City of New York: Urban Pollution Control Presents Problems of Great Technical, Legal, and Political Complexity." Science 170, no. 3959(1970): 706-712.
Eitrem, S. "Venus Calva and Venus Clo-acina." The Classical Review 37, no. 1-2 (1923): 14-16.
Franceys, R. A Guide to the Development of On-Site Sanitation. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1992.
Frank, Anne, Otto Frank, Mirjam Pressler, and Susan Massotty. The Diary of a Young Girl: The Definitive Edition. New York: Doubleday, 1995.
Gandy, Matthew. "The Paris Sewers And The Rationalization Of Urban Space." Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers 24, no. 1 (1999): 23-44.
Gates, Bill. "Inventing a Toilet for the 21st Century." Impatient Optimists Blog. N.p., August 14, 2012. Web. May 5, 2014. <www. impatientoptimists.org/Posts/2012/08/ lnventing-a-Toilet-for-the-21st-Century>.
"Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation." Bill Gates Names Winners of the Reinvent the Toilet Challenge, www.gatesfoundation. org/media-center/press-releases/2012/08/ bill-gates-names-winners-of-the- reinvent-the-toilet-challenge (accessed April 25, 2014).
Geisler, Tim C. "On Public Toilets in Beijing." Journal of Architectural Education 53, no. 4 (2000): 216-219.
Gerhard, Wm. Paul. House Drainage and Sanitary Plumbing. Reprinted from Van Nostrand's magazine, ed. New York:
D.	Van Nostrand, 1882.
George, Rose. The Big Necessity: The Unmentionable World of Human Waste and Why It Matters. New York: Metropolitan Books, 2008. Print.
Gibbons, Stella. A Pink Front Door. London: Hodderand Stoughton, 1959. Print.
Giedion, S. Mechanization Takes Command. New York: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Gregory, Morna E., and Sian James. Toilets of the World. London: Merrell, 2006.
Harington, John, and Elizabeth Story Donno. Sir John Harrington's a New Discourse of a Stale Subject, Called the Metamorphosis of Ajax. A critical annotated ed. New York: Columbia University Press, 1962.
Hellyer, S. Stevens. Principles and Practice of Plumbing. London: G. Bell, 1891.
Heselbarth, Rob. "Toilet Smuggling Law Tough to Enforce." Contractor Magazine, August 1, 1998.
Horan, Julie L. The Porcelain God: A Social History of the Toilet. Secaucus, N.J.: Carol Pub. Group, 1996.
Horrocks, Clare. "The Personification of "Father Thames": Reconsidering the Role of the Victorian Periodical Press in the "Verbal and Visual Campaign" for Public Health Reform." Victorian Periodicals R eview 36, no. 1 (2003): 2-19.
PAGE 164
Hoyt, William E. "Safety in House-Drainage. "Popular Science Monthly 23 (1888): 289. Print.
Humphreys, Laud. Tearoom Trade: Impersonal Sex In Public Places. Enl. ed. New York: Aldine Pub. Co., 1975.
Illustrated Catalogue of Statuary, Fountains, Vases, Settees, etc., for Parks, Gardens and Conservatories, Manufactured by the J.L. Mott Iron Works ... New York: E.D. Slater, printer, 1875.
"Improved Sanitation Facilities (% of Population with Access)." World Bank. N.p., n.d. Web. 5 May 2014. <data.worldbank. org/indicator/SH.STA
Jansen, M. "Water Supply And Sewage Disposal At Mohenjo-Daro." World Archaeology 21, no. 2 (1989): 177-192.
Kaufmann, J. E., and H. W. Kaufmann.
The Medieval Fortress: Castles, Forts, and Walled Cities of the Middle Ages. Conshohocken, PA: Combined Pub.,
2001. Print.
Kira, Alexander. The Bathroom. Ithaca: Center for Housing and Environmental Studies, 1966.
Kira, Alexander. The Bathroom. New York, USA: Penguin Books, 1976.
Kurokawa, Kisho. "Capsule Declaration."
SD Magazine, 1969.
Lacan, Jacques. "The Insistence of the Letter in the Unconscious." in Structuralism. Vol. 36-37. New Haven: Yale French Studies, 1966. Print.
Laporte, Dominique. History of Shit. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2000.
Leonardo da Vinci: Codex Atlanticus. reprint ed. New York: Johnson, 1973. Print.
Levi, Primo, S. J. Woolf, and Philip Roth. Survival in Auschwitz: the Nazi Assault on Humanity. New York: Simon & Schuster, 19961959. Print.
"Luther's Lavatory Thrills Experts." BBC News. BBC, October 22, 2004. Web. May 5, 2014. <news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/3944549.stm>.
Macdonald, Colin F., and Jan M. Driessen. "The Drainage System of the Domestic Quarter in the Palace at Knossos." The Annual of the British School at Athens 83 (1988): 235-258.
Mays, Larry W. "Water Technology in Ancient Mesopotamia." Ancient Water Technologies. Dordrecht: Springer, 2010.
41. Print.
'Mercano' user comment on Kdawson "Main Toilet On ISS Craps Out." Slashdot, News for Nerds Forum, science-beta.slash-dot.org/story/09/07/19/2357222/ main-toilet-on-iss-craps-out
Molotch, Harvey Luskin, and Laura Noreln. Toilet: Public Restrooms and the Politics of Sharing. New York: New York University Press, 2010.
Morse, Sidney, and Isabella Curtis. Household Discoveries: An Encyclopaedia of Practical Recipes and Processes. Petersburg, N.Y.: Success Co., 1909.
"OED Online." Oxford English Dictionary. N.p., n.d. Web. 4 July 2013. <www.oed. com/>.
Oliver, Stuart. "The Thames Embankment and the Disciplining of Nature in Modernity." The Geographical Journal 166, no. 3 (2000): 227-238.
New York Times. "Perplexing Problem:
When Streets Become Public Urinals," December 29, 1986.
News, CBC. "Public Pay Toilet Opens in Toronto." CBC news. CBC/Radio Canada, 19 May 2010. Web. 5 May 2014. <www.cbc. ca/news/canada/toronto/public-pay-toilet-opens-in-toronto-1,943367>.
Nichols, Francis Morgan. The Roman Forum. A Topographical Study, by Francis Morgan Nichols,... London: Longmans, 1877. Print.
Nyathi, Kistepile. "Zimbabwe City Orders Synchronised Toilet Flush." Africa Review. N.p., 21 Sept. 2012. Web. May 5, 2014. www.africareview.com/News/Zimbabwe-city-orders-synchronised-toilet-flush/-79180/1513704/-/38jaaoz/-/index.html.
Plainer, Samuel Ball and Thomas Ashby.
A Topographical Dictionary of Ancient Rome. London: Oxford University Press,
H. Milford, 1929. Print.
Penner, Barbara. Bathroom. (London: Reaktion Books, 2013).
Poore, George Vivian. The Dwelling House. London, New York and Bombay: Longmans, Green, and co., 1897.
Possehl, Gregory L.. The Indus Civile tion: A Contemporary Perspective W ~\ 1 Creek, CA: AltaMira Press, 2002.
Putnam, J. Pickering. Plumbing and H hold Sanitation,. Garden City: Doubler|USe' Page & company, 1911.	a^j
Ragette, Friedrich. Traditional Domestic
Architecture of the Arab Region. Stuttn • Edition Axel Menges, 2003.	'9art
Rainer Riesner, "Josephus' 'Gate of the Essenes' in Modern Discussion," Zeitsrh • des Deutschen Palästina-Vereins Vol ine; (1989), 105-109.
Rizvi, Sayyid Muhammad. "The Ritual and Spiritual Purity." Al-lslam.org. N.p., n ^ Web. 5 May 2014. www.al-islam.org/ritUa|
and-spiritual-purity-sayyid-muhammad-rizvi
Sabine, Ernest L. "Latrines and Cesspools of Mediaeval London." Speculum 9, no 3 (1934): 303.
"Sanitation." The Holocaust Explained.
www.theholocaustexplained.org/ks3/the-
final-solution/auschwitz-birkenau/sanita-
tion/#.U1p9lfmSzAk (accessed April 25, 2014).
"Seattle's $5 Million Automated Public Toilets Sold for $12,000." Local News. N.p. n.d. Web. 5 May 2014. <seattletimes.com/ html/localnews/2008117767
"Shit" issue. Colors Magazine. Issue 85.
2011.
Stevens, John. A New Spanish and English Dictionary. Alicante: Biblioteca Virtual Miguel de Cervantes, 2008.
Stone, May N. "The Plumbing Paradox: American Attitudes toward Late Nineteenth-Century Domestic Sanitary Arrangements." Winterthur Portfolio 14, no. 3 (1979): 283.
Stone, May N. "The Plumbing Paradox: American Attitudes toward Late Nineteenth-Century Domestic Sanitary Arrangements.” Winterthur Portfolio 14, no. 3 (1979): 283-309.
"Synchronised Toilet Flush Held in Zimbabwe's Bulawayo." BBC News (London), September 24, 2012. www.bbc.com/news/ world-africa-19704766 (accessed September 23, 2013).
Tanizaki, Jun'ichiro. In Praise of Shadows. New Haven, Conn.: Leete's Island Books, 1977. Print.
j; r(-cans with Disabilities Act.
^ p Q . us Dept, of Justice, Civil ** pjv|sj0n, Coordination and Review Rig^ts <991. Print.
Section
flush Toilet." YouTube. YouTube,
“^ie, r4 2007. Web. May 5, 2014. <www.
0utjbecom/watch?V=8pPfrV8E37o>'
r "Habuba Kebira ou la Naissance rurbanisme-" Paleorient22, no. 2 (1996)' 45-7(3.
derKam, Oames C. The Dead Sea Scrolls Today Grand RaP'ds- Mich-: Eerdmans,
(994. Print-
yVaarts, Loes L. "An Expert's Take on j0j|et History and Customs from Antique, the Renaissance." Bible History pgny |\|.p., n.d. Web. 5 May 2014. www. biblicalarchaeology.org/daily/archaeol-nqy-today/biblical-archaeology-topics/ a„-expert% E2 % 80 % 99s-ta ke-on-toilet-history-and-customs-from-antiquity-to-the-
renaissance/.
Waarts, Loes L. The So-called 'Bathroom of Pope Alexander VI. Turnhout Brepols Publishers, 2004.
Wangkiat, Paritta. "Toilet Plan Fails to Sit Flush with Squatters." Bangkok Post Article. N.p., 25 Feb. 2013. Web. May 5, 2014. <www.bangkokpost.com/print/337532
Winblad, Uno, and Wen Kilama. Sanitation Without Water. Rev. and enl. ed. Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire: Macmillan, 1985. Print.
"World Toilet Organisation". N.p., n.d. Web. November 5, 2013. <worldtoilet.org/>.
Wright, Lawrence, and Leon Banov. Clean and Decent: The Fascinating History of the Bathroom & the Water Closet, and of Sundry Habits, Fashions & Accessories of the Toilet, Principally in Great Britain, France, & America. New York: Viking Press, 1960.
PAGE 166
PAGE 167
¡ifla9e
sources and courtesy
Philip Corke © English Heritage;
P220 l3Pi|otAfrica Media, LLC; BBC.
B.udvvig W. (1977). Mass, Sitte und P8 -li des Bauens in Habuba Kabira Süd.
ju colloque "Le Moyen Euphrate, ActeS,ec0ntacts et d'échanges," D.-C. .„„r, (Ed.), Strasbourg (France), 63-
R. (1997). "Habuba Kebira ou la ^KrnCe de l'urbanisme (Habuba Kabira or nafbirth of urbanism)," Paléorient, 22(2),
the c 45-76.
^ "Water Supply and Sewage Disposal f Mohenjo-Daro," M. Dansen, World
myology. Vol. 21, No. 2, The ilchaeology of Public Health (Oct., 1989), <77-192; Aldo Tamburrino; BMD Publishing Group Ltd; The Drainage System of the ^Kistic Quarter in the Palace at Knossos, Q0lin f. MacDonald and Dan M. Driessen,
7/,e Annual of the British School at Athens, Vol 83 (1988), pP 235-258 / Oxbow Books.
P21 Lawrence Wright, Clean and Decent, Penguin Group, 2003; A P Nicholson / Nottinghamshire History.
P22 Loes L. Waarts, "The so-called Bathroom of Pope Alexander VI," Functions and Decorations: Art and Ritual at the Vatican Palace in the Middle Ages and the Renaissance (Turnhout Brepols 2004).
P23 BNF, Bibliothèque Nationale de France.
P25 © Stiftung Luthergedenkstatten in Sachsen-Anhalt (English: Luther Memorials Foundation of Saxony-Anhalt).
P28-29 Sir. Dohn Harrington, The Metamorphosis of Ajax (1592).
P30 Lawrence Wright, Clean and Decent, Penguin Group, 2003; © 2013 Sotheby's;
© Bonhams 2001-2014; Françoise de Bonneville, The Book of the Bath, Rizzoli, 1998; Museum of Applied Arts, Budapest; Florian Papp Incorporated.
P10 Georgios P. Antoniou.
P12 Ms R 171 f.285 Plan of Canterbury Cathedral and the plumbing system, from the 'Eadwine Psalter', c.1150 (vellum),
English School, (12th century) / Trinity College, Cambridge, UK / The Bridgeman Art Library.
Pli Lawrence Wright, Clean and Decent, Penguin Group, 2003.
P14 Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division; Bormay Engraving Company.
P15 Toriyama Sekien, The Illustrated Night Parade of a Hundred Demons (1779).
P16 ©The Trustees of the British Musuem. All rights reserved.
P17 Akira Matsui, Masaaki Kanehara and Masako Kanehara, Paleoparasitology in Japan - Discovery of Toilet Features. (2003)
p18 D. E. Kaufmann and H. W. Kaufmann,
Die Medieval Fortress: Castles, Forts,
And Walled Cities of the Middle Ages,
(De Capo, 2004).
H9 Tim Davies / www.flickr.com/photos/ xanthias/3574962375; Dohn Cooper / WWw.pbase.com/john_cooper/image/ 131741375; © 2000-2014 CastleUK.Net.
P31 Pat 59 / www.vacanceo.com/albums_ photos/voir-photo_90071.phP
P32-33 Friedrich Ragette, Traditional Domestic Architecture of the Arab Region, Axel Menges (2003), p. 11-13.
P41 Lawrence Wright, Clean and Decent, Penguin Group, 2003.
P43 Richard Trench and Ellis Hillman, "London Under London: A Subterranean Guide," Dohn Murray (1993); Clare Clark, The Great Stink, Harcourt (2005).
P44 Munroe Blair, Ceramic Water Closets, Shire Books (2000).
P45 Ramdomness453, Extra Special Video: The Pedestal Vase (Washout)
By George Jennings, T.C. & Co (2010) / www.youtube.com/watch?v=9aqmj_yKpCU; Geoffrey Pidgeon/ADP Bathrooms.
P46-49 Geoffrey Pidgeon/ADP Bathrooms
P50 Siegfried Giedion, Mechanization Takes Command, W.W. Norton & Company, 1969.
P52-53 Twyford Bathrooms.
P54 © London Dewish Cultural Centre 2011 / Yad Vashem The Holocaust Martyrs' and Heroes' Remembrance Authority.
P55 Duliana Ribeiro Muniz Westcott.
4® 3- E. Kaufmann and H. W. Kaufmann, U® Medieval Fortress: Castles, Forts, And Called Cities of the Middle Ages,
. e Capo, 2004); Farrell Grimshaw ar*nership; Adam Kaliszewski.
P56 © The Rockefeller Archive Center. All rights reserved.
P58 Uno Winblad and Wen Kilama, "Sanitation Without Water" McMillan (1985).
P59 Lawrence Wright, Clean and Decent, Penguin Group, 2003.
P61 Kisho Kurokawa Architect & Associsates; Charlie Koolhaas.
P63 Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division.
P65 Archizoom Associati.
P66 Thomas Loot / Trunk Archive,
Samuel T. Ludwig.
P67 Arnold Newman / Getty Images.
P68-83; From THE BATHROOM by Alexander Kira, copyright© 1966, 1976 by Alexander Kira. Used by permission of Bantam Books, a division of Random House LLC.
P84-85 "The Flush Toilet" / www.youtube. com/watch?v=8pPfrV8E37o
P86-87 New Whole Earth LLC
P88 Timothy C. Geisler; Ciska van Geer; Fang Hsieh.
P89 "Public Toilet (5283632152)" by russavia is licensed under CC BY 2.0;
© China.org.cn; Insapphowetrust.
P90 Nick Currie.
P91 Christoffer Delsinger http://media. tumblr.com/tumblrJhi5dyVpnh1qej5bd.jp
P92 US Department Of Dustice, "2010 ADA Standards for Accessible Design."
P94 ©2014ThePrivacyCover.com; Donathan Hironaga / ilovestupid.com;
© Copyright 2014 Onion Inc. All rights reserved.
P95 bestway64 / www.flickr.com/people/ bestway64/.
P96 William E. Dones and David Kordansky Gallery, Los Angeles, CA.
P97 Laura Noren; NEWSTEAM National Corporate Photography Service © COLORS magazine; BBC.
P98 Ted S. Warren / AP; flickr.com/photos/ milkman.
PAGE 168
P99 © Procter & Gamble; BlogTO licensed under CC BY 3.0
P100 Speakman Showers.
P101 Kohler Co.
P102-103 BUILDER Online / © Hanley Wood Media, Inc.; www.victorlana.com/Bathroom/ extra-bathroom.html.
P104 Kohler Co.
P105 Supply House Times; Deft MacNelly; Toledo Blade; RTI International; Gareth Humphreys.
P106-107 Peter Greenaway, 26 Bathrooms (1985).
P108 Lixil Corporation; TOTO®; Keramag Design / Sanitec Group; TEARTE I Digital Rendering.
P109 The British Bathroom Company;
St Dames England; LINEATRE s.r.l.; www. resourcedir.com/insight/cozy-bathroom/ cozy-bathroom-interiors-design-16684. html; Savio Firmino s.r.l; GPF Lewis.
P110—111 Francois Guillot / AFP / Getty Images.
P112-113 ©2014 DigitalGlobe, Map data ©2014 Google; Bjorn Moerman; Ryan Hernandez / Gulf News; AECOMSM.
P114 GIZMODO.
P115 www.kumailplus.com/2013/05/15/ 31872 Hyder Consulting.
P116 © 2013 Pilot Africa Media, LLC; zafarbaig08 / www.flickr.com/ photos/26903716@N03/3237802581; ACUMEN; Total LandCare; WHARTON Magazine; TOTO®.
P117 ©American Standard; TOTO®;
Dr. Lucas Dengel / http://bopdesigner. com/2012/04/an-argument-for-ecosan; Sun-Mar; NASA.
P118—119 TOTO®; Roland Widmer; Morna
E.	Gregory and Sian Dames, "Toilets of the World", Merrell (2009; Patrick Almaguer;
Dr. Dot, "The Pros and Cons of a German Toilet by Dr. Dot" (2012) / http://vimeo. com/38146485; © Bob Cromwell / http:// toilet-guru.com/; Geoff Alexander; Chris 73 / Wikimedia Commons.
P120 http://terriblerealestateagent photos.com/
P122 Bangkok Post.
P123 LIXIL Corporation; Heike Lipp / www.chinaheike.de/cia_oeffentlichetoilette. htm; http://windchaser-escape.blogspot. nl/2010/04/easter-trip-to-newcastle-day-2. html; Maria Chiara Pastore.
P124 Squatty Potty®; Nature's PlatformTM.
P126 Arnold Cohen, SCALA Archives;
H. M. Umann, US3247524; Eri Izawa.
P128-129 Sian Dames, Toilets of the World, Merrell (2009).
P131 Africa Review.
P132-133 URBZ / Urbanology; Duliana Ribeiro Muniz Westcott.
P134-135 © 2014 DigitalGlobe / © 2014 Google; Madeleine Bouchez.
P136-139 RMA Architects.
P140 Maila Mukti Yatra; www.youtube.com/
watch?v=iM2NoEQ2Agw&feature=
youtu.be.
P141 Eram Scientific Solutions Pvt. Ltd;
S. Gopakumar / The Hindu.
P142-143 The Potty Project.
P144 Profimedia.
P145 NASA.
P146 ©WHO, 1992.
P148 Uno Winblad and Wen Kilama, Sanitation Without Water, McMillan (1985).
P149 Brian Lee / Professor Michael Hoffmann / California Institute of Technology; Trevor Dohnston / University of Toronto Centre for Global Engineering (CGEN).
P150 ©WHO, 1992.
P151 RTI International; Cranfield University.
P152 ©WHO, 1992.
P153 EOOS / EAWAG.
P154-155 LIXIL Corporation; TOTO®.
P156-157 Erik de Castro / Reuters.
P158-159 ©2014 State of Utah / © 2014 Google; Don D. Dones and Alan L. Sutton / Purdue University.
P160-161 Mishka Henner.
P166 Collage by Annie Wang.
P169 Maria Chiara Pastore.
PAGE 169
2011 Toilets in Hanna Nas-sif Ward, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
STAIR
Staircase as spectacle: where classical grand staircases provide passage to desirable destinations up or down, Thomas Heatherwick's "Vessel" staircase sculpture for New York's Hudson Yards is a "Stairway
to Nowhere" (New York Times, September 14, 2016). A 21st century update on Indian stepwells, "Vessel" rises up rather than sinking down, the better for taking photos, the contemporary equivalent of
drawing water. With 154 interconnected staircases and 80 viewing landings, the structure is nicknamed the "social climber" by Stephen M. Ross, billionaire developer of Hudson Yards.
STAIR
PAGE 1
contributors
friedrich mielke institut für scalalogie stephan trüby
stair
the diktat of the 15th-century architectural theorist Leon Battista Alberti - "The fewer staircases that are in a house, and the less room they take up, the more convenient they are esteemed" - has proven to be a prophecy for the contemporary condition of the stair, considered dangerous - safety requirements limit ambitions - and possibly endangered, only still in existence in order to enable 'emergency exiting' (though the stair may be making something of a comeback as an aid to fitness and an energy-saving alternative to the elevator)... the stair has an illustrious history as a physically and architecturally demanding element allowing ascent - to upper chambers and heightened spiritual states... according to Friedrich Mielke (born 1921), the stair is "the queen of architecture," though it "never gets the attention it deserves"... after 60 years of measuring and theorizing staircases around the world, authoring 28 books on the staircase, and establishing science of Scalology (staircase studies), Mielke has synthesized a formidable understanding of stairs, and a deep sensitivity about the movements any staircase both imposes and enables...
PAGE 2
STAIR
i
STAIR
PAGE 3
15BC Vitruvius
21st century
boutique stairs
PAGE 4	STAIR
blondel's universal stair formula
François Blondel (1618-1686) is likely to have been the first to measure the human step and use it as a base for his formula, which is still in use today. Blondel postulated in Cours d'Architecture (1675) that two steps (riser height =
R) and one tread (tread depth = T), should together make a length of 65cm. The formula 2R (Riser) + 1T (Tread) must = 65cm is very close to the length of one adult stride on an incline, which is about 63cm (on flat ground, an adult stride is about 76cm). It's also very close to the 2009 International Building Code recommendation for 2R + 1T, 334 years later: 65cm.
This formula can be applied to all regular inclinations: for steeper stairs, meaning higher steps, the tread becomes smaller accordingly; stairs with lower step heights produce a greater width of treads.
Blondel's formula is a rare case in architecture where construction dimensions are directly and intrinsically related to human dimensions. The Blondel proportion, the measurement of the stride, remains fairly constant across cultures, independent of technical progress - and allows divergences to be readily noted...
STAIR
PAGES
r
"The length of a comfortable pace 0fg man who walks on level ground is ...
?4 inches. And the [maximum comfortable] heiqht of one climbing a vertical step |s only twelve inches.
Rpch (pre-Revolutionary) royal inch = 1.0568 inches today)
gl0ndel concluded that for every inch of height for the riser, one must subtract 2 ¡nches from the pace; or, expressed Mathematically:
2 x Riser + 1 x Tread = 24 inches (25.5 inches today/64.8cm)
2R + 1T = 65cm

1675 François Blondel, Cours D'Architecture.
PAGE 6
STAIR
three masters
15 BC Rome
Vitruvius, Ten Books on
Architecture
1452 Italy
Alberti, De Re Aedificatoria
"The rise of such steps [for a temple] should, I think, be limited to not more than ten nor less than nine inches [22.8-25.4 cm] for then the ascent .will not be difficult. The treads of the step ought to be made not less than a foot and a half [45.7 cm], and not more than two feet deep [61 cm]. The theorem [Pythagoras's]
"[The Romans and Greeks never made steps] higher than 9 inches [22.9 cm] or lower than 6 inches [15.2 cm]."

Vitruvius
riser 22.9-24.7 cm tread 45.7 - 61.0 cm
STAIR
PAGE 7
1570 Italy
Palladio, Four Books on Architecture
"The steps ought not to exceed six inches in height [6.8 English inches / 17.3 cm] and if they be lower, they must chiefly be long and continuous stairs, for the steps will be so much the easier because one needs not to lift the foot so high, but they must never be lower than four inches [4.5 inches today, 11.4 cm]."
Palladio
riser 10.2-17.5 cm tread 30.5 - 52.6 cm steps / flight 11-13
meters
PAGE 8
STAIR
Three social classes: bourgeois, canon, clerical
From Friedrich Mielke, Eichstätt: The higher the social standing, the gentler the stairs...
Bourgeois
Residence
.riser 19 cm tread 27cm
1 flight of stairs with 2 entry, 2 exit steps, corner landing and 16 steps overall, stair width 134 cm.
"the stair inclination was markedly higher in the stairs found in middle-class residences. The standard risers measured 17-18 cm (in 80 percent of the residences), but some exceptions even reached the height of 21 cm.
This scale was generally accepted and
I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I
I I I I I I I I I
I ■ '
I I I I I I I
I I | I I I I I I I I I | I I I I I
I I I ' I
STAIR
PAGE 9
"The courts of the cathedral canons ... in Eichstätt are at a close second when it comes to providing comfortable rises. Eleven stairs belonging to this group were measured, and all steps had risers between 15 and 16.5 cm. In comparison, the maximum difference to the bishop's stairs was only a little more than a centimeter."
18th century
Canon
Clerical
Prince Bishop's Residence
riser 14 cm tread 34 cm
double-run staircase with 3 landings per floor; stair widths 281, 285, 323 cm.
Prince Bishop of Eichstätt,
Franz Ludwig Freiherr Schenk von Castell (1725-1736).
■ > • I
"It is clear that the heads of either religious or the secular leadership should not have to overexert themselves, whilst climbing the stairs. The steps should be so easy to climb so as not to impair the display of majesty. Thus, we find the smallest step risers in the residence and on the main stairs that Pedetti built in 1767. (See
A.	Bishop's residence) All flights of stairs have a rise/run ratio of 15/33 with a riser heights of only 14cm."
Domherren Canon's residence riser 17 cm tread 31 cm
7 flights of stairs, 2 landings per floor, stair width average 155 cm.
PAGE 10
STAIR
Netherlands vs. the rest of the world
The Netherlands has a shorter 2R + 1T than most countries: 60.5 cm compared with International Building Code of 63.5 cm, with shorter treads, higher risers, and therefore much steeper inclines (and shorter strides). As well as having Dutch stairs go on for longer: the maximum height between landings is 4 meters compared with international standard 3.66 meters. And the IBC's standard incline, in the Netherlands, is merely the point at which “ handrails are required. So why so steep?
~ "Stairs in the Netherlands are notoriously steep, in several cases exceeding a 45-degree slope. ... A historical house tax based on the width of the front facade produced tall and narrow houses with specific interior arrangements conducive to specific stair configurations. Wood was a rare commodity in a country with few forests, and stone was even rarer, resulting in optimized stair layouts. The Dutch tradition of ship construction, where steep stairs ~ and ladders were commonplace for space-saving, transferred to house construction. In addition, hoisting furniture from the exterior relieved the I stair from dimensions other than those determined by humans."
— Bollerey, Franziska, "Formerly of Wood; Still Steeper than Anywhere Else: I Stairs in the Netherlands," Detail, issue 2 (1997), 145.
Dutch stairs:
2 Riser + 1 Tread = 60.5cm
International Building Code: 2 Riser + 1 Tread = 63.5cm
NETHERLANDS
INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE
riser 21.0 cm max. tread 18.5 cm max.
riser 17.8 cm max. tread 27.9 cm max.
International Building Code 2009, International Code Council, Inc.
Bouwbesluit 2003, Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment; Central Directorate for Legal Affaii:., Legislation Department.
STAIR
PAGE 11
Netherlands: max. height between landings: 4m (13'-0" 1/8").
I.B.C.: max. height between landings: 3.66m (12'-0").
STAIR
PAGE 12
grand stairs
Inspired by the grand stair at the Paris Opera, architect Ferdinand Chanut designs a curving, ornate, reinforced concrete, triple-flight stair for department store Galeries Lafayette in 1912, rising from the ground level of the cupola hall. With 18 elevators efficiently organizing traffic between the store's five levels, Chanut's stair is largely symbolic, but also serves a crucial function: an invitation to stroll up to the first floor, it allows visitors to engage in a bit of flaunting, and to maintain visual contact with the array of products spreading out beneath them. While shopping aisles are traditionally arranged lengthwise, next to the store windows, Chanut designs a circular plan for Galeries Lafayette, mimicking the cupola, forcing visitors along a predefined, seemingly endless shopping labyrinth. Architecturally, the main hall, dome and triple-flight grand staircase transform the shopping area into a theatrical décor. The building's interior design combines commercial and non-commercial areas like a smoking room for men and reading room for women. For the first time, shopping is turning into a leisure activity.
1875 Opera Gamier, Paris.
STAIR
PAGE 13
1912 Galeries Lafayette, Paris: grand escalier.
1912 Ferdinand Chanut's grand stair for Galeries Lafayette, under construction from reinforced concrete.
PAGE 14
STAIR
Crisis of the commercial centers
The trente glorieuses (the three decades of strong economic growth from the end of the war to 1975) marks the beginning in France of mass production and consumption with the social function and product range of department stores expanding beyond their original purpose. But from the mid-70s onwards, the economic situation deteriorates, and a host of new conditions emerge: the development of supermarkets, specialized distributors, and the increasing number of competitors in the ready-to-wear market, creating a highly pressurized environment. In Galeries Lafayette every square meter counts. The result is the destruction of the grand stair in 1974 to enlarge the retail space on the ground floor, which is deemed more valuable.
2012 Entire ground floor a highly valued rental space.
1961 Christmas show: a band plays on Galeries Lafayette's grand stair.
STAIR
PAGE 15
grand escalier demolished
!^iave the honor to inform you that our company cannot accept the proposed classification".
PRESIDENT
GALERIES LAFAYETTE PARIS
Le 18 avril 1979
PREFECTURE DE PARIS
Direction de l'Urbanisme et de l'Equipement
Environnement et protection historique des Sites
Centre Morland
75181 - PARIS CEDEX 04
Monsieur le Préfet,
Par lettre en date du 16 mars 197 9, vous m'informiez que la Commission Supérieure des Monuments Historiques avait donné un avis favorable au classement, parmi les monuments historiques, du grand hall avec sa coupole, et des galeries balcons de notre magasin du Bld Haussmann.
J1 ai l'honneur de vous faire savoir que notre Société ne peut accepter le classement projeté.
En effet, la procédure particulièrement rigoureuse amène à une indisponibilité partielle de l'immeuble. De ce fait, son utilisation, concernant notamment la visibilité, doit donner lieu à des demandes entrainant une instruction qui risque, dans certains cas, d’être très longue, mais en .tout état : de cause, nécessité du_.tçmpsv. -.^. ^
"This architectural complex, covering a floor space of 1,780m2 built by ourselves, is the heart of the commercial activity of our house, activity which is made of decisions that are generally rapid, and, because of the necessities of animation of a leading Parisian department store, incompatible with the instruction timeframe I mentioned above."
Or, cet ensemble architectural recouvrant un emplacement au sol de 1.780 m2 construit par nos soins, est le coeur de l'activité commerciale de notre maison, activité faite de décisions en général rapides et, du fait des nécessités d'animation d'un grand magasin parisien, incompatibles avec les délais d'instruction dont j'ai parlé ci-dessus.
Le grand hall, sa coupole, ainsi que les galeries balcons, font partie de l'image de marque des GALERIES LA FA YE TT] et notre Société, plus que quiconque, est intéressée à leur conservation qui contribue à sa notoriété nationale et internationale.
Aussi apparaît-il que la mesure envisagée par la Commission Supérieure des Monuments Historiques risque de créer, dans la conjoncture économique présente, des difficultés supplémentaires à l'un des grands organismes commeri français .
Je vous prie d'agréer, Monsieur le Préfet, l'assurance de ma haute considération .
Etienne MOULIN.
The 'non-preservation'
The demolition of the grand staircase raises the question of the preservation of commercial buildings. In a letter to the Prefect of Paris in 1979, Galeries Lafayette director Étienne Moulin explains that he doesn't want the buildings to be registered as a historical monument because trade and heritage measure time differently.
PAGE 16
STAIR
1875 Au Bon Marche, Paris, grand escalier. Succession of architects: Louis-Auguste Boileau, Gustave Eiffel, Armand Moisant.
grand stairs, demolished II.
STAIR
PAGE 17
1990 Au Bon Marche: escalators replace stairs, with grid pa,tern bY Andree Putman.
PAGE 18
STAIR
Tailor-made
'Laurin Stair"
"Elsa's Stairs"
In 1990, the artist and sculptor Werner Bäumler, nicknamed Laurin, together with Friedrich Mielke's "Arbeitsstelle für Treppenforschung" (Center for Stair Research) conceive of a stair with progressively increasing then decreasing risers.
Abrupt transitions from straight ground to stair are avoided by creating very shallow risers at the stair entry, which progressively increase in height, then slowly decrease to transition back to straight ground, creating a shallow s-curve in section.
Treads remain at a constant depth throughout, to focus the stair user's attention on the ascending and descending movements.
If the principle of the Laurin Stair and its incongruity with current standards can be accepted, the possibilities for the design of stairs could be greatly enriched, according to Baumler.
riser 2.0-18.0 cm variable tread 28.7 cm fixed
1929 Stockholm City Hall
Oral tradition tells of the architect Ragnar Ostberg's wife, Elsa, walking down a model staircase in a dress and heels as a means to test proportions of riser and tread and help Ostberg perfect the proportion of the Blue Hall stairs. Today, the stair is used for the annual Nobel banquet, with men and women ascending and descending the stairs in formal dress; a fitting recreation of Ostberg's empirical research.
riser 13.4 cm tread 40.6 cm
STAIR
PAGE 19
Itamaraty Palace stair
1970 Oscar Niemeyer's foreign ministry in Brasilia, featuring rail-free, shallow spiral staircase to mezzanine level.
Here, guards escort Queen Elizabeth as she ascends.
ca. 1987 Blogger Matt Weddle shares a childhood memory.
STAIR
PAGE 21

gua
rdrail design
it, y a stair without guardrail is E 'it to conceive. The stair is E^pt from a guardrail only in the ** instances where a stair rises less
than
76.2 to 100 cm.
Through building code terminology le guardrail has been conceptually ,. rced from its counterpart, the balustrade, which connoted an rnamental and integral component t the stair. Often, the balustrade of a stair or the lack thereof is the most ndicative component of the evolution and fashion of stair design. Now, as with the guardrail, it has become
primarily an indication of safety-consciousness. There is still opportunity for the guardrail to contribute to the design of a stair, but its modernized name and definition has neutered this component of the staircase.
The US International Building Code defines a guard as the following: "GUARD. A building component or a system of building components located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level."
The guardrail has become a battleground for safety design. Since the late 1980s, the requirements for a guardrail have become increasingly strict across the world. The main concern is for child safety: what can prevent an adult from falling from a walking surface may not prevent children or other users from the same risk.
•	Height of guards is measured from the leading edge of treads on a stairway
•	Guards are typically 42' 11067) high except in R-2 or R-3 occupancies, where they may be 36' 1914) in height when not more than 3 stories above grade in height.
•	Bends or transitions in handrails that occur between flights or transition to a guard in R-2 and R-3 occupancies are permitted to exceed the maximum handrail height of 38" 1965).
•	Guards are to be designed with a pattern from the floor up to 34'(964) such that a sphere 4'(102) in diameter cannot pass through. ¡Openings in R-2 and R-3 sleeping units at the open sides of stairs may allow passage of a 4.375' (111) sphereI
•	From a height of 36' to 42‘ (864 to 1067). the pattern may be more open, allowing a sphere upto43/s'(111)in diameter to pass.
Guards
§ 1013 requires that railings or similar protective elanents be provided where any grade change of 30" (762) or more occurs m a means of egress. This also applies when a means of egress is adjacent to glazing elements that do not comply with the strength requirements for railings and guards peri 1607.8.
It happens that a typical, non-descript intellectuall^^^v discovers, almost by accident, a particular, seemingly]^; obscure aspect of an element, becomes obsessed with— jt-typically by some of its negative features (and in the we 20th century, that means, typically, 'security') and will not rest before that aspect is transformed, beyond recognition. A kind of massive influence that typically goes unrecognized; which explains why, ultimately, the aon-descript change the world more than the well-Known... One of such is Elliott O. Stephenson (1919) who, Slnglehandedly, campaigned to reduce the size of “Penings in a staircase's balustrade - and succeeded worldwide to turn an element of great artistic ingenuity delight into a merely gridded presence dimensioned ™ not let the head of the smallest child pass through openings, and thus dead-ended the history of a Previously cultural element on a single utilitarian note.
PAGE 22
STAIR
the 4-inch ball test
Elliott O. Stephenson is one of the world's leading advocates for child safety in design. From the late 1980s, Stephenson publishes extensive studies calling for stricter stair guardrail restrictions to protect children's safety. His studies examine the size of guardrail openings as well as "climb-ability" and the "ladder effect" relating to child falls and injuries. These studies have had a substantial impact on building regulations relating to guardrail design.
"Ball Test" for determining safe gaps in stair guardrails, applied to different age groups.
Ball Test compared-Different building codes specifying Maximum R-i Openings, past and preset
hildren between 13-18 months old can pass through 12.7 cm (5 ¡n \ wide openings.
"About 5 percent of 1-year olds can pass completely through 11.4 cm (4.5 in) wide openings.
"Virtually no child 1 year or older can pass completely through 10 cm (4 in.) wide openings.
"Prior to 1988, building codes in the United States permitted guard openings of a size large enough for a 15 cm (6 in.) diameter sphere to pass through.
"Even earlier, some codes permitted passage of a 23 cm (9 in) diameter sphere, Virtually all children under 6 years old can pass completely through 15 cm (6 in.) wide openings.
"About half of all 10-year-olds can pass completely through 15 cm (6 in.) wide openings."
Elliott O. Stephenson, published and cited in: Berg Rice and Pauls, take, "Ergonomics for Children: Designing products and places for toddlers to teens", edited by Rani Lueder, Valerie J (Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis Group, 2007).
In this book, sources taken from:
Elliott O. Stephenson, "The silent and inviting trap," The Building Official and Code Administrator, November / December 1988, 28-33; March/April 1989, 2. Southern Building, November / December 1988, 7—15. Building Standards, January-February 1989, March-April 1989, 27.
Elliott O. Stephenson, "Update on the silent and inviting trap," Building Standards, January-February, 4-5.) 1991-
Elliott O. Stephenson, "The elimination of unsafe guardrails: A progress report," The Building Officialen Code Administrator, January, 1993 February, 22-25. Building Standards, March-April, 12-15. Southern Building, May/June, 6-10.
Elliott O. Stephenson, "Climbable guards: Special en^ of the world's children," Southern Building,September October, 32-35, 2001
Diagrams: Jenny Flong/AMO.

STAIR
PAGE 23
Theoretical test of the 4-inch ball (and other sizes) applied to various balustrade designs
"There is no 'official' 4-inch ball (for sale or otherwise), nor are there official balls for the 0.5-inch and 6-inch ball rules in various current safety standards for walkways and guards.
"The concept of a ball is simply the clearest way, in words, of specifying a maximum opening dimension taken on the smaller of two directions of opening, for example a vertical opening between two balusters of a guard being no greater than 4 inches, horizontally, while the larger dimension of the opening, vertically, is on the order of a few feet. On gratings, the 0.5-inch ball rule addresses the narrow dimension of the grate opening and other, related rules address the direction of the long-dimension opening." — Jake Pauls, CPE, Consulting Services in Building Use and Safety, email conversation with Denny Hong / AMO, October 26,
Virtually all children under 6 can pass completely through 15 cm (6 in.) wide openings. About half of a 10-year-olds can pass completely through 15 cm (6 in.) wide openings. About half of children between 13 and 18 months old can pass through 12.7 cm (5 in.)[ wide openings. About 5 percent of 1-year olds can pass completely through 11.4 cm (4.5 in.) wide openings. Virtually no child 1 year or older can pass completely through 10 cm (4 in.) wide openings.
PAGE 24	STAIR
safety concerns
What makes a safe guardrail for children? Remarks on child safety by advocate Elliott O. Stephenson and
NOMMA (the National Ornamental & Miscellaneous Metals Association) member Tim Moss, applied to Friedrich Schinkel's Altes Museum (Berlin, 1830), where the gaps are far larger than the recommended 4 inches (10 cm)...
STAIR
PAGE 25
"The Industry's Response To 'Climbable' Guards," Ornamental •llaneous Metal Fabricator, November / December (2001).
This railing produces the “ladder effect," encourag ing dangerous climbing
Children under the age of 5 require adult supervision. According to [Stephenson's] own research, most children over the age of 3 can and will climb anything, including ALL types of guardrails.
Small children are able to use [horizontal rails] as a handrail to assist them as they learn to walk and maneuver on stairs.
We've also been told that horizontal members can benefit the blind by providing a guide for their walking sticks.
In the ADAAG Manual, Section 4.8.7 on Edge Protection, horizontal rails are recommended to function like a curb to keep front wheelchair casters from getting caught on the vertical post.

PAGE 26
STAIR
US fire escape patents
Early patents in the US indicate that the fire escape has its roots as a device, not as a stair. These apparatuses range from the practical to the absurd, including expandable ladders, trampolines, lowering ropes and devices, slides and chutes, a parachute helmet and shoes. Few of these ideas could function for a building over five stories.
1879 Parachute
"by which a person may safely jump out of the window of a burning building from any height, and land, without injury and without the least damage, on the ground ... consists of a parachute attached, in suitable manner, to the upper part of the body, in combination with overshoes having elastic bottompads of suitable thickmess to take up the concussion with the ground."
— B.B. Oppenheimer
1883 "Portable Gun"	, ■'
"operated either by powder or other explosives, or by a spring of sufficient a power, or by compressed air... Into this gun is placed an anchoring device ... and a rope is fastened to it... a pulley Is connected, and through the pulley there is a strong but small wire rope."
— A.W. Sperry
1870 Chute
"a tube or pipe of canvas ... surrounded by a spiral elastic or yielding hand, as a consequence of which, persons, in descending through it, can regulate their descent."
— William Burditt
1885 Trampoline
"practical fire-escape for saving persons from burning buildings by jumping upon the fireescape ... made of such size, strength, and elasticity ... that persons may jump upon the fabric ... from the highest buildings without injury."
— H. Wettstein
1889 Lowering Suit
"having arm-holes and attached legs, made of stout material and provided with small ropes or strong cords."
— 1C. Betten
1887 Bridge Surrounded By a Railing
"... bridge being adapted to be placed on the roofs of adjoining or adjacent buildings, thereby permitting the ready and safe passage from one roof to the other."
— Anna Connelly
STAIR
PAGE 27
1877 Ladder On A Cart
"a fire-escape which shall combine lightness and cheapness of construction with simplicity, portability, and strength, and at the same time enable the ladder or fire-escape to be conveniently and quickly raised and controlled with a comparatively slight expenditure of force."
— Antonio D'Amore
1893 Expandable Ladder
"a light, durable, flexible ladder together With means for coiling and compactly storing the same, or for readily adjusting and securing it in position for use."
—ID. Niehaus
INTERIOR STAIRS
As early as 1881, the Franklin Institute, a scholarly society in Philadelphia, concludes that an external fire escape is not sufficient and advocates for permanent egress in the form of interior stairs. In response to the Franklin Institute's recommendations, the state of Pennsylvania passes laws requiring a more substantial fire escape, though external fire escapes are still Aceptable. By 1899, "Philadelphia fire towers," are obligatory in large stores and factories. The Philadelphia fire tower is a completely enclosed space
for
an egress stair accessed by an
exíer¡or balcony or vestibule.
1883 Fire Balcony And Ladder
"ladder is used attached directly to a building or in conjunction with a balcony ... to provide a means of escape always ready and accessible ... making the balcony ... and ladder one and the same."
— W.H. Barnes
1885 Fire Escape Tower
"provision of passage-ways in the same tower, which cannot be obstructed by the jamming of separate crowds at the landings of different floors opening upon the tower, and which cannot become filled with smoke from a fire in any part of the building of which it forms part."
— C. Clarke
ErfERloR STAIRS
“ are inherent drawbacks to Wf- q fire escapes on the exterior of ¡|ding, which expose them to snow, 3 and the possibility of rust. Although |C®'an official balcony, the fire escape i1 s as extra space for tenants S d is used as storage space, or as a a, ceto sleep outside on hot summer Phts, although building officials h Dlicitly forbid it. During a fire, the sS path could be blocked by these Instructions as well as fire and smoke emitting from windows, and the iron rate flooring could become intolerably Hot Security is also an issue for exterior stairs: in times of emergency, a locked gate at the ground floor could prevent people from exiting properly.
PAGE 28
STAIR
PAGE 29
STAIR
9 BMg|*Or
PAGE 30
STAIR
2009 Prefabricated concrete stair, produced by 'Floorspan.'
the prefabricated stair
^xMiruftn :®A.inWkJyri9 fflr Antritt QtevMWun) für Austritt
1870 Hawksley's Patent Steps.
Werkffeintreppe, freifragend
Werkffeintreppe einfeftig eingemauert, andere Seife durch Stahlträger unferffützf
ToapUiren
ca. 1965 Advertisement in Architettura Cronache e Storia.
STAIR
PAGE 31
ca. 1965 More stair adverts in Architettura Cronache e Storia.
PAGE 32
STAIR
boutique space
Despite the squeeze on the ornamental stair from safety requirements, automated alternatives, and a general disregard, one space where it thrives - even though rentable floor space is at a premium - is in the designer boutique...
2010 Louis Vuitton on New Bond Street, London, Peter Warchol.
Processional stair the main organizing principal of the store...
2006 Tod's on Omotesando, Tokyo, Toyo Ito.
2006 Longchamp, New York, Thomas Heatherwick.
2006 Apple Store,
5th Avenue, New York, Bohlin Cywinski Dackson.
STAIR	PAGE 33
PAGE 34
STAIR
2007 Under threat as Ground Zero is cleared.
2011 Removed from surrounding structure, moved to site for September 11 National Museum.
2014 Memorial
Survivors' stair installed at the September 11 National Memorial and Museum.
Stair as hero
The "Survivors' Stair" is the only surviving structure of the World Trade Center complex after 9/11, when the stair led hundreds of people to safety from 5 World Trade Center. "They were the path to freedom," Kayla Bergeron, chief of public and government affairs at the Port Authority, and a 9/11 survivor thanks to the stairs, tells the New York Times (May 11, 2006). Left alone for years at Ground Zero as clearance and infrastructure work begins on the site around it, in 2006 the stair is placed on the America's Most Endangered Places list by the National Trust for Historic Preservation. The stairs are on the site where developer Larry Silverstein to build "Tower 2" and must be clearer. The World Trade Center Survivors' Network rallies and a plan is announced to move them intact and in their entirety at a cost of between $500,000 and $700,000 to complete; others suggest the operation will cost over $2 million. In 2007, a compromise is reached: all 38 steps will be removed from their concrete structure and later inlaid into a staircase leading down into the September 11 National Museum.
STAIR
PAGE 35
PAGE 36
STAIR
fun theory
2013 By transforming a subway stair in Stockholm into an oversized piano keyboard, Volkswagen tries to get people to choose the stair over the escalator in a subway station. According to the company, 66 percent more people than usual choose the (musical) stair over the escalator.
STAIR
PAGE 37
2013 New York Mayor Bloomberg issues an executive order requiring city agencies to promote the use of stairs. The Center for Active Design, a new nonprofit organization, hopes to increase visibility and access to at least one staircase in all new buildings in the city.*
"Walking up the stairs just two minutes a day helps prevent weight gain. It also helps the environment."
— Mayor Michael Bloomberg
,,ay°r Bloomberg points out alternative paths through New School's new building, University Center / rreV Hall, using stairs instead of elevators.
Health theory
PAGE 38 bibliography
STAIR
Alberti, Leon Battista. De re aedificatoria. Florentiae: Nicolaus Laurentii, 1485.
Americans with Disabilities Act: Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities (ADAAG). Washington, DC: US Access Board, 1998.
Blondel, François. Cours d'architecture enseigné dans l'Academie royale d'architecture. 2e éd., augm. & corr. ed. Paris: Chez l'auteur, 1698.
Bollerey, Franziska. "Formerly of Wood; Still Steeper than Anywhere Else: Stairs in the Netherlands." Detail Issue 2 (1997), 145.
Bouwbesluit 2003, Minister of Housing, Spatial Planning and the Environment; Central Directorate for Legal Affairs, Legislation Department, Kingdom of The Netherlands.
Ching, Frank D.K. and Winkel, Steven R. Building Codes Illustrated. John Wiley & Sons, Inc: Hoboken, New Jersey, 2006.
Elliott O. Stephenson, published and cited in: Berg Rice and Pauls, Jake., Ergonomics for Children: Designing products and places for toddlers to teens, 2007, edited by Rani Lueder, Valerie 1, Boca Raton: Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.
International Building Code 2009, International Code Council, Inc.
Moss, Tim. "The Industry's Response to 'Climbable' Guards," Ornamental & Miscellaneous Metal Fabricator, November/ December 2001.
Palladio, Andrea. The Four Books of Architecture. New York: Dover Publications, 1965.
Stephenson, E.O., "Climbable guards: Special enemy of the world's children," Southern Building, September/October, 32-35. 2001.
Stephenson, E.O., "The elimination of unsafe guardrails: A progress report,"
The Building Official and Code Administrator, January, 1993 February,
22-25. Building Standards, March-April, 12-15. Southern Building, May/June, 6-10.
Stephenson, E.O, "The silent and inviting trap," The Building Official and Code Administrator, November/December 1988. March/April 1989. Southern Building, November/December 1988. Building Standards, January-February 1989, March-April 1989.
Vitruvius: the Ten Books of Architecture. New York: Dover Publications, 1960.
STAIR
PAGE 39
I gources and courtesy
HLrl Fichot, "Nouvel Opéra" (1875);
P'2 ,eS Garnier, "Le Nouvel Opéra"
IM»»).
,4 Grand Hall, escalier monumental BLupole des Galeries Lafayette, 1912 etpyright Archives Galeries Lafayette.
p15 blog Hobor.
m^jglke Archive of Stairs, Friedrich-\ lug-lnstitut für Scalalogie, Ostbayerische Snische Hochschule Regensburg,
Germany-
•ARobyn Lee / www.flickr.com/photos/
roboppy/263899435.
p18 Mielke-Archive of Stairs, Friedrich Ivlielke Institut für Scalalogie, Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg,
Germany.
p19 Oscar Niemeyer Cultural Centre /
Centro Niemeyer.
P20 Ralph Larmann Company; Matt Weddle / http://sincewayback.com/ Mattw_photos.htm.
P24-25 Erik Bootsma.
P27 A. D'Amore / US198576; W. H. Barnes / US288155; 1 D. Niehaus / US500030;
C. Clarke/US318086
P29 Michael Dant / www.flickr.com/photos/ faasdant/3592674673
P30 UBM Built Environment; Alan and Sylvia Blanc, Stairs, Architectural Press (2001) / Reed educational and professional publishing Ltd.; Ditta G. Gasparini & Figli Fabriano; Illuminati building solutions.
P31 Mancosu editore; Carrara;
B. FINCH & Co. Ltd.
P32 ©2010 Paul Warchol; Kenzo Hsieh / www.flickr.com/photos/kh 1979/110796360; Peter Mahno Architect.
P33 Nic Lehoux; 2006 La Maison Unique-Longchamp, New York, Heatherwick Studio. Photo by: Nikolas Koenig.
P34 David W. Ortega / www.flickr.com/ photos/davidwo/2337786153; 911 research, com / http://911research.wtc7.net/wtc/ evidence/plans/doc/pac1TowerA/A-A-19_0. png; Seth Wenig / Associated Press;
By Mark Kent - A81A5207-22, CC BY-SA 2.0, https://commons.wikimedia.0rg/w/ index. php?curid=39439847
P26 B.B. Oppenheimer / US221855;
A. W. Sperry / US276090; W. & G. H. Burditt /US99399; H. Wettstein / US312415; 1 C. Betten / US416550; A. Connely / US368816
P35 New York Daily News.
P36 KJ Vogelius / www.flickr.com/photos/ kj_/3669721910 / www.dogonews. com/2009/10/8/piano-stairs-making-music-while-you-climb, 2009; © Volkswagen / Thefuntheory.com
P37 Whitney Hess / www.flickr.com/ photos/qt711/3087297093.
P8-150 Mielke Archive of Stairs, Friedrich-Mielke-lnstitut für Scalalogie, Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg, Germany
P151-180 Friedrich Mielke / Handläufe und Geländer, Verlag Ernst Vögel,
Stamsried 2003.
P181-266 Mielke Archive of Stairs, Friedrich-Mielke-Institut für Scalalogie, Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg, Germany.

"...we created stairs, although we did not even need them..." — friedrich mielke
STAIR
PAGE 41
by
Stephan trüby
on friedrich mielke and the study of stairs
,,^ll jdiots," Gustave Flaubert once said about architects - "they always forget to put in the stairs." It cannot have been o0 many stairs that were forgotten by them - how else would Friedrich Mielke, noted stair researcher, born in 1921, e established an Institute for Stair Research in Konstein, Bavaria, which founded a specialized library containing ground 500 titles, and which holds an archive with more than 10,000 dossiers on stairs from all countries, slide library containing around 35,000 stair records, a vast collection of model stairs, and numerous drawings and hotographs of stairs and stair details? Mielke's archive, which in 2012 was absorbed into the newly founded Friedrich ylielke Institute for Scalalogy (Friedrich-Mielke-Institut für Scalalogie) at the Eastern Bavarian Technical University of Regensburg, invites us to reformulate Flaubert's tirade: "Idiots, all these architecture historians, they always forget the stairs."
Friedrich Mielke forces one to rethink the concept of 'objective' research. The stair researcher approached his subjects not only through books, but - most importantly - through arduously taking notations on site, while being one-legged. In 1942, at the height of the Second World War, his right leg was amputated; in 1960, a serious car crash forced him into a wheelchair permanently. Fie started writing his first substantial book on stairs, Die Geschichte der Deutsche Treppe, the history of German stairs, published in 1966, while still bed-ridden in hospital. What followed is a canon of work counting 31 books to date, most of which, 27 to be exact, are dedicated to the subject of stairs. The underlying research has, literally, followed a strenuous path: suffering great physical pain, he measured narrow medieval spiral stairs in church spires - and even the daring steps found in Tunisia's ghorfas, vaulted rooms used by Berbers for storing grain. Perhaps Egon Friedell was right after all, when he set up his provocative claim in his Cultural History of the Modern Age (1927), stating that every exceptional performance in life has, at its base, some form of physiological defect; excellence is always the result of an over-compensation for some imperfection.
Mielke's research career may well be illustrated by his bibliography: it all starts in 1957 with his dissertation named "Die Treppe des Potsdamer Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert" (The stair in the Potsdam townhouse of the 18th century), in which many of his methods for analysis already become established and will eventually become perfected: typological thinking, components making up the whole element of 'stair,' 'big data' comprising a total sum of stairs in a city, endless lists of addresses, and Stair-, Balustrade- and Landing-Notations taken at tenth-of-a-millimeter-precision. Attention to the measurements was later on brought to perfection, particularly in his 1986 analysis of the stairs in Eichstätt.
One thing that becomes most apparent here is Mielke's focus on the stair users - ever present in their multitude. The stair becomes a palimpsest of observation, which carries complex traces of use: traces of gender, traces of social rank, traces of craftsmen's rules and transmissions. In the context of his equally disciplined and passionate research, Mielke coined the term "Scalalogy" - a term which clearly differentiates itself from basic Stair Research: "Scalalogy is the science of the interactions between humans and stairs, between foot and step. Since no one could possibly climb a stair without having contact with its steps, an interdependency is created, between the claims made by the living, and the reflection of such claims by the material."
Are there any phenomena of importance to the stair-interested, which are not touched upon by Mielke? Mielke himself tasa rather modest take on the results of his lifelong research activity: "What do we know of the Chinese stairs, or the South Vietnamese ones, or the ones from Angkor? Nothing, little, next to nothing." And he not so modestly adds,
One would require an entire university, dedicated to the study of stairs of the world." What Mielke did not analyze or Merely touch upon, is prefixed here in shorthand: the current influence of building regulations and the modern process of codification; the rivalry between the stair and the escalator; the post-craftsmanship, pre-fabricated, industrial stair; the current presence, in parallel, of the pragmatic fire escape stair and its 'gimmick' counterpart symbolic stair found in any oyer space; and finally, the exile of the dedicated enclosure, or "Treppenraum" for stairs present in metropolitan a9ship stores. In short, the stair has surely experienced highpoints in the eras of the Middle Ages, the Renaissance and e Baroque and also in the 19th century, prior to the invention of the elevator; but the following pages may point °wards a research requisite: the modern stair has developed a kind of schizophrenic double existence - she, whriwa^i °nce, according to Mielke, the "Queen of Architecture," has mutated - at least for the rri§s|j>art - into both alservice^ Provider, and a ground floor clown.
PAGE 42
STAIR
Venice statement
No one can possibly climb a flight of stairs without making contact with one's foot. Foot and Step are dependent on each other.
Their interdependence marks the defining characteristic of Scalalogy.
In Europe we have adjusted to a riser measuring 18 to 20 cm in height.
For the ancient Romans, 25 to 30 cm high risers were considered normal. Meanwhile the steps on the Mayan pyramids measure 40 to 50 cm in height.
Following from these relationships is the theory that cultures are significantly affected by the measurements of their stairs. This is true not only for peoples as a whole, but also for their internal social hierarchies, which are made visible by the steps. Analogous to Scalalogy, one can, purely based on the measurements and idiosyncrasies of a stair, draw conclusions relating to the manufacturer, the user, and all other circumstances surrounding its creation.
Scalalogy may benefit both builders and clients, manufacturers and users, artists and art historians, psychologists and physiologists, anthropologists and medical doctors, teachers and students.
Scalalogy differentiates itself in spirit from the purely technical surveying methods employed by Stair Research.
Scalalogy creates the philosophical superstructure to cover all profane accomplishments.
friedrich mielke, 2014
STAIR
PAGE 43
VENEDIG Statement
Keiner kann eine Treppe steigen, ohne daß sein Fuß sie tritt.
Fuß und Stufe sind von einander abhängig.
Ihre Interdependenz ist das Charakteristikum der Scalalogie.
In Europa haben wir uns auf ein Maß von 18 bis 20 cm Höhe der Stufen eingestellt.
Für die Römer der Antike waren 25 bis 30 cm StufenHöhe normal.
Die Stufen der MayaPyramiden sind 40 bis 50 cm hoch.
Aus diesen Relationen ergibt sich, daß alle Kulturen durch die Maße ihrer Treppen signifikant sind. Das gilt nicht nur für die Völker insgesamt, auch Standesunterschiede werden durch Stufen markiert. Analog der Scalalogie läßt sich aus den Maßen und Eigenarten einer Treppe auf die Hersteller, auf die Benutzer und alle Umstände der Entstehung schließen.
Von der Scalalogie profitieren Baumeister und Bauherren, Hersteller und Nutzer, Künstler und KunstHistoriker, Psychologen und Physiologen, Anthropologen und Mediziner, Lehrer und Schüler.
Die Scalalogie unterscheidet sich in geistiger Weise von den technischen Bauaufnahmen der Treppenforschung.
Die Scalalogie ist der philosophische Überbau aller profanen Fertigkeiten
STAIR
PAGE 45
Sr. mielke, how many stairs have you measured ¡n your lifetime?
an't say. I never counted. I would estimate maybe oilOO both inside and outside.Hg 1-21 just registered them ' ¡nCjex cards without counting/9 ^ I measured maybe 100 Holland, even more in France. It was wonderful training body building with stairs. Stairs are seldom described. !Lre are few books about stairs... some older books. i bought all the ones that I could find over the years, and ^gve read and studied them carefully. Where has something been written about stairs? All in all, I have looked through 900 inventory books, skimming through them page by page ntj| | found something about stairs. There wasn't much to find. One could say that 10, maybe 20, authors casually mentioned stairs. All the others didn't even see the stairs.
It goes like this: a castle is described in great detail, all four sides with the entrance and moat. Then, the portal is acknowledged, due to the style, and the second floor with its grand rooms, its splendid moulding work, and collection of stag antlers. Then the author describes the next floor.
No one mentions that there are stairs between the first and second floors. There is not a word about them.
The scalalogist Friedrich Mielke in conversation with Stephan Triiby, October 20, 2013
SCALALOGY
One must imagine: in 1733 Friedrich Wilhelm I made Potsdam into his second garrison, where he preferred to billet his grenadiers. These grenadiers were taken captive from around the world. Maybe a few came because they were running from some trouble back home and sought protection, but the majority of them were forced to serve and had learned a trade before they were taken. We can be certain that many of them were trained in woodcraft. One can see this in the stairs/'8-5-8 There are some particularities that one sees in some places, but not in others. I recall a handrail in Potsdam, whose parallel I found in Denmark.
So, it must have been a Dane who worked on the handrail.
In addition, there were various distinctive characteristics, especially in the profiling. One must remember that they couldn't buy a wood plane or other tools at Aldi or the next hardware store. The tools were individually crafted by the tradesmen and were unique. When I see that one profile I'erematches another profile there... In Holland, I also found several profiles that turn up again in Potsdam. One can find international connections through the profiling and workmanship.
PAGE 46
STAIR
1-2. Mielke's team measuring stairs at Schloß Ellingen.
I 3-4. Mielke's repertoir of I stair index cards,
I catalogued by country and I stair type.
STAIR
PAGE 47
R 1960s, I tried to establish a connection to French ln uj+gcts. I received an answer from Bertrand Monnet, s<c t^e architecte en chef des monument historiques. He ned doors for me throughout France, more than I could 0P use. During my time there I saw, especially in the ey D|e buildings where handicraft played a role (not in the sl t|eS/ where the situation is different), but in the plain C3'ldings ¡n counftY/ I saw a connection. They either hared similarities with Potsdam or not at all. That is where S alalogy begins - the relationship to people. It is not only ■jl stairs themselves that are important (whose measure-ents I can take exactly), but also the person behind the siajrs. That is why I always make a distinction between stair ^search and scalalogy. Scalalogy is opera [sings]. The subject is raised to a higher level.
PAGE 48
STAIR
11. Reporting for bridge-building duty, 1942.
9. Mielke's parents, 1919.
10. Mielke as a child In Tharandt, Saxony, 1924.
STAIR
PAGE 49
low did amputation load you to stairs?
will see 'n my resume that I was born in the Forest, and most people consider me to be from utf'rttemberg. But that is not the case. I am from an old y cklenbur9 family through and through. There was one 0|e exception, a "foreigner" from Pomerania/'9 My father tudied civil engineering and traveled throughout Germany •th his firm- That is how he ended up in Neuneck in 1921 to build tunnels, but moved to Forbach in Baden in 1922 to work on another construction site. In 1924, we landed . Tharandt/'9 10 south of Dresden. My mother and I always moved with him. In the span of a couple of years, I went from a Swabian-speaking lad to a Badener to a Saxon.
When my father got a contract to move to Turkey, my m0ther did not go with him, due to political unrest there.
So she and little Friedrich moved back to Mecklenburg to relatives.
At my grandma's in Lübtheen, Mecklenburg, Kreis Hagenow, I had a delightful youth, with a large meadow behind the house and a brook that felt like it belonged solely to me.
The various construction sites of my father led us to move with him throughout Germany, and my mother deserves credit for managing all ten moves. In 1933 we became residents of Berlin for good. I attended the high school for the humanities, because my mother wanted me to become a pastor. She imagined her son standing high on the pulpit as he preached to the congregation, and high school was necessary to achieve that goal. But my father was of another opinion. He was convinced that I should work in the building business, maybe as an engineer or an architect, due to my experience of life on a construction site. I found this idea more to my liking. So, in 1940 I received my diploma with the comment, "Mielke wants to become a construction engineer."
Iliad a thorough education, also in languages. It began with Latin, and continued with French in the year after that. Then I learned Greek and even a bit of English in the last year. The war began in 1940, so directly after graduation,
I had to commence fatigue duty.
WAR
These were units that shoveled earth. In 1940 we first worked in Emsland, then in Holland, in Belgium, and in nance. Up until then, I had been a student, and the work was very difficult for me - physical work on the moors ^Emsland or in the chalky earth of France.
I endured the time tolerably well, and in time I grew stronger, due to the daily work. No one spared us as we toiled eight, nine, ten-hour days.
But the life in France was delightful. In Germany we had food rationing. But in France I could buy eggs and butter and bread cheap directly from the farmer. There was red wine to be had for one mark per bottle. And the best cognacs and other liquors were so inexpensive that we soon became connoisseurs.
After three-quarters of a year, my fatigue duty came to an end, and I entered the military/'9 11 In the military I had the choice of being drafted into a troop or requesting a certain placement. I was, of course, interested in remaining in the building trade. I reported to the sappers and received basic training in such areas as bridge building. We built bridges in France, Yugoslavia, and above all, in Russia. Whenever the infantry was stuck and the tanks could not continue, we combat engineers were called upon. We worked night and day to clear the way for the troops. I am not sure whether you are familiar with the term corduroy bridge. It is a kind of dam constructed solely of tree trunks. The tree trunks are laid on top of each other and secured so that the vehicles can cross it. First we had to find the trees, cut them down, remove the branches and transport the trunks. This was backbreaking work. I soon became a specialist in tree felling. After felling several hundred trees, I was as good as the Bavarian lumberjacks that one sees in competitions.
It is always important to strike the axe in a manner that creates a clean groove. That is a criterion for a lumberjack, and I could do it, too, after the first several hundred trees. But then winter came, and the Russians were smart enough
PAGE 50
STAIR
12. Life-saving: amputation certificate, issued by the Wehrmacht, 1942.
14. Architecture school established at Cloister Wilhering. Mielke enrolls.
13. Rehabilitation refuge, post-amputation Olympia-Lazarett Döberitz.
STAIR
PAGE 51
i treat and let us freeze in the snow. That was hell. t° |6. sUpposedly hot, but there, hell was ice cold. The ^Erature dropped to -20° C, -30° C, -35° C, and we Kgd that the troops were destroying everything in their ♦h as they advanced. They leveled villages, whole cities. Pf the soldiers entered the ruins and had the pleasure ■ sending the night in houses that were shot to pieces. n absolutely everything was destroyed, we slept in the w f0r days, weeks. The army command sent us winter Nothing for Christmas. Until then, we had only our summer ¡forms, and many more men died from the cold than from wounds. There were terrible losses: in the autumn of 1941, the soldiers of the 8th tank division numbered 1,095 n down from their normal strength of 25,000.
Our troop of combat engineers, the Pioneer Battalion 59 belonged to the 8th Tank Division. We had to do our duty, build our bridges with numb fingers and great losses. The crossing of the Volkhov River involved especially heavy losses. The Russian artillery followed our moves to bridge the gap/ with fatal consequences for us. The supreme c0inmand of the German Army, Herr Hitler himself, had the glorious idea of rounding the eastern bank from the south of Lake Ladoga in order to make contact with the Finns. It was not known, however, that the terrain was impenetrable, swampy, and frozen in the winter.
amputation
It is impossible to describe the losses that we suffered. Considering the situation, I consider myself fortunate to have been wounded/'912 It saved my life. A piece of shrapnel shredded my right leg, but, thank God, my left leg remained unhurt. They amputated my leg in the field hospital, telling me that I otherwise wouldn't survive the injury. In March of 1942 I returned home via various institutions and hospitals.
It was my father's idea to send me to a special hospital.
He had connections and saw to it that I was brought to the hospital housed on the athletic grounds built for the 1936 Olympics/'9-13 The institution was an exemplary hospital, in which the patients received first-class food and first-class medical treatment. We had access to all kinds of perks, cultural and otherwise. If I wanted to go to the theater in Berlin in the evening, I only had to say, "I would like to see this production or that show," and I got a ticket with a 9reat seat. There were always good theater seats reserved for severely disabled veterans.
Stairs did not play a role for me at the time. I was glad to have a bed in a reasonably warm room. Outside there was half a meter of snow. We were lucky to have acceptable temperatures and to be taken care of. The care was e>(ceptional. It was 1942, and everything was still in good supply. Our daily rations included one shot of schnapps per day, half a bar of chocolate, and an egg.
TRAINING
At the Olympic village hospital there was another crucial advantage - not only was the treatment very good, but we also had our own physical trainer, who was there to help us become capable citizens again. Patients with amputated legs had daily training. Imagine: on one leg, several young people learning how to box! Of course they fell down after every hit, but it was supposed to train stability. We had to jump high and far from a standing position, and we swam. The goal was to receive the disabled sport badge. The most difficult exercise was to hop 50 meters on one leg in 12 seconds. That required training that one would call inhumane these days. In the end, I got the gold badge.
The hospital was a welcoming, friendly and useful haven. They even helped us gain admission to the university. In the architecture department of the Technical University of Berlin in Charlottenburg, the students were either disabled war veterans or women. We veterans did not view our studies as a necessary evil, but rather as a very welcome rescue leading us back into civilian life - a true salvation, as a drowning person would feel upon reaching land with a useful goal.
On March 1, 1943,1 arrived at the university and wanted to go to the sketching room. A fellow student pulled me back and said, "Not another step." Directly behind the door was a crater from a bomb dropped recently by the Americans or the British as they bombed the university. Everything was destroyed.
And then a miracle occurred. My architecture studies had vanished into thin air, but around the same time I read an advertisement in the paper: "We are establishing a new technical college for disabled veterans in Wilhering, Austria and are looking for new applicants. No applications from women accepted." A school for men. The college and its students were housed in the Wilhering Monastery/'914 The administration made sure that we were not solely educated in the fine arts. In the winter, we got skis. In addition we received lessons in horse riding and fencing... all with one leg... very difficult. I had to give up horse riding, because the horse wouldn't react to my prosthetic leg. But I could ski on one leg/'9 15
The times when we attended class were not officially regulated. We didn't even have semesters. Instead we worked all through the year, because Mr. Hitler wanted lots of architects ready to rebuild after his final victory.
I received my degree as an architect-engineer in April of 1945. It was then time to find a job.
PAGE 52
STAIR
15. Hikes in Ischl, Austria, 1944.
16. Riding with one leg, Schwerin, Saxony.
17. Schwerin Castle, visited by Mieike and his colleagues at the Office for the Preservation of Historical Monuments.
18. The castle's spiral staircase awakens Mielke's interest in stairs.
STAIR
PAGE 53
„^WANTED
ved to Mecklenburg and wanted to start my own ^K¡ q firm, but that didn't suit my skills. As a trained K. cti I was not necessarily educated in practical afC trUCtion of buildings. In the meantime, a female friend, 0°n | met in 1944 in Dresden, had found me a job with an ■Ltectural firm in Dessau. But it didn't take long for my af t0 run out of money to pay me. So I returned to
ugnburg. There, a friendly acquaintance told me of a cat'°na' sc*100' was l°°kin9 for teachers. After the Ejall of the teachers that were members of the Nazi party re let go. So now they had a school with students but no chers. "Would you like to be a vocational teacher?"
"Why not?" It was 1948 when I returned to my old school • [„y hometown. But I soon realized that I was not wanted ^gce. Many master craftsmen resided there now, and they all belonged to the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED).
I did not. My studies were completed without affiliation to any political party. A teacher who did not belong to the party was not acceptable.
was back where I had started. What could I do?
¡ had a degree as a vocational teacher and couldn't practice my vocation. Again, it was my father who helped.
He told me, "In Schwerin they are setting up a committee for monument conservation. They are looking for an architect." That was a turning point for me - from chaos to building conservation.
CONSERVATION
In 1950 I worked for them unofficially, and in 1951 ! was formally instated as architect in the State Office for the Preservation of Historical Monuments [and Buildings] in Schwerin, Mecklenburg. It was a wonderful time. My colleagues were friendly, party affiliation did not play a role, and the tasks were tremendous. Our small office, consisting of an art historian, a secretary, an assistant and me, was responsible for all monuments in the state of Mecklenburg. The task was especially difficult due to the poor quality of transportation and infrastructure. Very little remained intact after the war. My bicycle helped a lot.Fig 16 I had a very good bicycle, and I used it to travel hundreds of kilometers throughout the state. I tied my prosthesis to the right pedal, and I pedaled with my left foot.
SPIRAL
In Schwerin my colleagues and I worked well together. One day we visited the Schwerin Castle, quite a large structure, built in the Renaissance and enlarged in the middle of the 19th Century by Stiller/1'1 There is a large spiral staircase in the castle that we climbed together/’918 And here is the point. One of my colleagues looked at the staircase and said, "Actually, a spiral staircase is the best kind in the world. Those with short legs can climb the stairs on the inside of the spiral, while those with long legs have enough space to climb on the outside of the spiral." There is enough space for every length of stride. That was the point when my initial interest in stairs was awakened. I realized that stairs were not only the means to climb to another room, but that one should consider who is climbing the stairs. That I only had one leg to climb the stairs was, in fact, an advantage. The problems I have climbing stairs are multiple. It is much more difficult for me to climb stairs than a normal person who just darts up the steps. Thus began my marriage to Scalalogy - in the year of 1951.
PAGE 54	STAIR
19. On Sanssouci Stair, Potsdam, 1952.
20. Potsdam destroyed after bombing, 1945.
21. Dutch quarter, Potsdam, studied by Mielke.
ch stairs are Eorth looking at?
ved to PotsdamF’9'19 and the task of building preservation in the entire state of Brandenburg was solely my nsibility- Considering the conditions I was working under, it ■^possible t0 work normally. I had to be above normal.
0 of the historic district of Potsdam was demolished during the war/'9 20 Of the around 1,000 buildings in the district, around half were entirely or partially destroyed. I was supposed to renovate, rebuild or maintain all of them.
■ only had my bicycle. In the coming years, I would make an exact study of approximately 400 houses from the cellar to •he attic, creating a file of all of the information that is still kept in the monument conservation office in Potsdam today.
Hooked through circa one thousand old records from the 18th and 19th centuries. Whenever I found something interesting and important to the conservation of the object, such as a rebuilding, an addition or a balcony (related to the modification of the studied object), I then made a drawing of the alteration in my file. I made thousands of small sketches, not during work hours, but in the evenings between eight and ten or eleven. As a result, an enormous file of all the monuments in Potsdam was created, with the help of my colleagues. The analytic depth of our research was so thorough that the city awarded me an honorary citizenship in 1991. At the awards ceremony, it was said that the documents that I created were so complete and thorough that the office could still use them.
DUTCH
¡also made a detailed study of the Dutch Quarter and wrote a book about it that is still used as a foundation for further conservation/'9 21 Due to my conscientious nature, fwas not satisfied with the city's renovation of the Dutch Quarter. In 1955 I applied to the East German government f°r a travel visa. Imagine: a citizen of the GDR who was not Member of the Socialist Party. It was a risk. I'm not sure % my request was granted. Naturally I had to leave my family ¡n Potsdam to ensure my return. Then I was allowed totravel on my own to the Netherlands with a small stipend for fourteen days.
STAIR
PAGE 55
When I arrived at the main train station in Amsterdam,
I couldn't stop looking at everything. Amsterdam is a wonderful city, especially compared to the cities I knew in Eastern Germany. The next day I reported to the Rijksdienst voor de Monumentenzorg, the Cultural Heritage Agency of the Netherlands. They were very amiable colleagues, but they sometimes gave me strange looks, because I was a German, specifically from the GDR. At the agency, I was able to go through their bountiful archives and research comparisons to the buildings in Potsdam in the Dutch Quarter. That was my reason for being there.
One day Mr. Rossegarden Biskopp led me on a tour through Amsterdam. We entered a house. I think it was on Keizersgracht. He opened the door: the corridor was not very big, with marble on the walls, marble floors. On the ceiling were Venetian chandeliers, stucco work everywhere. I had only seen such things in castles in Germany.
Mr. Biskopp said in a condescending manner, "See,
Mr. Mielke, this is what a simple townhouse is like in Holland." That was a slap in the face. We continued along the corridor. At the end there was a spiral staircase of the highest quality. One can judge the quality of a spiral staircase by the curves, whether they have any sharp bends or if they don't transition into one another smoothly, how they correspond with the side wall. Everything on this staircase was the best quality. It was a Dutch masterpiece in stair construction that fascinates me to this day. In my opinion the Dutch are, with some exceptions, the best wooden stair builders in the world.H9S-22-28 I've only seen better in Flanders. The FlemisfLSre even a bit better. Amazing.
PAGE 56
STAIR
28. Handrail section.
25-27. Herengracht 284, stair and plan.
29. Mlelke's Citroën DS, only automatic car on the East German market, 1966.
22-23. Stairs in Amsterdam, at Herengracht 366.
STAIR
PAGE 57
hipbuilding
9 t0 the Dutch tradition of shipbuilding, a whole guild ^Ufst class woodworkers was trained. And they brought ° best most exPens've types of wood from the colonies ■pod that we don't know of, the most exotic, wonderful od ln addition, it was a tradition back then for wood ftsmen, including carpenters, to buy wood and let it age. g carpenter bad a daughter who was supposed to marry, ■Lould buy a whole load of lumber for chairs and ^ boards at her birth. Then he would leave it alone for ten, fifteen years until it was time for the daughter to marry. The Dutch woodworkers also let the wood [for the staircases] ag6 f0r decades until it didn't crack anymore.
inthe 1980s I traveled again to the Netherlands with collea9ues' We saw ar|d measured similar staircases. My german colleagues were surprised at the absence of any cracks, even shrinkage cracks, in the wood. The wood was 0f one piece and beautifully handled. There was not one kink in the curves. It was a masterful achievement. I had neverseen such staircases as these, although in my conservation work in Potsdam I had seen many stairs, including the steps in the almost 400 houses that I climbed from the cellar to the attic. In climbing the stairs of the simple townhouses, one becomes well acquainted with the construction. I recorded, sketched and photographed each detail from the starting step to the stringer to the balustrade. In pain. You can imagine what my stump looked like after walking around with my prosthetic leg for eight hours a day.
But one learns to live with the pain. It's the same with a handyman. At the beginning, the hammer hurts. They can barely hold it. They get blisters for some time - it's weeks or months before they develop enough calluses and the hand is accustomed to the friction and the pain.
WEST BERLIN
When the SED policies became more oppressive in the 50s, I had no choice but to flee to the West. It wasn't in the dead of the night, but rather on a bright, beautiful Sunday that we crossed the border to West Berlin. We arrived with four children and no possessions, not even one German penny. My wife had made provisions for our arrival. We had planned our escape for a quarter of a year. Day by day she had brought clothing and bedclothes across the border. So we had a bit of household inventory. I had made sure to find a job before we crossed over. On March 15, 1958 we left for the West, and on March 16, I reported for my first day of work with Professor Ernst Heinrich. He was an archeologist and had nothing to do with conservation, but with building history. I had slipped from building preservation into archeology, which I did not know so much about. I needed to build my reputation in the field of conservation in my new surroundings from scratch.
I was still stuck on stairs. The Dutch, the French, the Italians were all responsible for my inability to let stairs go. Do you know what a 'near horse' is? It is a second horse that one leads alongside the other and can be used if needed, when the first horse becomes tired. Stairs were my near horse. I had practiced conservation with intensity and at full steam, but stairs were my near horse.
My colleagues in West Berlin were more educated in art history than I was. Their degrees were from proper programs of study. They felt at home in Italy and of course knew France. They knew a multitude of objects that I had not even heard of. I had a lot of catching up to do. In order to do that, I needed a car. In 1959, with the help of 700 marks, we bought the most modern car on the market, the DS. This was because the French were the only ones in the world to build cars with automatic operation, and those were the DS.F'9 291 could now drive with one leg.
PAGE 58
STAIR
30. Zerbst castle, ca. 1681-1696, stairs from 1706-1708, balustrades from 1720-1723.
31. Mlelke at Chateau Montserau, 1966.
32. Forbidden City, Bejing.
35. Angkor Wat.
33. Khai-Dinh tomb, Vietnam.
34. El Castillo, Mayan civilization, Yucatan
37. Mielke's Chinese stair model, in his living room, Konstein, Bavaria,
36. Guatemala Tikal, Granplazza.
STAIR
PAGE 59
Iji^fgll of I960 the family undertook a trip to help me W ¡rnize my knowledge gap. We drove through West ^ rriany 'n severa' sta9es and through Holland via Utrecht, BCprrlam and Delft to The Hague. Next we went to the ^Bregi°n t0 v's't children's grandmother, the mother vVvife. Then we had an accident. A car passed us and 01 idht in front of the DS in order to return to the lane. I ° |<ed hard. The DS has the disadvantage of not braking jBLressively, but rather at one stroke. The front wheels fjpp The back of the car flipped up, the car rolled over, jvve landed in the hospital. So, in the second year after Lving the East, we had landed again at rock bottom. I was ¡n pieces, in casts up to my middle. But after the doctors had more or less patched me back together, I began to «ink more about stairs and to write down my rough draft. inthis way The History of German Stairs came into being.
Today I would write it differently, but back then I collected everything that I could about stairs in Germany and other I c0|jntries. Most of the time they were only pictures. I ■L,mpiled them, and thus the book emerged. It was the first book of its kind - an overview. In this overview it became dear to me that the German staircases, the grand stair-cases in Germany were almost never German. François »Cuvillier is French. Others are Italian. Even Sweden is Represented, not to forget Holland. The German stairs are only conditionally German. If I were to write the book today, I would give it the title Stairs in Germany. Then we could pack almost everything in there.
10,000	STAIRS
When I noticed that we actually don't have any German stairs, or very few truly German stairs, I threw myself into studying the stairs of other countries. Thus, the travels, for instance in 1960 to Holland, Belgium and France.Fi9S 30-31 My eyes were opened to what the neighboring countries had created but not publicized. In any case, I discovered a wide-open field that had not yet been plowed. This knowledge prompted me to dedicate myself to the study of stairs. My collection comprises 10,000 stairs. I would estimate that there are roughly one million staircases in Germany alone that deserve merit. In the Netherlands, Belgium, France there are several hundred thousand more that should be thoroughly examined. One should establish an entire university dedicated to studying the stairs of the world.
What do we know about Chinese stairs or about South Vietnamese stairs... from Angkor? Very little, almost nothing. What do we know about American stairs or South American stairs? Practically nothing. The stairs of the Mayans have been acknowledged, but there is so much more that remains to be discovered.F‘9S 32-36 [Pointing] This model comes from China.6'9 37 It demonstrates a special construction, in which the steps coil, but have no outside support. There is no sidewall and no central pillar. The steps are anchored to each other in such a way that they hold, despite the great curvature. That is very special. In the field I have only seen an example of such a staircase in Belgium.
PAGE 60
STAIR
I 38. Ghorfa stair i measurements, Tunisia.
39. "One step might rise 14 centimeters, and the next 20 or even 30 centimeters."
STAIR
PAGE 61
¡5 there an order of steps?
®pn mankind began, in the primitiveness of the beginning, h re is a sta9e °f human development where man is ¡caiiy the same as an ape. An ape does not need stairs, i wings from branch to branch, and the greatest distance, highest height is not a problem. Surely humans, at this tage of development, did not think of incorporating steps into their terrain. It wasn't necessary. They scampered awards a bit like a mountain goat. I am always amazed by howdogs and cats can climb stairs. The steps are for them aS ¡f they were half a meter high for us, and yet, they spring up two, three, or four steps in a single bound - an astonishing stamina, jumping power and flexibility. The sarliest humans must have possessed similar abilities. We have lost them, due to our laziness which caused us to entrust ourselves to stairs, even though we don't really need them.
GHORFA STAIRS
I saw a picture of the ghorfa stairs in a newspaper article.1"'9 38 They are exceptional, without any European orderliness. Since my topic is "People and Stairs," I wanted to know how the people in Tunisia made do with these stairs.
How was it possible? The ghorfas were fascinating in their enormous irregularity. I wanted to see them. So I booked atrip to south Tunisia. My traveling companion was a neighbor, who assisted me in the travel and in taking the measurements. We had quite an adventure.
f We found that they had similar, but not the same dimensions as European stairs from the Middle Ages. I measured the , rise of steps in old church towers that were quite irregular.
[ One step might rise 14 centimeters, and the next 20 or even 30 centimeters/ '9 39 The step after that is 18 centimeters \ high. In any case, the steps were so higgledy-piggledy, it led to a new insight - that the dimensions of the stairs and steps depended on how important the staircase was.
¡exactitude
I Symbolic stairs are exactly ingrained and attached down ' to,he last millimeter or tenth of a millimeter. But in places PJBpre it doesn't really matter, such as side-stairs or also in lurches, one finds a motley assortment of dimensions.
such cases, a second or third-rate craftsman was working with the materials at his disposal. So we came to the realization that the exactitude of the stairs' dimensions was directly related to their significance. The emperor, king 0r Prince had exactly constructed stairs. The beggar is not
PAGE 62
STAIR
41. Measurements of spiral stairs, Michelstadt.
1


40. Leonradplatz 2, Eichstätt: dimensions of wooden spiral staircase.
STAIR
PAGE 63
important enough and must be content with steps of irregular heights. Conversely, one can conclude from the exactness in which stairs have been constructed, which category they belong to. I only need to see the stairs or their measurements, and I can already say, "Yes, that is built for nobility, and that is for some other common citizen."

sweat
Eichstätt is a very good example. Together with students,
measured all stairs of interest in the historic district of Eichstätt. Analyzing the data later, one could clearly see:
the prince-bishop had steps up to around 16 centimeters high; he was not supposed to work up a sweat. Thus, flat or comfortable steps were necessary. In addition, there were knights of orders and cathedral canons who had their own courts. In these courts, the steps measure between 17 and 18 centimeters high.Rg-41 The steps in the undistinguished residences were normally higher than 18 centimeters. In the case of Eichstätt, there are three classes of steps - for the nobles, for the church canons, and for the common people. These days, whenever I enter a house that I don't know,
I only have to measure one step. Then I know whether it belongs to the category of cathedral canons or another.
In this respect, the dimensions of steps are extremely significant to social standing.
CHARACTER
Eichstätt was the residence of a prince-bishop for a long time. Ingolstadt, on the other hand, is a citadel city, one of the biggest fortresses in Bavaria. Each city has a very different population structure and a different group of craftsmen. There are only 20 or 30 kilometers separating the two towns, but imagine: if a craftsman from Ingolstadt wanted to procure something in Eichstätt, 30 kilometers is six hours by foot. Six hours there, six hours back. He will think twice before making the journey often. So each town developed its own close-knit group of people who worked together and traded among each other, but who seldom left the town. That created a local population of craftsmen with its own specific character.
Whenever I travel to Italy (not to South Tirol, which is related to Bavaria, but to the old Italian cities), I see how particular characteristics that are typical to the landscape have evolved. One can't compare it to southern Italy or Sicily. Certain similarities may be present, for instance in the form of the step's nosing. However, the nosing, sometimes called the snout, is not exactly defined for the craftsman. So, one can use it to see how the steps are constructed somewhat differently. Each area of craftsmanship has its own characteristics. In cases where it is not necessary to have a nosing, simple block steps are used. Block steps are quite prevalent, because they are easily constructed. One finds them in the south of Spain and in
Norway. They are simple wooden or stone beams inserted into place. They possess a certain similarity. There are also differences in the displacement of the step when nailing it in. One needs to know these differences if one want to register the stairs.
The English stairs are very difficult to record, because big firms always reside in the great houses. The secretary does not understand what I want with the stairs, and she tells me, "Not allowed." Even with written correspondence, the communication is less than successful. I wrote to Her Majesty, the Queen. No answer. Stairs there have not yet found an enthusiastic following. England is still a treasure trove of stairs; some examples are extraordinary.
NUMEROLOGY
To my knowledge, the construction of the Forbidden City in China was defined by numerology. It is a realm of numbers. Number one is naturally reserved for the Emperor, God, and the sun. In places where there is only one step, I know I am entering a sacred area. Number two is assigned to women. If there are two steps, the plateau behind it is probably female. Three steps are assigned to men. If standing in front of a temple, whose rise is divided into three steps, then one can be quite sure that the temple is dedicated to a male god. The quality of the stair construction does not make a difference. There are huge irregularities in that area. I only know this from pictures.
But the three is male, and the two is female. And thus, a connection is formed with the Arabic world.
I had an encounter with the pastor from a neighboring town. The church was under renovation, and the area in front of the altar was to be entirely redone. I asked how many stairs would lead up to the altar. Normally it is three: God, the Son, the Holy Ghost are reflected in that number. He said, "We will have two steps." So I asked him whether he was Muslim. He looked at me, astonished, and asked why. The number two is a holy number in Islam. The Koran begins with the second letter in the alphabet, "b." The basmala, the opening phrase of the Koran, is: bi’sm Allah ar-rahman ar-rahJm. The starting letter, "b" is equated with the number two. That is also why mosques have two minarets. One would be enough for the muezzin, who calls the prayers out. Technically, a second minaret is superfluous. If you enter into a mosque, you will most probably climb two steps to get there. There is a connection between numerology and stairs. Numerology brings us back to the people.
PAGE 64
STAIR
42. "I wanted a softer transition into the inclination and back again onto the horizontal level." Laurin stair recreation, built in Mielke's garden.
STAIR
PAGE 65
One day, a sculptor by the name of Bäumler; whom I did not known, appeared and asked to see my stair collection as a motivation for his sculpture work. We started talking.
I was in the process of building a staircase on the backside of a house leading down into the cellar. The stairs that I had at that point did not satisfy me, because, like most stairs,
they started abruptly, one climbed up, and at the top, they stopped abruptly. I wanted a softer transition into the inclination and back again onto the horizontal level. He was working on a similar problem, but had other thoughts. We sat and talked shop the whole afternoon until we came up with this solution. I named the stairs after his artistic name, Laurin, out of gratitude/'93 42-43 Mr. Bäumler is represented in the figure Laurin, although one should know that Laurin is also the King of the Dolomites, above Verona.
PAGE 66
STAIR
44. Mielke's drawings of wooden balustrades with pear shapes.
STAIR
PAGE 67
what about handrails?
studies of stairs, I have found classifications to be quite confusing. Every person describes the steps, the landings, and the stairs according to his own pattern, and at the end there is a big mess. This forced me to classify my own collection. The classification was based on the fight of stairs, the stairway arms, and the balustrade. If the railing system is at all addressed in France, Holland, and Belgium, it is simply called baluster, balustre in French. Even the single rods or ornamental spindles are called balustre. It is absolutely outrageous to designate anything and everything with just one term. I began to study all of the books I had on stairs. What had colleagues written about balusters in the past and present? I also consulted with Mr. Mannes, a very proficient builder of stairs, who is now retired. I asked him, "What do you call this?" They are simply balusters. That won't do. If I want to teach, I have to be able to tell the students: "The cabbage is called cabbage, and the turnip is called a turnip."
[Pointing] Those are the "trailles."Figs 44-45 The French write it "traille," but which has also been carried over to gardening. At least it provides a term for the thin supporting rods that somewhat emulate columns. Here is the capital; there is the base, with room in between for ornamentation. The trailles are very common, probably also inexpensive to produce. In some regions and cities, there seems to be the manufacturing of trailles that look all more or less similar. The question is always, when did such a thing originate? Whenever I have a staircase whose origin I can put a date to, it is still not certain that the balusters were constructed at the same time. They could have been added later. One must pay close attention.
[Pointing] These baluster rods are called dockes. A docke is a term in many trades, in weaving and in farming. At farms the dockes are stood up. In the construction of balustrades, these thick versions are called sheaves. That is because docke is also used to denote a woman. Women are somewhat round. One can argue in borderline cases between trailles and dockes, but the ones with the thick profile that are called balustre all over France, are impecable dockes. [Pointing to a fourth supporting rod.]
'n contrast to the rounded middles of the dockes, the balusters are angular. The balusters are easily recognizable W their rich profiling, similar to the dockes, but angular.
SECURITY
The ethnic groups in Germany and other countries did not originally need the balustrade as long as they had developed an inner security in climbing. It depends entirely on the people using the stairs and how they negotiate heights. A mountain climber usually has nothing to keep him from falling over the edge. He is trained to climb with secure footing. In farmhouses in southern France, Italy and Spain, I saw that balustrades were superfluous. They were developed in response to the modern need for security and ornamentation. A great flight of stairs and an opulent, gold-plated cast iron balustrade are unessential, except for display.
Next door I have some balustrade parts from the Baroque era and later - not for practical reasons, but as ornament. The supporting columns have their own classification, their own formality in the flow of individual curves. These curves are often so artistic that they form a separate ornament.
PAGE 68
STAIR
46. Scala d'Oro, Doge's Palace, Venice.
STAIR
PAGE 69
0® jjrSt balustrades probably emerged In the hospitals of • The crusaders had the idea of killing as many Arabs ^■^ssible, thus endangering their own lives. So, hospitals aSf3 needed. It made sense to build two-storied buildings *ef. time. The women were on the top floor, and the men on the ground floor. That was not the problem, but H^orTien had difficulties climbing the less than orderly f®. and needed something to hold on to. It was the same %h the monks who needed to leave their rooms at night to f their prayers together. The sleeping room was upstairs, S'd a stairway led down to the choir room. I have observed le conditions in several monasteries. It was quite reasonable to expect the sleepy monks to climb such jtairs- They needed something to hold on to, whether rimitive or beautiful. And so the balustrade was born.
yVhen one is trained to think of the people using the stairs, ,hen one sees where the craftsman thought of the user -• easily gripped banister, for instance - and where the wish for grand representation was more important, with the Scala d'Oro in Venice, for example/'9 46 That staircase is only beautiful to the people who appreciate the aesthetic of glamor and ornamentation.
PAGE 70
STAIR
47. Stair to the underworld, with steps on the underside.
48. Mielke's self-designed, preprepared tomb stone, Konstein.
Ire there stairs for the dead?
| have documented stairs that lead into the n(j'erWorld.F'9 47 The steps are affixed on the underside.
•n,ey thereby demonstrate that the other world lives by different rules. They suggest something that we fail to Perceive on a daily basis, namely the position of the world, jts people and the cosmos. We are five people sitting here, but where are we really sitting? On a globe? On the bottom sjcle or the top side? We don't know where we are. None of uS realizes that he is sitting upside down. The stairs play a symbolic role; they lead to a supposed underworld that maybe can also lead upwards. Where is God sitting? Does he sit within our cosmos or outside of it? We cannot answer ¡his philosophical question, but it can be suggested with the stairs. With the symbolism of the stairway, we reach beyond the visible, the tangible.
At first I did not want a gravestone - granite, polished smooth, with some stupid inscription. It seemed too trivial to me. Then I thought about highlighting the unity with my wife with a double spiral.FiB 48 One strand of the spiral belongs to my wife, and the opposite strand belongs to me. It is about illustrating our togetherness. Then it came to my mind to use not a double spiral but a double spiral staircase with the same diameter. The spirals lead to a shaft, in which two urns fit. We ascend symbolically and then fall into nothing. One flight of stairs is reserved for my wife, the other for me. Each flight is adorned with steps - 72 for my wife. They have been etched in. I don't yet know how many steps will fit on my side.
I should add that the stone that you see in the garden is the first attempt; it is wrong. The correct realization is already in the cemetery in Potsdam. The city of Potsdam awarded me a plot. In the correct version, the flight of stairs does not rise against the sun. It should follow the sun and end at the top, because the course of the sun is important.
It denotes the bond to our earth, nature, our environment and everything in which I will have lived.
PAGE 72
STAIR
49. Vicenca, Pallazo Valmarana, Palladio, 1565.
I A N N O ancho nella fo-detta Città i Conti Valmara-Gentil'huomini honoratifsimi proprio honore , & comme -, & ornamento délia loro pa-fabricato lècondo i difegni,che îono: nella q uai fabrica cfsi non icano di tutti quegli ornamenti, fe le ricercano, corne ducchi, e ure . E’ queda cafa diuifa m : para dalla corte di mezorin-lo la quale è vn Corritore,ô Pog )lo,che porta dalla parte dinan-quclla di dietro . Le prime zefono in uoltorie fécondé in ro, e fono quede tanto alte, ntolarghe. IIGiardinochelï la auanti che fi en tri nellc dalle ; alto maggioredi quel ch’egli è lato : ma fi ha fatto coli picciolo thealtramente il foglionon fa-latocapace di elfe dalle, e cofi ittele parti. E tanto badi ha-detto di queda fabrica, elfen-he, come ancho nelle altre, ho podo ne i difegni le mifure délia grandezza di ciafcuna parte.
"The Valmarana counts, honored gentlemen, have also, in the city mentioned above, for their own honor and facility and decoration of the city, built according to the following designs, in which the construction has molds and paintings. This house is divided in two parts through the central courtyard: around it there is a corridor, known as Poggiuolo, which runs from the front to the back. The first rooms have vaults, the second ones have ceilings which are as high as they are wide. The gardens in front of the stalls is much bigger than in the drawing: it is this small because otherwise the drawing sheet would have not been able to fit the building together with all the other parts. Enough said about this building, given that, as with all the others, I have included measurements for each part on the drawings."
STAIR
PAGE 73
a stair museum
By ideal stair museum consists of a central building, something like the Palazzo Valmarana in Vicenza with « multiple-combined spiral staircase/'9 49 Four spiral staircases are linked to form a quadruple ascent. One arrives at a terrace, which goes all around the building, ■side the building I can exhibit a variety of models/9 50 The registry of all the stairs can be found in the cellar with the collection of index cards. It could be very big, very beautiful. In the middle of the central rotunda stands a four-part spiral staircase, which can be used to climb to four different addresses on the upper floors, thus preventing congestion and easing traffic/'9 51 Individual galleries are all around. The arrangement will be up to the director. But the centrality is important to me, so that the visitor can have an overview and simultaneously learn a lot. There is nothing like it in the world.
51. Design for quadruple spiral staircase, Palladio, 1570.
!J: Quadruple spiral staircase,
Mlelke's model, Regensburg archive.
PAGE 74
STAIR
Friedrich Mielke's books on stairs
PAGE 76
STAIR
friedrich mielke
stair bibliography 1956-2008
dissertation 20 scalalogy volumes 5 manuals 2 books
1.1956 Dissertation: "Treppen des Potsdamer Bürgerhauses"
2.1966 Die Geschichte der deutschen Treppen 3a. 1972 Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Textteil)
3b. 1972 Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Bildteil)
DIE
GESCHICHTE
DER
DEUTSCHEN
TREPPEN
4.	Volume 1 / 1985
Scalalogia,
Schriften zur
Treppenforschung,
Collectaneen
5.	Volume 2 / 1986 Scalalogia,
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
6.	1985 Treppen zwischen Tauber, Rezat und Altmühl
7.	Volume 3/1986 Treppen in Eichstätt
8.	Volume 4/1990
Treppen in Breslau
9.	Volume 5 / 1990 Treppen in Wien
10.	Volume 6/1992 Collectaneen 3
11.	Volume 7/ 1992 Treppen in Ingolstadt

STAIR
PAGE 77
12.1993 Handbuch der
Treppenkunde
13. Volume 8 / 1994
Treppen in Potsdam 14.1996 Transzendente Treppen Treppen zwischen Erde und Himmel
15.	Volume 9/ 1999
Gotik und Renaissance
16.	Volume 10/2000
Treppen in der Kunst
17.	Volume 11/2001 Collectaneen 4
18.	Volume 12/2001
Geistige Treppen Treppen des Geistes
19.	Volume 13/2002
Türkische Minarett Treppen
20.	2003 Handläufe und Geländer
21.	Volume 14/2007
Treppen im Modell
22.	Volume 15 / 2008 Treppen in Nürnberg
23.	Volume 16 / 2008
Mensch und Treppe
24.	Volume 17/2009
Schüler sehen Treppen
25.	Volume 18/2009
Ein Fotograph sieht Treppen
26.	Volume 19/2010
Wilde Steige
27.	Volume 20/2011
Treppen der Welt
PAGE 78
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY '

1. i9j>e
Dissertation: The Stair of the Potsdam Towifiouse in the 18th Century
STAIR	PAGE 79
PAGE 80
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
index: stairs measured
STAIR
PAGE 81
PAGE 82
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE sfAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
STAIR
PAGE 83
PAGE 84
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
TREPPEN-TABELLE
STAIR
PAGE 85
PAGE 86
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURy
Introduction
The history of bourgeois architecture in Potsdam starts around 1700. Previous to this, it was but a small country town, which changed authorities several times, and it contained nothing but run-down huts and a small castle, fairly insignificant from a military point of view. It was only when Friedrich Wilhelm I arrived that significant urban changes occurred. He was looking for a breeding ground for his expanding army and found it in Potsdam. Potsdam turned into a big military settlement, and when the existing buildings were not sufficient anymore, the city was expanded twice. For the most part, the urban volume reached by 1743 was retained for the following decades under Friedrich II. Up until the first decades of the 18th Century, craftsmanship and artistic development had developed fairly uniformly. Local traditions were predominant and rarely influenced by foreign modes of working. This changed, once soldiers of all ranks, who had been drafted from many different countries and professional backgrounds, started to actively participate in the local construction scene, or even managed to come into possession of their own residences.
provision for military and manufacturing, to establishing the infrastructure for Potsdam to becom the king's second residence.
With regards to the internal partitioning, decoration and the establishment of a certain comfort the king left the builders and individual owners with a free hand Here, the artisans had an opportunit to express their individuality, to ^ develop and to act independently fron) courtly influences and fashion whims Therefore the true, unaffected nature the of Potsdam of the 18th century can be learned behind the scenes, behind the facades.
For this reason, Potsdam does not boast the types of palaces and villas as seen in Vienna or Prague. In Prussia, the nobility could not act sovereignly but was always "His Majesty's most humble servant," and in this capacity, a certain hierarchy is probably in place, but no one dominant will which would express itself in prestigious buildings. It was the king himself, who for the most part bought and assigned houses to his subjects. This absolute claim to power in the Prussia of Friedrich Wilhelm I, also came with a lot of responsibility. After 1740, the focus of construction shifted from housing
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert," Dissertation,
October 1956, "Vorwort," 11.
STAIR
PAGE 87
PAGE 88	STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
Development in plan
With regards to the running width of stairs it should be noted that in Potsdam, they are always kept within very useful dimensions. Rarely will the dimension be lower than 0.94 m = about 3 feet. In principle this was dictated by a thought process, which is expressed by Penther and Storm, namely that the stairs should be wide enough 'to allow for two persons to walk comfortably next to one another, in order to avoid one of them following behind the other up the stairs, so as not to appear inferior; it is also important that gentlemen should be able to properly assist a woman ascending and descending the stairs.'
The practical writer also requests 'that one should be able to move all furniture and decorations of the house up and down the stairs without damaging them.'	Typical entrance hall.
The numerous functional considerations relating to stairs, such as width and length of the staircase, floor-to-floor height and desirable stepping inclination, strongly influence the development of the ground-plan.
We can assume that an established plan existed for the residences which had, in principle, persisted throughout the entire century. The systematized urban grid forced houses into a normative layout and a certain type of plan. On top of that, similar life and work habits, as well as desires for certain living standards, completed the process of limiting the plan variety to a minimum of different options.
Stair Widths
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert," Dissertation,
October 1956, "Grundrißentwicklung."
PAGE 89
KlEZSTRASSE 2
STAIR
PAGE 90	STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE
Railing beginners and 'Traljen' balusters Neuen Markt 1
Distance and rhythm of the bars are dimensioned in such a way that the festively carved balustrade .beginner sets the 'prelude' with the BM«str1i4^' bars following harmoniously, interrupted only by the^ reinforcing'arid 'decorative''elements otfy'fofyk
18TH
century

balustrade boards.
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert," Dissserta '<
October 1956, "Grundrißentwicklung."
STAIR
PAGE 91
PAGE 92
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
Am Neuen Markt 2
It was in the interest of the owner to keep labor costs as low as possible during the house-building process. This was done by participating in the construction themselves and by finding the cheapest possible execution. A different scenario — occurred when the artisan was moving into the new house himself, then the craftsmanship often turned the building work into a challenge to present his own skills. One example of this case is the staircase in the house on the 'Neuer Markt 2' constructed by the master carpenter Brendel. We have already discovered with most stairs, that the manufacturer's name remains unknown to us. It is only in this house that we came across the name of the carpenter.
Baluster post 'beginner.'
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert," DisssertatM
October 1956, "Grundrißentwicklung."
STAIR
PAGE 93
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Jahrhundert," DisssertatM
October 1956, "Grundrißentwicklung."
PAGE 94
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
Development of a 'stairwell' (Treppenhaus)
In 1800, new conceptions of the ideal interior space establish themselves. Several decades earlier, a type of entrance hallway had already been introduced, but was unusable ... Now the stairwell or 'Treppenhaus' becomes complete and receives its own, separate space in the house.
Stairwell in Stalinallee
Special considerations had already created a spatially closed-in Treppenhaus in this residence, situated next to the entrance passage, at a time when no parallel could found with any other housing types.
STAIR
PAGE 95
PAGE 96
STAIR - 1. 1956 DISSERTATION: THE STAIR OF THE POTSDAM TOWNHOUSE IN THE 18TH CENTURY
Staircase Friedrich Ebertstraße^y
A continuously uniform width of t-jdg stair hallway is applied preferentially in the first third 0f the century, especially in large prestigious buildings, such as the terraced houses along the canal, 0r
the grand school on Friedrich-Ebert
Straße 17. The result is a hall, ai the end of which lies a wide digntfje stairway, leading to the upper floor in this case using two flights of ' i stairs. Spatially, this creates a very effective solution. Eventually this staircase arrangement becomes characteristic of houses associated with the more influential groups of people surrounding Friedrich Wilhelm I.
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Treppe des Potsdamer
Bürgerhauses im 18. Dahrhundert," Disssertation,
October 1956, "Grundrißentwicklung."
STAIR
PAGE 97
PAGE 98
STAIR
2.1966
The History of German Staircases
"2R + 1T = 65cm" Blondel's stair formula
STAIR
PAGE 99
FRIEDRICH M1ELKE
DIE
GESCHICHTE
DER
DEUTSCHEN
TREPPEN
VERLAG
VON WILHELM ERNST& SOHN BERLIN-MÜNCHEN
PAGE 100
STAIR - 2. 1966 THE HISTORY OF GERMAN STAIRCASES
VORWORT .............................vu
EINLEITUNG........................... 1
spiral
DIE WENDELTREPPE ............................................. 4
DIE TREPPEN MIT MASSIVER WANDUNG.............................. 5
DIE AUFLÖSUNG DER AUSSENWANDUNG .............................. 6
Säulenstellungen ............................................. 6
Skelettkonstruktionen......................................... 8
Maßwerk ..................................................... 12
Helmtreppen ................................................. 22
DAS ERSETZEN DER AUSSENWANDUNG............................... 25
Kanzeltreppen................................................ 25
Selbsttragende Konstruktionen................................ 27
DAS ERSETZEN DER MASSIVEN SPINDEL............................ 36
Hohlspindeln................................................. 36
Wangensäulchen .............................................. 39
DIE STUFEN................................................... 41
Geschweifte Stufen .......................................... 41
Holzstufen................................................... 42
DIE MEHRLÄUFIGEN WENDELUNGEN................................. 42
Mehrläufige monozentrische Wendeltreppen .................... 42
Duozentrische Wendeltreppen - Zwillings Wendelungen.......... 51
Trizentrische Wendeltreppen.................................. 58
Konzentrische Doppelwendeltreppen ........................... 59
DIE SPÄTGOTIK................................................ 59
ADLIGE BAUHERREN DER RENAISSANCE............................. 61
Wendelsteine in der Frontmitte.............................   65
Wendelsteine in der Ecklage.................................. 73
BÜRGERLICHE BAUHERREN DER RENAISSANCE........................ 77
winding
DIE GEWUNDENE TREPPE.. ..
DAS ACHTZEHNTE JAHRHUNDERT
Symmetrische Aufgänge..............
Architekturtheorien ...............
Spiralig gewundene Aufgänge .......
Oberlichte.........................
DAS NEUNZEHNTE JAHRHUNDERT
Zentralräume .........................
Gesellschaftliche Repräsentation......
Theater................................
Fachliteratur .........................
DAS ZWANZIGSTE JAHRHUNDERT
Neue Konstruktionen....................
Plastische Gestaltungen ...............
STAIR
PAGE 101
exterior, 'free'
straight
plE AUSSENTREPPE .......................
»ußcngänge..............................
gjstaltete Außentreppen....... .........
dIE FREITREPPE .........................
dIE ZWEILÄUFIG SYMMETRISCHEN TREPPEN
Pfalzen und Rathäuser ..................
Kirchen .
Bühnen .................................
ITALIENISCHER EINFLUSS .................
DIE FREITREPPEN IM INNENRAUM
ADLIGE BAUHERREN DES BAROCK................
bürgerliche Bauherren des barock
KIRCHLICHE BAUHERREN.......................
I Chortreppen.................................
: Ädlfahrtstreppcn............................
| Heilige Stiegen ............................
DIE GARTENTREPPEN..........................
JM&tekturtreppen..............................
I kombinierte Kegeltreppen ...................
passertreppen................................
DIE GERADARMIGE INNENTREPPE ...........................
DIE URSPRÜNGLICHEN TYPEN...............................
Variable Innentreppen..................................
Dielentreppen..........................................
Mauertreppen ..........................................
Gangtreppen ...........................................
Turmtreppen............................................
DIE RENAISSANCE........................................
Zweiarmig gegenläufige Treppen ........................
DER BAROCK.............................................
Zeremoniell............................................
Theorie................................................
Ausland................................................
Freitreppentypen ......................................
Durchfahrttreppen......................................
Verdopplung von Turmtreppen ...........................
Verdopplung von zweiarmig gegenläufigen Treppen........
Idealtreppen ..........................................
Geradläufige Treppen...................................
DER AUSKLANG UND DIE NEUE ORIENTIERUNG .
Museen.................................................
Theater................................................
Justizbauten ..........................................
Gebäude der öffentlichen Verwaltung ...................
Hochschulen ...........................................
Warenhäuser . . . . ...................................
DAS NEUNZEHNTE UND DAS ZWANZIGSTE JAHRHUNDERT 167
Bpumentaltreppen ..............................................167
Ipeatertreppen.................................................173
DIE STRASSENTREPPEN ...........................................174
DIE WENDE ZUM ZWANZIGSTEN JAHRHUNDERT ..............................319
DIE »ÄTHERISIERUNG« DER ARCHITEKTUR ................................320
Eisen ..............................................................320
Gitterträgerwangen .................................................322
Aufgesattelte Stufen ...............................................323
Hängebauweisen .....................................................327
Glasbauweisen.......................................................327
Profildarstellungen.................................................329
DIE PLASTISCHEN AUSDRUCKSWEISEN ..............331
DIE BETONUNG DER STEIGELINIEN ................336
DIE WOHNBAUTEN .............................342
DIE »MOBILEN« TREPPEN ......................343
ANMERKUNGEN ZUM TEXT...........
ANMERKUNGEN ZU DEN ABBILDUNGEN LITERATURVERZEICHNIS PERSONENVERZEICHNIS ORTS- UND SACHVERZEIC ERKLÄRUNGEN .......
PAGE 102
STAIR - 2. 1966 THE HISTORY OF GERMAN STAIRCASES
Wendeltreppe
spiral stairs
/
/
/
/
Nördlingen, church, unknown,
Eye' & hollow spindle
Ulm (Münster), Hauptturm mit 52 Wendeltreppen, Johannes Hültz
1419- 1439 Eßlingen, Frauenkirche H.Böblinger
Graz, Burg, unknown
1499/1500
Mergentheim, Schloß, B.Berwart Stair eye 0,61m dia
Konstanz, Münster 'Schnegg' Master Antoni
Rothenburg oil Hegereiterhau* LVVeidmann
Regensburg, Neupfarrkirche, unknown
Replacement of outer walls
Replacement of solid spindle (?)
Duo-centric Twin Spiral Staircase
1519-1540
STAIR
PAGE 103
As we have seen, the evolution of German stair construction is closely linked to its neighboring countries, especially Italy and France. In Italy, the straight-run stairs had become a matter of course already back in the 16th century, at a time when it was just being discovered in Germany, and spiral stair construction was still in full bloom.
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen Treppe, 1966, "Ausland," 218.
development of straight stairs, the spiral stair also sought expansion of its
partly a stairwell.
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen Treppe, 1966, "Die Gewundene Treppe - Das 18. Jahrhundert," 84.
"Krümmlinge" for different types of spiral stairs
\
In the Baroque period, only one kind of spiral staircase was continued, one which had evolved from a twisted spindle, to a hollow spindle, to an inner column-free construct. Parallel to the
1736
central opening, in order to become
renaissance
17th
18th
Industrial Revolution
PAGE 104
STAIR - 2. 1966 THE HISTORY OF GERMAN STAIRCASES
gewundene treppe
winding staircases
By the 18th century, the winding stair begins to develop as a variant that dissociates itself from the spiral stairs and develops two symmetrical stair arms. The development of the spiral staircase entered a new phase.
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen Treppe, 1966, "Symmetrische Aufgange," 84.
15th
Late gothic
STAIR
PAGE 105
18th
Potsdam,
Am Neuen Markt 1
I
1767
The 19th Century
Design of a stair turning in quarter-circles llSchübler
I
1731
Sinuous Staircases
"Spiralig gewundene Aufgänge"
Bruchsaäl, Schloß, A.F.v.Ritte/zu Grünstein Mi. Roh rer ßfjeumann
/ I
' 1725/26 /	1726/27
17th #	1731/32
Light from Above
Wurzach, Schloß, unknown
1723- 1728
Wurzach, Schloß, unknown
I
1723- 1728
Societal /
J Representational Stairs
4«.1 '••U.
-
k
mf	...



Berlin, Land- und Amtsgericht, Central Staircase P.Thoemer/R.Mönnich/O.Schmalz
I
1895-1905
20th
Industrial Revolution
18th
19th
L
PAGE 106
STAIR - 2. 1966 THE HISTORY OF GERMAN STAIRCASES
freitreppe
exterior, free stairs
The conversion from an exterior stair to a Freitreppe in the Renaissance has its precursors in sacral and imperial architecture, which had, centuries earlier, already reached similarly complex, tightly organized architectural concepts, inaccessible to any building outside their influence until the 16th century.
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen Treppe,
1966, "Die Freitreppe," 125 ff.
Mid 16th
The 'Free Stair
"Freitreppe"
The usually very modest execution of exterior stairs corresponds well to their architecturally inconsequential status, rooted in practicality alone. It was not until the turn of the 15th to the 16th century that this stair typology became artistically interesting.
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen Treppe, 1966, "Gestaltete Außentreppen," 120 ff.
Dual-Run
Symmetrical Stairs
y'‘Die Churfürstl3»|
' Schwaig und Lusthataf
16th
Rj eiberg (Westf) Tpwnhall 'Freitreppe' f / M. Sonnen
1915/16
Duderstadt, TownhaJI'’ £ Exterior Stair ,!ü"
I
153J-Í3
HH23EESEJ'"
15th
Lübeck, Breite Strasse, Townhall Exterior Stair unknown
I
1594
Dinkelbühl, Georgenkirche, stair to medieval choir chamber N.Eseler von Alsey/N.Eseler
1448-1499
Gothic
Late gothic
15th
STAIR
PAGE 107
Kassel-Wilhelmshöhe, Castle and grand cascade G.F.Guerniero
1701 (design) 1717 (upper level )
Baden-Baden, Waserkunst Paradies, M.Laeuger
18th/19th
1924/25
^Augustiner -^enstiff West Wing, ione/3.Prandtauer
'706- 17 1 4
Maria Ehrenberg (Rhön) calvary to church
Berlin, Nationalgalerie, ^ ^.Stüler (Design 1864), H*.§track (execution)
Potsdam, design for Schloß Belriguardo, K.F.Schinkel
Stuttgart, Schloß Solitude, de la Guepiere/D. F. Wezh ing
Berlin, Grand Theatre, K.F.Schinkel
Ideal Theatre - project H.Helbig
unknown
'z:9- Pfefferstadt N.43
Pilgrimage Stairs
Public Buildings
The 19th Century
Grand Theatres & Museums
The Burgoisie
mid 20th
PAGE 108
STAIR - 2. 1966 THE HISTORY OF GERMAN STAIRCASES
geradläufige treppen
straight stairs
In the Middle Ages, straight-run stairs were often hidden within thick masonry. Yet in parallel, a staircase along a passageway (Gangtreppe) developed, whose walls did not have any structural function anymore, merely an enclosing one. The stair thus became more utilitarian in plan.
In the 16th century, the straight flights of stairs became doubled up, running in counter-direction, which opened the passageways and united the stair arms within a room, the first 'stair house'
(Treppenhaus).
This opening took place in the 17th century as a result of the partitions being resolved into arcades.
Another doubling-up of the stair runs in a tower staircase, as well as the doubling of arms in counter-direction for the straight staircase, as well as the inclusion of Freitreppen types within interiors, have all led to the formation of the Treppenhaus, a wide 'stair house' to satisfy the highest societal and architectural requirements.
A major concern of the 19th century was to create grand halls with imposing Prachtreppen. This idea encompassed and pervaded all types of constructs, from villas to the department store, from Museums to the Reichstag, the seat of government.
From these architectural concepts, the conditions for staircases in the 20th century developed: within these great halls, the stairs became independent of the building and its ground plan.
Here the straight stair has finally reached a freedom which the stepping tree and the spiral staircase had from the very beginning.	Jj
Friedrich Mielke, Geschichte der Deutschen I Treppe, 1966, "Die Wende zum 20, Dahrhundert" j 319 ff.
1691-1711

Late gothic
"Prachttreppen"
Turn of the 20th Century
Theatres & Museums
mmetrical stairs al-ruh in opposite directions
Courts of Justice and Public Administration Buildings
-•T—,ur
STAIR	PAGE 109
Berlin, Palais Prince Albrecht K.F.Schinkel
Stuttgart, Neues Schloß, Main Staircase PL.Ph.de la Guepiere
I
1746- 1768
18th
mgm
Achen, Villa Delius, G. Frentzen
1894/95
Arolsen, Chateau, Design (1715) and Realized Design
I
1766
Berlin, Voßstraße 3, Kgl. Bayer Gesandtschaft, Kyllmann & Heyden
I
1890/91
19th
Frankfurt a.M.
Wayss & Freytag KG office
I
1894/95
Leverkusen, College H.Schumacher
I
1955/55
Berlin, Philharmic H.Sharoun
1960- 1963
Würzburg, Residence, Staircase B.Neumann
I
1737- 1743
München, Staatsbibliothek, F.v.Gaertner
I
1832 -1843
Darmstadt, Haus Glücken J.M.Olbrich
1901
elden, Schloß Weißenstein „v.HMebrandt
1716
I “
! 111
Vienna, Court of Justice, A.v.Wielemans
I
1875 - 1881
Berlin-Moabit, Amts-und Kriminalgericht, R.Mönnich/C.Vohl
I
1902- 1906
Berlin, Museum am Lustgarten, K.F.Schinkel
1824- 1828
Baroque
1829- 1883
PAGE 110
STAIR
3a. 1972	DAS DI UTSCIIK BÜRGERHAUS
The Townhouse in Potsdam (text)
FRIEDRICH MlfcLKl
Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam
STAIR
PAGE 111
13b. 1972	DAS DE! rSCtiE B< RG ER HAUS
The Townhouse in Potsdam (images)
( lili I \ ll l#*t I lili I (r I
PAGE 112
STAIR
4.	1985
Scalalogy - Collected Writings on Stair Research (Vol. 1)
the stair: queen of architecture spiral stairs
man becomes measure: Palladio's stair catalogue how do people walk on stairs?
STAIR
PAGE 113

SCALALOGIA
Schriften zur Treppenforschung
Band 1/1985
Friedrich Mielke: Collectaneen
Schrenk-Verlag
PAGE 114
STAIR - 4. 1985 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON STAIR RESEARCH (VOL 1)
Peter Parleras legacy:
"exposing" the spiral stair, Veitsdom
Peter Parier
Master Mason and sculptor
Born: ca. 1330 Schwäbisch Gmünd, Holy
Roman Empire (Germany)
Died: Duly 13, 1399, Prague, Kingdom of Bohemia.
Son of Heinrich Parier the Elder Brother of Heinrich Parier & Michael Parier Father of Johann Parier the Younger, Wenzel Parier
1344-1929 Veitsdom, Saint Vitus Cathedral 1348-1558 Saint Barbara Cathedral, Prague 1357-1380 Charles Bridge, Prague 1360-1378 St. Bartholomew church chancel
Peter Parier was born into the famous "Parier clan" of Master Masons and sculptors, with its members scattered all over Europe in the 14th and early 15th century. Exemplary in their profession, their influence spanned several countries from France to northern Italy, southern Germany and into today's Czechia.
Aged 23 (in 1353), Parier was called to the new imperial capital at Prague by the emperor Charles IV. There, he took up work on St. Vitus Cathedral, as its original architect, Mathias of Arias, had died the previous year, only eight years into the cathedral's construction. Parier was responsible for most of the design elements of the building, despite the fact that it wasn't truly finished until 1929, including most of its gothic architecture and flying buttresses.
Apart from the cathedral, Parier was the main designer of the New Town of Prague and built Charles Bridge and its towers. In the Royal Palace of Prague Castle, Parier built the All Saints' Chapel. He was also a master sculptor and designed the gargoyles of St. Vitus Cathedral, giving ornamentation to the original design by Mathias Arras.
STAIR
PAGE 115
ter parler attached a special kind »spiral staircase to the southern front j tf,e Veitsdom Cathedral in Prague «372-73). It is located at the front side I a pillar, east of the Golden Gate.
■^¡s staircase is remarkable in many
rsgpects.
ln the 14th century, it was not yet customary to place a spiral staircase
outside.
Stairs were considered insignificant and were thus hidden in the thickness of the stonework. Stairs were not yet participants in architecture.
1372 St. Vitus Cathedral, Prague, southern transept, scheme of the staggered spiral staircase, on a square plan, Peter Parler.
Nevertheless, Peter Parler reduced the wall of his stairs to a skeleton of structurally necessary ribs, in order to let the staircase with its steps be visible to the outside.
The quadratic layout of the staircase is also remarkable, being more difficult to construct than a staircase built upon a circular foundation. This solution contrasts with his decision to attach the staircase to a pillar.
However, the most extraordinary feature of Parler's concept is that he changed the rotational direction of the spiral staircase several times.
Peter Parler's construction granted the staircase a new significance in the art of construction. It was not just a functioning member of the whole, but also decoration and a showpiece of architecture.
IlNrich K/lielke, "Peter Parlers Variation des Exzentrischen Wendelprinzips und ihre Jr"tolge in Mitteleuropa," Scalalogia Vol. II, ' ranz-Sales-Verlag Elchstätt/Wien,1986), 79.
Model of Parler's staggered spiral staircase on square plan, by Friedrich Mielke.
Prag, Veitsdom, 1344-1929,	G - "Goldene Pforte" (Südportal)
Baumeister: Matthias v.Arras u.a.	Peter Parier, bis 1367
Ansicht von Süden, vor dem	T - gestaffelte Wendeltreppe
Weiterbau 1873	= marianiseheHimmelstrepi
Zeichnung: A. Weber.	Peter Parier, 1370 ff.
PAGE 116
STAIR - 4. 1985 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON STAIR RESEARCH (VOL. 1)
"the stair, queen of architecture": spiral stairs
1500-1507 Saint-Gatien cathedral, Tours, north tower.
STAIR
PAGE 117
Kike on Saint Gatien's Cathedral in ■ (begun around 338 AD) with its calier (beginning 16th century):
ft cannot assume that the stairway ^built to honor a king or even to ^used by a king. The attribute 'royal' j s not necessarily refer to one Kgon. Its use as an adjective sug-Pests that both words could be inter-ftged, in the sense of 'King of the Stairs/ implying that the staircase is he most difficult element in the art (construction and should be held ¡n high esteem.
fogive stairs the attribute of king in the realm of construction is not limited to tower staircases. In the French cast|es of Chateaudun, Azay-le-Rideau, Çhambord, Blois, and many more, the [builders of] stairs were not content with the task of spanning between floors. They reached beyond the building into the roof regions, where their grandeur is wasted on side rooms and attic spaces.
The stairs became autonomous. Freed from pure function, they transcended into the realm of l'art pour I'art.
They often create their own façade in the front view of a building. The ascent on the interior is also continued in places where neither the grand breadth nor the fine features are necessary.
During the 15th century, the time in which the stairs began to gain independence as an artistic entity, another emancipation had also begun, namely that of the single citizen; the Bürger was freeing himself from the witten and unwritten compositional regulations of the Middle Ages.
1507 Saint-Gatien cathedral, Tours, Laterne des Nordturms.
Saint-Gatien cathedral, Tours, north tower, four-run tower stair transitioning to a spiral staircase on a square plan.
»sprich Mielke, "Treppen als Königinnen der u Mektur," Scalalogia Vol. II, (Franz-Sales-Verlag ^stätt/Wien, 1986), 13.
As interesting as a spiral staircase on the inside of a spire may be, it cannot function as a 'Roi des escaliers' to the outside.
A hidden king has very little chance of getting public attention and resonance. The representation at the highest point for all to see from miles around, the last step in 'I'art pour I'art,' was not taken in Esslingen, Tours, Rodez or Fleilbronn.
The stair as the crowning glory of a church spire, a staircase within the highest point of a structure, a 'Roi d'escaliers', the stairs as an abstract concept. This marks the final improvement on the hidden 'Escalier Royal' in Tours.
1511-1526 Notre-Dame, section through the bell tower.
PAGE 118
STAIR - 4. 1985 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED \ l/RITINGS ON STAIR RESEARCH (VOL. 1)
münster cathedral
Peter Parler's achievements gained even more meaning after the construction of the Munster cathedral in Ulm, in which the stairs were elevated to a level of prestige not known before, due to their placement on the visible side of the cathedral.
In the original drawings by Ulrich von Ensingen, the spire is flanked by sweeping spiral staircases, set in place of potential corner towers. Peter Parler's stairs in the 'Veitsdom' undoubtedly inspired this idea.
Peter Parler was finally succeeded by the next master builder of the 'Strassburg Munster.' After completing the Octagon, Johannes Hultz was given the task of crowning the tower with a spire. The builder seized upon the stair motif in Prague and built a spire 39 meters high, consisting entirely of spiral staircases in 1419-1439.
Reaching from the corners of the Octagon up along the spire are stone groins, which Hultz studded with rows of small hexagonal stair towers. Transitioning from one small tower to the next, the change of spiral direction conforms with Parler's stairs in the St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague. However, in Strassburg, the spiral stairs do not just stagger three-times, but rather, Jahannes Hultz formed eight rows of small towers on top of the eight stone groins.
Each of these rows of small towers is staggered six times, until the groins sit so close together that a continuation of the system is not possible.
Above the sixth small tower, the master builder added a platform, from which four more spiral staircases lead to the lantern post. Apart from some short straight steps at the very top, the 52 small spiral staircases encased six stone pillars, each constitute the spire.
Friedrich Mielke, "Peter Parlers Variation des monozentrischen Wendelprinzips und ihre Nachfolge in Mitteleuropa," Scalalogia Vol. II, (Franz-Sales-Verlag Eichstätt/Wien,1986), 79.
STAIR
PAGE 119
The spire stairs and numerology
The spire of Strasbourg Münster, as constructed by the masterbuilder Ulrich von “gingen in 1399-1419, forms an octagon in plan. This octagon is not of architectural, but of symbolic value. Since Babylonian times, the number eight has ranked high as the number of G°ds and belonqs intrinsically to the house of worship.,
onsequently, the spire of this octagonal tower pontains eight stone ribs or groins, striving to the They form the structural support for six sta9gered spiral staircases. The number six is also ®sacred number: God created the world in six Salomon's throne has six steps, Days and
Nights are divided into 2x6 and so on. The number six stands for perfection.
To these existing 8 x 6 = 48 spiral staircases, Johannes Hültz, the master builder of the spire tower, added four more spiral staircases, which lead all the way to the top of the spire. All together, 52 spiral stairs form the spire of the Münsters in Straßburg, as many steps as weeks in a year. The symbolic numbers for God (eight) and for perfection (six) are related here to the course of a year. The Tower of Straßburg Is a great example of the symbolic language of architecture, represented through the stairs."
Handbuch der Treppenkunde, 1993, Verlag Th.Schäfer, Hannover, "Symbolzahlen - Zahlensymbole," 23.
PAGE 120
STAIR - 4. 1985 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON STAIR RESEARCH (VOL. 1)
palladio's staircase & codification
In the theoretical passages of his text "Delle scale, e varie maniere quelle..." Palladio based his writings on those in Alberti's De re aedificatoria book X, which is in turn based upon Vitruvius' related text.
Palladio borrows the following ideas from Alberti:
and Vitruvius' suggested maximum measurements for rather extreme tread depths, from 2 feet (= 59.2 cm) to 1 1/2 feet (= 52.56 cm).
Palladio also adjusted Alberti's assertion mentioned in d). Alberti had limited the odd number of steps to seven to nine steps per run of stairs, but Palladio revised this, according to his experience, requesting 11 to 13 steps per stair run.
This adjustment of measurements based on practical experience proves Palladio's interest in building stairs that were comfortable for people to use.
"Whereas stairs in the Middle A were meaningless climbing s for which comfort played no role comfort became the deciding fa^ in stair design during the Renais-^ sance. Man became the determining measure."
"Proportion was more important to Palladio than function."
a)	the basic underlying notion that "scalae esse architecturam perturbatices" (stairs disturb architecture).
b)	the insistence on adequate lighting and wide and broad stairs that would be commensurate to the stateliness of a house.
c)	the assessment that three openings are imperative for every stair:
the entryway, the window and the stairwell.
d)	the indication that ancient stairs were always built with an odd number of steps.
e)	the establishment of minimum and maximum measurements for steps.
Palladio shows himself to be a critical practitioner with regards to his use of Alberti's postulate in e). He does not copy, but redefines it according to his own experience.
While Vitruvius called for a step riser to measure a maximum of 5/6 foot (=10 inches = 24.67 cm), Alberti specified the measurement of Va feet (= 9 inches = 22.2 cm) for the riser.
Palladio wanted a riser measuring a maximum of Vi foot (= 6 inches = 17.52 cm) and a minimum of 4 inches (=
11.68 cm). He also decreased Alberti's
Palladio proves himself to be a master builder of the Renaissance when he writes that stairs should be 'commode al salire' and 'quanto a gli homini se non haveranno I'ascesa loro difficile and erta' ("The stairs should be comfortable to climb and should pose no difficulty and steep incline for the people."
Villa Rotonda:
"The square enclosure of the central circle left some interstitial space, into which the architect placed the stairs to the upper levels. The stairs were not a factor of the initial design consideration, but a leftover, crammed into a plan which was complete in principle.
Palladlan stairs are always enclosed by walls; visual cross-connections are unthinkable.
A spatial construct created by stairs, the creation of a stairwell, was only achieved In stairs winding around large openings, stair 'eyes'.
Palladio used Roman stairs for his winding ^ stair, such as Bramantes creation In the Vatican
(1507-1514) and possibly also Raffael s design for the Villa Madama."
Tafel IX Vicenza
Villa Almerico ('La Rotonda'),
A. Palladio, 1566 ff.
STAIR
PAGE 121
Palladio's stair catalogue provides no illustration of the text, but is rather a 'presentation of single types.'
The catalogue is not even complete. The type of stairs most commonly found in Palladio's sketches - the straight-armed scissor stair - is not present in the catalogue. 'Free stairs' are also entirely absent.
The stairs are additively integrated into the series of rooms, not seen as part of a spatial experience, but always as one compartment within other compartments. Each staircase is set in an enclosure that - at least with the straight-armed stairs -has not yet evolved into a stairwell.
For the circular, spiral staircases in Italy (vacua nel mezo), the only European country with comparable examples is Germany.
This type of construction was not fostered in France. On the contrary, the master builders in German speaking countries may claim to have created the first spiral staircases with central stair openings.
Friedrich Mielke, "DieTreppen im Werk Andrea Palladios," Collectaneen - Scalalogia - Schriften zur Treppen-forschung, Vol. 1 (Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985), 24.
PAGE 122
STAIR
5.	1986
Scalalogy - Collected Writings on International Stair Research (Vol. 2)
What is scalalogy? First definition
Vorwort............................................................ 7
Einleitung	  9
Friedrich Mielke:
Schinkel und die Treppenbaukunst seiner	Zeit ..................   15
Friedrich Mielke:
Die Wendeltreppe der Kirche in Fredelsloh	"
Milada Raclovä-Stikovii:
Steinerne Treppen des 13. bis 16. Jahrhunderts in der Tschechoslowakei ................................................
Peter Parlers Variation des monozentrischen Wendelprinzips
und ihre Nachfolge in Mitteleuropa	..........
Hendrik Jacob Zantkuij 1:
Treppen in Amsterdam	9
Ernst Jendrässik:
Beiträge zur Lehre vom Gehen	99
Friedrich Mielke:
Die Gesellschaft für Treppenforschung (Scalalogia) e. V. im Berichtsjahr 1985/86 ..............................................121
Rezensionen .......................................................125
STAIR
PAGE 123
SCALALOGIA
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
Band II - 1986
Franz-Sales-Verlag Eichstätt/Wien
PAGE 124
5. 1986 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON INTERNATIONAL STAIR RESEARCH (VOL
Society for Staircase studies
Day of Scalology Lectures in the city hall
from 9.00 to 18.00
Exhibition on Staircases in mid-Frankonia
Drawings by Prof. Lidl exhibited in the Sparkasse Marktplatz 43, from 17 to 31 May
STAIR
PAGE 125
AUSSTELLUNG »Treppen in Mittelfranken«
Zeichnungen von Professor Lidl in der Sparkasse, Marktplatz 43 vom 17. bis 31. Mai
Auskünfte und Programm der Vorträge im Verkehrsamt am Hlastuim HK.70 Ciiinzenhausen, Postfach ISO, Marktplatz 23, l
PAGE 126
5. 1986 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON INTERNATIONAL STAIR RESEARCH (VOL. 2)
1986 Scalalogy: a first definition
What is scalalogy?
"The definition of scalalogy is the "science of the properties and the effect of stairs/ in short "the science of stairs."
It emerged from stair research, which serves both practical stair construction, as well as architectural history in multiple ways.
The subject of research is the type of negotiation of height differences through static constructions with steps.'"
Friedrich Mieike, Collectaneen II, 1986,
"Einleitung," "1. Definition," 11.
STAIR
PAGE 127
Scalalogia (Latin Scalae = steps = stair) is a branch of science that deals with the interdependence of humans and stairs.
It emerged from Building Research relating to stairs and, amongst other things, investigates the stepping behavior of stair users, and its resulting consequences for the construction of staircases of all kinds.
Scalalogy relies heavily on the study of historical stairs and the knowledge derived from different peoples constructing them. It is inevitable to cooperate between different disciplines, for example archaeology, construction, and building research, art history, civil engineering, architecture, craftsmanship, physiology, psychology, anthropology, even medicine.
The current headquarter of all these operations is called "Center for Stair Research" (Arbeitsstelle für Treppenforschung) in Konstein (Upper Bavaria). Its archive, with a database of more than 10,000 stairs from many countries, a specialized staircase library holding nearly 500 titles and a slides library with more than 35,000 images, presents the only specialized institution of this kind currently in existence.
Its correspondence reaches members in more than 30 countries. The director of the Center for Stair Research, Professor Dr.lng. Friedrich Mielke, founded the Society for Stairs Research - Scalalogy (Gesellschaft für Treppenforschung - Scalalogie e.V.) in 1983, which has been followed by more than 70 experts from 10 European and non-European countries until 1990.
The book series 'SCALALOGIA' publishes both their own and other people's scalaiogical investigations at a regular interval. It is published by the Center for Stair Research.
Friedrich Mielke, "Glossary," Handbuch der Treppenkunde (1993), 292.
PAGE 128
5. 1986 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS ON INTERNATIONAL STAIR RESEARCH (VOL. 2)
scalalogy between heaven and earth
Linguistically, the term Scalalogy is a hybrid composed of a Latin and a Greek noun. Such miscreations are not uncommon, they have become naturalized and we are familiar with them, such as television, automobile, bureaucracy and many others. Whoever puts emphasis on the value of language purity, needs to know that this type of sterility has never existed. Every people, which had contacts with different people in his environ, has inevitably expanded its vocabulary in order to understand and describe 'strange' things.
Friedrich Mielke: "Scalalogie zwischen Flimmel und Erde" (1996), in (ders., Flrsg.):
Collectaneen 4, Band IX der Scalalogia-Schrlften zur internationalen Treppenforschung (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), S. 14.
stair research/science versus scalalogy
In the literal sense, it (the term stair research) refers solely to the study of the 'object,' not the preoccupation with the human subject, which is characterized by physical and mental peculiarities. Since the founding of the Society for Research on stairs (Scalalogy) in 1983 ¡t is therefore called Scalalogy, if you think of the polarity of stairs and man
The benefit (of Scalalogy) is there for all stair-climbing people. If one studies the ascending behavior of staircase users, recognizes hazards, and is compelled to compare between energy expenditure and practical use, one learns to understand the human themselves.
Friedrich Mielke: "Denkmalpflege und Treppenforschung" (1989), in (ders., Flrsg.): Collectaneen 4,
Band IX der Scalalogia-Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), S. 12.
etymology
The noun staircase relates to drip, drop in its dialect versions, dröppeln or drippen. ... Another explanation of the word staircase makes use of the derivation from the verb trappen = to tread loudly, trapsen, trample. In Holland the stair is called trap, trappan in Sweden, trapper in Denmark. ... While the word group around 'stair,' tropfen, trappeln and so on, inherently has a descending tendency, such as in the French word degré, the stairs are ultimately characterized by an ascending tendency. Relating to stiege is the English word, stairs. In old Germanic there was also the verb stig for climbing stairs. It has been lost. One says 'to climb.' One incomprehensible moment is the English use of staircase. Strictly speaking, only the staircase (Treppenhaus) can be called thus, but it mostly refers to just the stairs.
Friedrich Mielke: "Scalalogie zwischen Flimmel und Erde" (1996), in (ders., Flrsg.): Collectaneen 4, Band IX der Scalalogia-Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2001), S. 17.
If we compare this with cautiously described 'germanic' phrasing of the word group surrounding stairs, steigen und stapfen, with the equally cautiously designated 'romanesque' terms of sca/a and gradus, then it can be said that the southerners defined the term staircase around its technical detail surrounding the step or tread, as well as the measurement of the stair's inclination, while northerners focused on the human as the
defining criterion of ascension.
Friedrich Mielke: "Scalalogie zwischen Flimmel und Erde" (1996), in (ders., Flrsg.): Collectaneen 4,
Band IX der Scalalogia-Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2001), S. 17.
STAIR
PAGE 129
Now we get to the point. One of my colleagues said, while looking at the stairs:
Actually, the spiral staircase is the best stair in the world, for those who have short legs, can walk on the inside where treads are smaller, and those with long legs, have enough
space to ascend along its periphery.
A spiral staircase accommodates each stride. That was the point where my initiative and interest for the stairs arose. Now I knew that the stairs are not purely an aid, but that one must consider the human who ascends the stairs. Here it came to my aid that I must always ascend with only one leg. For me, the problems of ascension are exacerbated by a multiple. I find it much harder than a normal human being who just races up the stairs.
Thus began my marriage with Scalalogy.
Not only the stair itself is important, with all its dimensions, (which I can measure very accurately), but: who is the human behind it? That's why I made the difference between Stair Research and Scalalogy. Scalalogy is, so to speak ... the opera [singing]. Since it raises things to a higher level.
Interview with Stephan Truby, 2013.
PAGE 130
STAIR
6.	1989
Stairs between Tauber, Rezat and Altmühl
STAIR	PAGE 131
Josef Lidl Friedrich Mielke
TREPPEN
zwischen Tauber, Rezat und Altmühl
Verlag Walter E. Keller
U~ns%
PAGE 132
STAIR
7.1986
Scalalogy- Stairs in Eichstätt
Stairs representative of Sociological & Urban context:
A.	Ecclasiastical
B.	Feudal
C.	Bourgeois
STAIR
PAGE 133
SCALALOGIA
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
Treppen in Eichstätt
PAGE 134
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTÄTT
stairs in eichstätt, germany: a social hierarchy
If we study the stairs of a city in detail, we soon recognize which habits were and are prevalent there. The measurements disclose this information. With the help of scalalogy, it is possible to quantify habits. However, this cannot occur in blanket generalizations. Stairs are built for various tasks, and their users do not claim to have homogenous human measurements.
In Eichstätt we divided the task-groups for stairs in the following manner:
A.	Buildings for the Prince-Bishop and his representation
B.	Courts built for the cathedral canons
C.	Various types of residences
Stairs and Sociology Introduction
This book seeks a place within the broad framework of scalalogy. Thus, not only stairs will be investigated and represented. Builders and residents will also be examined in order to establish sociological dependencies and town planning relationships.
Whoever argues that the building of stairs has little to do with urban matters, should read the chapter on the bishop's city residence, and the canonry houses (Residenzpl. 9-15).
It clearly demonstrates the interdependency between the two.
The aim was to represent this interconnectedness, without assuming that similar problems do not exist elsewhere. This work does not only apply to stairs in Eichstätt, but rather to their scalalogical interdependence in general...
... It is clear that the heads of either religious or the secular leadership should not have to overexert themselves, whilst climbing the stairs. The steps should be so easy to climb so as not to impair the display of majesty. Thus, we find the smallest step risers in the residence and on the main stairs that Pedetti built in 1767. (See A. Bishop's residence) All flights of stairs have a rise/run ratio of 15/33 with a riser heights of only 14cm.
The courts of the cathedral canons (See B.) in Eichstätt are at a close second when it comes to providing comfortable rises. Eleven stairs belonging to this group were measured, and all steps had risers between 15 and 16.5 cm. In comparison, the maximum difference to the bishop's stairs was only a little more than a centimeter.
Meanwhile, the stair inclination was markedly higher in the stairs found in middle-class residences. The standard risers measured 17-18 cm (in 80 percent of the residences), but some exceptions even reached the height of 21 cm. This scale was generally accepted and used in most buildings.
Friedrich Mielke, "Treppen in Eichstätt", 1989, "Einleitung," 11.
STAIR	PAGE 135
• AS -TSfc.	>
< ,
C. Residence *S^§ LuitpodStraße 18
B. Court of a canoh Domplatz 3
A. Bishops residence 'Residenzplatz 1, west-trakt
C. Kanonikatshpfe Residenzplatè 9,f1
PAGE 136
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTÄTT
A. city residence of the prince-bishop
Residenzplatz 1, West-Trakt
Proprietor: Marquard II. Schenk v.Castell, Johann Euchar Schenk v.Castell, Johann Martin v.Eyb Master builder: Dakob Engel Construction: 1684-1702
New staircase, west wing
Client: Raymund Anton Graf v.Strasoldo Master building: Maurlzio Pedettl Bauzeit: 1767-1769
Owner in 1988: Landkreis Eichstatt (since 1975)
Double-flight sandstone staircase with a total of three landings per flight of stairs. Ornamental wrought Iron banisters.
1st runs:
28 (10+8+10) steps 14-15/33 cm;
Stair widths 284, 324 cm;
2nd runs:
28 (10+8+10) steps 15-16/33-34 cm;
Stair widths 281, 285, 323 cm
... A south wing emerged, executed by Gabriel de Gabrieli, probably according to the completed plans of Engel. Together with the older east wing, it created an impressive palace which met the requirements for all of the business obligations of a bishop's seat.
However, the interior representative office for the ceremonial reception of illustrious guests seems not to have been in accordance with the new residence. The old staircase did not meet the heightened requirements of the ambitious resident prince-bishop.
Raymund Anton Graf y Strasoldo (1757-1781) must have felt this shortcoming especially strongly. He instructed his court building director, Maurizio Pedetti, to reconstruct the west wing and create a new spacious staircase.
Pedetti came up with an ingenious solution to the problem. In the layout of the bishop's residence, the former
court wall (built by Engel) was clearly recognizable due to the massive stonework. Pedetti broke through this exterior wall by way of the three central axes and built the new, grander stairwell in its place. It extended across the former building line into the courtyard.
The integration of the new construction into the old one was entirely successful.
Pedetti's 'Stair-house' (Treppenhaus), begun in 1767, has several impressive qualities:
Whoever enters the house sees the staircase in its entire breadth: a frontal view of both lateral runs, a sideways view of both second runs in elevation, with accompanying latticework balustrades, and a view of the underside of the third run, which is shared by the two flights.
The arrangement of both flights of stairs, each with three runs was practically unavoidable in order to preserve an open passage from the street into the courtyard. This type of staircase can also be called 'passage stairs' (Durchfahrtstreppen). A number of typologically similar examples from the 18th and 19th centuries can be found throughout Germany.
The construction of the staircase in the bishop's residence consists of two separate flights of stairs, each with three runs, with the third run shared by both flights.
Thus, there are, in all, not six, but rather five runs which facilitate the ascent to the next floor on both sides. The flights are led around two rectangular openings, the stair 'eyes.'
Every stair user has the opportunity to select either the right or the left run.
If one now imagines a great number of people climbing both flights simultaneously and inevitably reach' the floor landings to change directi ^ a stepping path akin to a figure-eight*1' appears in plan.
The architectural relation between the twin spiral staircases of the late Middl Ages and the 'passage stairs' of the * Baroque era is unmistakable. However there is no clear evidence of it being a direct imitation.
Inclination:
A rise/run ratio of 16/33 cm can be assumed to have been the designed average. This is not exactly the ratio recommended by the Italian master builder Palladio (1508-1580) of 1:2, but it is close. It corresponds more closely with the formula posed by the French mathematician and architect, Francois Blondel (1618-1686), in which two risers (2r) and one tread (t) amount to 65 cm.
If one inserts the measurements of Eichstätt into this formula 2s+a=65 cm, the result is 2 x 16 + 33 = 65 cm.
Blondel's Cours d'architecture, published in 1698 in Paris, was widely known in architectural circles at that time. It is very possible that Pedetti also studied it and orientated his stair construction on Blondel's recommendations.
Friedrich Mielke, Treppen in Eichstätt, 1989-Residenzplatz 1, 64 ff.
STAIR
PAGE 137
Plan
A certain difficulty arose with the insertion of the new stairs in the new foundation, because Pedetti was required to connect various heights before he could fasten the first steps of the two flights. These heights were those of the passageway, the laterally adjoining hallways and of both curtail steps. Again, he proved to be a master in his discipline; in each spot, he consolidated three steps and created two platforms twice. In this way, he achieved a layering of levels that literally elevated the space.
Handrail
Residence at West-Trakt, stairwell section, from:
F. Mader, S. 530.
The wooden handrail of the banister tells a story. Neither its shape, nor its width of 57 mm made it easy for a hand to grasp. Nevertheless it becomes a document of its time, exactly for that reason. Considering the generous width of the stair stringers made from stone, and given the multiple interruptions of the banister by pillars and columns, it would be difficult to use the handrail as a climbing aid.
would require help climbing the stairs. Such a highly ranked person would climb the stairs at their very center, flanked by several attendants. The generous width of the steps (281 cm in the first run and up to 323 cm in the third run) allows space for up to five people walking next to each other. The authority of his lordship was, after all, founded on a full autonomy regarding his presence, his bearing and his ascent and descent on the stairs.
feidence at West-Trakt, andrail of the wrought iron “anister, by M.Pedetti 1767-
However, it was not created for this reason. It is little more than the straight, upper closure of the banister which is merely an ornament. Not more than that.
The sight of a person holding on tightly to a handrail as they laboriously clambered up the stairs, step by step, did not fit the rank of a prince of the church.
ädrich Mielke, Treppen in Eichstätt, 1989, !"fenzplatz 1, 64 ff.
It must have been difficult for the architect of a representative staircase to imagine that the master of the house, His princely Grace Bishop
A handrail may be present, but not
PAGE 138
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTATT
Bischôfliche Stadtresidenz-reprasentatives treppenhaus
Considering the generous width of the stair strin«|rs W|de from stone, and given the multiple interruptions of the Dafii^l' by pillars and columns, it would be difficult to use the bagpbil as a climbing aid. However, it was not created for this	It is
little more than the straight, upper closure of theJmnjHr which is merely an ornament. Not more than that.
Viewed by itself, this banister is a special kind of ornamental delicacy. It was forged from wrought iron and displays the Rocaille motif in a symmetrical order. Shell and foliage motives are distributed richly. It merely lacks a tiny bit of the imaginative freedom of typical Rococo motives characterized by asymmetries.
STAIR
PAGE 139
■
• ■'■Am»

Every stair user has the opportunity to select either the right or the left run. If one now imagines a great number of people climbing both flights simultaneously and inevitably reaching the floor landings to change direction, a stepping path akin to a figure-eight appears in plan.
Whoever enters the house sees the staircase in its entire breadth: a frontal view of both lateral runs, a sideways view of both second runs in elevation, with accompanying latticework balustrades, and a view of the underside of the third run, which is shared by the two flights.
Balustrades
In searching these various types of stairs in this residence for a common denominator or a main characteristic, one settles on the types of balusters called 'Docken.' They appear in all four stairs, albeit in different configurations.
In two cases they are round, sculptural docks (Docken) created by a craftsman with a wood turner.
In the other two cases, the balusters merely possess the outline of the sculptural docks, but their volume has been reduced to the thickness of a board or plank. They were crafted by a cabinet maker or a carpenter, who simply cut out the contours.
If we were to compare the handrail In this house to many others crafted at the same time (during Gabrieli's tenure as Director of Construction in Eichstätt), one finds clear differences in the types of patterns that are characteristic of the 17th century, but not for the 18th century. In Gabrieli's time, handrails were more delicate and most often had an asymmetrical profile.
Second floor, wooden spiral staircase with timber plank balustrade.
PAGE 140
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTÄTT
B. courts of the cathedral canons
Domplatz 3
Former Cathedral Canon Court Speth.
Proprietor: Dohann Heinrich Speth v.Zwiefalten Master builder: Dakob Engel Construction: 1675
Main staircase: triple-run, oak stairs with two corner landings and dock balustrade:
1st run: 21(6+7+8) steps 17/31-34 cm; stair widths: 155, 158, 152 cm
Tower on 1st floor to the right: wooden spiral staircase on a square plan; at the top end of the stairs some remains of the original spherical 'Docken' balustrades.
Stair risers: 15.5 cm Stair width: 102-105 cm
Tower, 2nd floor to the right:
Wooden spiral staircase with a timber plank balustrade, 19 steps:
Stair risers: 15.5 cm Stair width: 71 cm
3rd Floor
Spiral Staircase made from timber with a wooden plank balustrade, 33 steps:
Stair risers: 16 cm Stair width: 95 cm
STAIR
PAGE 141
Tower, second floor to the right: timber spiral staircase with a plank balustrade.
Tower, third floor: hall with spiral staircase leading to attic.
Domplatz 3, plans.
PAGE 142
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTÄTT
C. residences of a bourgeois character
LuitpoltraBe 18
Residential house
Proprietor: ]ohann Anton II. Frhr. v. Freyberg Master builder: Matthias Seybold Construction: 1748
Owner 1988: Paula Grunzinger, Berta Schropp
Wooden stair (altered) with two corner landings and ornamental balustrade
1st run: 16 (2+12+2) steps 19/27 cm Stair width: 106 cm
2nd run: 16 (2+12+2) steps 18-19/28 cm Stair width: 119 cm
In 1748, the ninth year of Pope Benedikt XIV's rule, this house was built with royal funds. The cornerstone was laid by Otto Philipp Vierdung von Hartung, doctor of medicine and privy councilor in Eichstätt. It is certain that the house was built under Gabrieli's influence, who had died in the year before (1747). The details in the stairs allude to his customs, except for the balustrade, which does not match the ones we attribute to Gabrieli.
A hallway (2.82 x 11.9m) leads from the street into the courtyard. There is enough room for the stairs on its side. They are located at the back part of the house and begin with two steps leading up to the first landing.
The master stair builder used the resulting difference in height to furnish the beginning of the stairs with a small, appealing detail. Instead of leveling the differences, he emphasized them.
The posts at varying heights on the podium were connected by a handrail in the shape of an S, which ended on top of the bottommost post in a volute. This handrail motive does not appear to be heavily influenced by Baroque or Rococo intentions. In any case, one cannot find anything to attribute it to Gabrielli.
In the context Eichstatt's crafted balustrades, it is a new motive, a largely independent design, something special. The large S-curved openings and the small rounded and tapered holes in between, rule out any analogy to the forms traditionally used at the time in Eichstatt.
The creator of this banister used an ornamental form, for which a model can be found in Ingolstadt. The banister in the 'Ickstatthaus' (Ludwigstr. 5) is more richly carved, however it demonstrates the exact same crafted
curvatures. The house in Ingolstadt was built in 1746, two years before the house in Eichstätt, thus any douh over the formal relationship of the two staircases can be dismissed Th staircase in the house on Luitpoldstr 18 in Eichstätt may display forms that are typical for its time, but they f0||OVN design examples found in another town, namely Ingolstadt, instead of adhering to the local customs of Eichstätt.
This is one of the seldom cases of an import, which one could describes an enriching incursion into Eichstatt's tradition of stair building.
1746 Balustrade, drawing by A. Losch.
1748 Balustrade, drawing by ].H. Min.
Post 'beginner' at beginning and end of stair banister.
STAIR
PAGE 143
■BUster stair builder HSie resulting «l|£.ence in height to ^■bhe beginning o’ ^H|ir balustrade wstti appealing detail ,i|of level g tl jfefaces. he empha-
PAGE 144
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTÄTT
D.	houses for the church canonicate
Residenzplatz 9, 11,13, 15
Two mirrored duplex houses built for the Canons of the 'Willibaldchor.'
Proprietor: Franz Ludwig Frhr. Schenk v. Castell Master builder: Gabriel de Gabrieli Construction: 1732 Owner 1988: Domkapitel
Each house:
Straight stair with last few steps winding out,
2 access steps and corner podium,
16 steps at 18/27 cm Stair width: 134 cm
The four residential buildings were planned as a building group, specifically two duplexes as counterparts to each other. Thus, they can be discussed together, especially since their stairs resemble each other down to the last detail. These are the courts built for the church canons that were designed as a group to represent the eastern façade of the Residenzplatz.
Their location and their size were meticulously planned. Evidently, it was Gabrieli's idea to create an urban space featuring a system of distinctive quality.
After 1730, the eastern side of the square was supposed to be renewed. Up until then, the gigantic granary was the building that framed that edge of the square. Gabrieli now placed the four houses for the church canons in front of the huge building, making sure that the length of their row equaled that of the granary.
If one compares these two duplexes with the other residences for cathedral canons in Eichstätt at the time, their architectural restraint is remarkable. They represent urban components, instead of domiciles for noblemen of the church.
There are no spacious entrances, and there are also no elaborate stairwells. The entrance hall, measuring a width of 207 cm in each of the four buildings, leads to a room facing the courtyard, comparable to a vestibule, from which a modest staircase on the side leads upstairs. The entrance hall and the vestibule together form an entrée that is no greater than 32 m2. The stairs begin with two steps in front of a podium; the mostly straight flight of stairs with sixteen steps winds out at the end. The flight width is 134 cm. In houses number 11 and 13, the steps measure 18-18.5 cm / 26.5-27 cm.
As outward appearances suggest, the houses are of standard design with mirror-image floor plans. They have a
floor area of 14.5 m to 15.5 m length in the front times 12.7 m depth, which makes 184 m2 to 197 m2 for each of the two full stories. Additionally, the courtyard measures approximately 109 m2.
These dimensions can hardly be described as humble and compete with many of the town houses in Eichstätt, but they cannot be compared to the much greater courts for the cathedral canons.
The cathedral canons in Eichstätt were housed in representative palaces that corresponded to their individuality.
They purchased their domiciles themselves and had the buildings constructed according to their wishes. Thus, one sees the personality of the proprietor reflected in the construction.
The courts for the canonicate, however, were commissioned by the bishop. The anonymous equality of the residents is manifested in the façade of their domiciles.	.■
Friedrich Mielke, "Residenzplatz 9, 11, 13, 15/ Treppen in Eichstätt (1989), 228.

STAIR
PAGE 145
there are no spacious entry passages or exuberant staircases
Residenzplatz 9, 11, 13, 15: ground floor plans, G. de Gabrieli, 1732, after a survey by the Eichstätt planning department.
slhedral and ince-Bishop'sc rsidence. Ü,
granary and houses for t$e church canonicate, residenzplatz 9, 11,
Residenzplatz
1775 Sketch for a surve^Hhe squari
Altmühlbogen
H. Pedettäpodek 1
jjreatiryjs,
¡jbhitekursammlunj
Residenzplatz, current layout.
PAGE 146
STAIR - 7. 1986 SCALALOGY - STAIRS IN EICHSTATT
The houses for the canonicate were designed to form the East elevation of the Residenzplatz.
Their dimensions are not considered minute, they compete with many of the homes in Eichstätt, but hold no comparison with the much more generously sized courts of the cathedral canons.
The anonymous equality of its inhabitants is reflected in the exterior facade of their homes
» -*% t
PAGE 147
STAIR
STAIR
PAGE 149
PAGE 150
STAIR
STAIR
PAGE 151
STAIR




PAGE 152
Preface
The images intthis book reveal an enthusiastic attitude to a self-motivated task, a love for 'his' Viennese stairs^ In light and in shadow, Peter Tolzer scans the room, identifies relationships, wnich are barely visible to ^he distracted stair user, and caresses every detail withjhis camera. The work, assambtedover a whole decade, is more than a §Hi^ase , book, it is a tribute to the stejrd'of™ /
Vienna. In this sense, the ba mirror image of Viennese socie' excellence, its past and present, famous citizens and people who rems rN„ unknown, and no less its industrious inhabitants, its artists and craftsmen.
As diverse as the life of this city on th Danube, as diverse are the stairs it offers in its houses.
The weight of building activity at the time lies within the late Classicism, which was named 'Biedermeier' in Vienna. It is an epoch from which an abundance of charming bourgeois residences are preserved.
Irich Mielke, "Vorwort," Scalalogia > 5: Treppen in Wien (1990), 9-10.
STAIR
PAGE 153
Numerous examples of 'stair eyes' (Treppenaugen) can be found in Vienna. The openings are often so large that it would be possible to retrofit an elevator in their place. The construction dates for these houses range from 1830 to 1913.
PAGE 154
STAIR
stair 'eyes' in Vienna
1876-1877 Veithgasse 11 / Rennweg 7, A. Stein.
1903 Untere Augartenstrasse 36, 0. Luckeneder / C. Miserowsky.
1905 Altgasse 27 / Lainzer Straße 3-5, E. Reitmann
1900 Mariahilfer Giirtel 1, architect unknown.
1926 Antonigasse 100, social housing, E. Leischner.
1902-1904 Berggasse 41-43 / Rossauer Lande 5-9,
K\/-\likaorlmior+ür P \/ Protoi"
STAIR
PAGE 155
the 'ey©' of the staircase
1f,e term 'stair eye' (Treppenauge) is c|osely associated to spiral, winding and multi-run staircases. The earliest tairs with a circular plan may have originated in wells.
In 3ib (Gibeon, Israel), we find a circular hole with a diameter of about 12 meters, which is said to have been dug in 1000 BC. In order to reach the water at a depth of 25 m, stairs were provided at its periphery, which follows the circular wall along a winding staircase.
The center which is surrounded by them, is an open space which allows for air and light, and it is what we may today call the 'eye' of the stair.
Since time immemorial, the triangle is a symbol identified with the Christian Trinity. However it is the circular shape which has prevailed for spiral staircases, joined in close second place by the elliptical opening, coming from Italy.
It is only in modern times and the 10th century that the opening created by the enclosing stairs, has become a tool for design. Its outline follows contemporary and fashionable forms °f ornamentation.
blot only the stairs with its sequence °f steps, and its balustrades, but also the 'eye' of the stair received a new Modern take. Master builders of
winding stairs built before the baroque were not yet ready to address the 'eye' of the stairs in design terms.
It was the 18th century, when grand and prestigious staircases turned into single-storey Freitreppen, and the space thus created became united as a grand hall, and these staircases set the impulse to produce poly-storey staircases for the 19th century.
Finally it was the epoch of the Classicism when semi-circular running figures became commonly popular.
The vertical projection of a one-storey run of stairs from entry to exit level, first tempted the decision to retain a crescent-shaped opening, an 'eye' as we know it.
1900 Hamburg, Heintzehof, architect: Hermann Krumbhaar, Hermann Eduard Heubel.
1953-1955 Berlin, Haus der Allianz AG, Doachimstaler Str 10-12, architect: A. Gunzenhauser.
1904 Hamburg, Neuer Wall 26, Kontorhaus Pincon, architect: Leon Freitag, Hermann Wurzbach.
1908 Hamburg, Gertrudenkirchhof 1, Mönckeberghaus, architect: Claus Meyer.
1956 Hamburg, Gehrckens Hof, Bei dem Neuen Krahn 2, architect: Otto Wunsch, Heinz Mollenhauer.
1990-1992 Hamburg, Heiligengeistbrücke 4, Hotel Steinberger, architect: Gerkan Marg & Partner.
Friedrich Mielke, "Das Auge der Treppe," Scalalogia Vol. 11, Collectaneen 4 (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), 44-53.
PAGE 156
STAIR
10.	1992
Scalalogy - Collected Writings (Vol. 3)
Stepping schemata Stepping line
"Stepping zone" (Steigespur)
"Table of Notation" (AufmaBtabelle)
The Laurin stair
STAIR
PAGE 157
PAGE 158
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
the typical path of a stair user
Example 1:
Steps - Lines - Fields - Areas
On the steps of frequently used stairs, the traces of the users become recognizable as abrasion. The depth of wear directly reflects the frequency of use. Each step is measurable, which points have been used more or less frequently, and which have not been used at all. From the distribution and degree of wear, the habits of the stair users climbing the particular stair, can be quantified. On each step, the most prominent spot, used by the majority of all stair users, is shown as a point.
The sum of all points on all steps of the staircase marks the 'typical path of the stair user.'
In practice, taking inventory does produce some difficulties in the sense that people do not tend to climb stairs mechanically or evenly. Moreover, the traces measured are the product of a multitude of different individuals. Therefore, the different contributions to this wear can be no different than individual.
This example shows a straight stair set between walls, without handrails.
It belongs to a fort on the island of Malta, measures 1.05 m in width, and has 25 steps, with a slope ratio of 25-27 cm / 28 cm (rise / run).
The unusual inclination can be explained by its time of construction in 1610. For the last 370-odd years, the staircase has been in use continuously. On this stair, the level of abrasion was not documented fully step-by-step, but instead the deepest point was marked.
The representation (Fig. 1) shows-apart from the first three and the very last step - a regular alternation of points with the strongest wear, which we call track points (Spurpunkte).
If we now combine these track points by straight lines (pace or stepping lines), then the systematic change of steps from left to right to left, etc. becomes more apparent.
The 'stepping marks' are obtained by connecting all track points of the right, and all track points of the left side of the run, This creates a limit within which the majority of stair users would usually climb the stairs.
With the two lines of stepping marks left and right, a field is described which is called the stepping field (Steigefeld)
The unilateral narrowing down of this field at the beginning of the stair indicates that this stair was always approached from the side, and more precisely, that the majority of users commenced their ascent from one single point on this stair which measures less than one meter in width
Furthermore it becomes evident that most users first stepped on the stairs with their left foot. Exiting the stairs, the stepping field narrows down, once more to one single point, but here located less far-right as the entrance point.
Friedrich Mielke, "Der übliche Weg der Benutzer einer Treppe," Collectaneen - Scalalogia -Schriften zur Treppenforschung, Vol. /, (Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985), 131-132.
Fig.'l: Marsaxlokk (Malta), Fort St. Lucian, 1610, Staircase from 1st to 2nd loorl 25 steps: 25-27/28 cm; stair widths 105 cm, Mesurement F. Mielke 1.1982.
STAIR
PAGE 159
Fxa^P16 „
Abrasion - Stepping area -Stepping Field
fte points measured in this example ^ere taken from the beginning of . jbie wear, to the deepest point to ^eend of visible wear on each step, Iways starting from the side of the stair stringer. In this way, alongside determining the deepest wear points, we also determine the stepping field parked by stair users, independent of the frequency of use.
The stepping range is indicated in Figure 2 on the front edge of each step with short dashes, as well as a fine grid pattern. We call it the stepping area -not to be confused with the narrower stepping field which is limited to strong stepping traces.
The evaluation of these notations reveals that the traces left on the two runs are not identical. Apparently stair users climb stairs differently floor-byfloor. Even in the near-identical flights of each run there are significant differences.
In the first flight of stairs, the width decreases continuously. It reduces from a maximum of 10 cm height in the first run, to about 7 cm in the second run, to a minimum of 5 cm in the third run. As a consequence, all stepping points shift in their axis closer to the stair stringer. However, the axis for the stepping field does not correspond to this shift, being located a little closer (4-6 cm) towards the wall on all three runs
In the second run, the climbing behavior of the stair users has remarkably changed. In the first run we find a regular alternation between left and right stepping points, which C|,eates a continuous stepping line, nowevei in the second run the s,ePping field has so drastically decreased that it is hard to distinguish a left-right change of steps.
The foot is placed more or less in front of the other, rather than side-by-side.
In order to illustrate this stepping behavior, the stepping areas and stepping fields are marked in III.3. Much more visibly than in III.2, the stepping fields become increasingly smaller and are only minimally influenced by the stepping areas.
Any increase in width of the stepping field is only visible in a shorter sequence of steps. It seems that the landing platforms force the stair user into a narrow track.
correlating stepping tracks and the stepping line, stepping field and stepping area, as well as the axes measured, all provide diverse insights relating to the typical path of a stair user.
Without being able to anticipate any further conclusions, it is still safe to say that the use of stepping points and its
Friedrich Mielke, "Der übliche Weg der Benutzer einer Treppe," Collectaneen - Scalalogia -Schriften zur Treppenforschung, Vol. I, (Schrenk-Verlag, 1985), 131-132.
Mid 18th century Stepping area demarcation, Michelstadt winery, three-run wooden stair. Notation by members of the Society for Stair Research (Scalalogy), 2 Dune, 1984.

PAGE 160	STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
The Institute for StairResearch (Arbeitstelle für Trepjpenforschung), has preferred to seek alternative methods of
identifying the steppi&gfc>ehavföfs_of different stair users.®) achieve this, the following conditions wüst first be met:
a.	All stairs occurrinffpn the practice of _ stair construction mpst be considered.
b.	The stairs examifled should ideally have been used b\|fthe largest possible } variety of people dfSlwh genders.
c.	The traces leftfoy the people mentioned in b) are to be measured on each step of the ttMfcexamined.
All these conditions can only be met by studying old stairs. Their signs of wear allow us to examine the habits of an innumerable amount of stair users. The deepest parts of the abrasion mark the areas most preferably used by the majority of people.
Friedrich Mielke, "Der übliche Weg der Benu:
einer Treppe," Collectaneen - Scalalogia -Schriften zur Treppenforschung, Volume I, (Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985), 132
STAIR
PAGE 161
lable °f measurement:
riser heights and stair abrasion
Table of measurement: riser heights and wear.
Step height
___ Minimum tread
width
___ Step wear/
abrasion
"The only prerequisite for measurement is that the stairs show clear traces of use. The stepping behaviour of an innumerable amount of users can be measured from this abrasion. The deepest parts of the wear mark the preferred route taken by most people. The extent of abrasion diminishes along the sides, corresponding to the intensity of use which is also reduced in these parts."
Town church (Stadtkirche) Michelstadt: west facade.
PAGE 162
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
stepping path, stepping points, stepping line, stepping field, stepping area
Spiral staircase in Michelstadt Parish Church
Right-turn spiral staircase located in the tower.
Diameter: 175 cm
Running width: 80 cm
70 steps at an average riser of 20 cm
Tread min. 7 cm, max. 37 cm
Constructed: 1507
Notations by: CP Carlsen, G. Smolibowski,
N. Stannek, 2 June, 1984.
The difference in inclination of the steps indicates that this spiral staircase was built in three stages, which most likely relate directly to progress of the church tower, whose construction began in 1507. The first 39 steps all have the same riser height. Relatively small differences of up to 0.5 cm, with an absolute maximum difference of
2.0	cm remain in the normal range considered for construction tolerances.
The average riser is measured at 20 cm. From the 40th to the 54th step, the inclination as well as individual riser differences vary more than what was measured in the first section. The steps vary between a minimum height of 21.5 cm and a maximum height of 25.5 cm. The absolute difference is therefore 4 cm. The relative difference (from one step to the next) is 3 cm max (steps 40-41) and 0.5 cm minimum (steps 44-47). The average height of these 15 steps measures 23.2 cm, therefore, about 3 cm more than the average of all steps from the first construction phase.
In order to clearly demonstrate the climbing habits of the stair users of this particular spiral staircase, the three measurements taken on each tread were notated in such a way as if one was dealing with a straight stair.
This way a diagram is created, in which the stair width reflects reality, but the distance between steps (treads) can be reduced graphically.
Fig 2: Demarcation of step abrasion.
It has been proven that this simplification is both practical and highly instructive. Firstly we extract from this table of notations ("AufmaB-Tabelle") (see fig. 1) the beginning and end of the 'wear' visible on each tread. These data are shown in fig. 2, where the extent of wear is indicated by short vertical lines.
The deepest point on the stair is best illustrated by a dot. This is where most users have left their mark, which is why we call this the tracking point (Spurpunkt). In general, each step has only one tracking point. On a busy stair with high frequency in both directions though, and especially on very wide stairs, several points may occur on the same tread.
Fig 3: The typical path of a stair user, stepping area, alternate stepping points, stepping line.
The region between the two vertical lines more or less indicates the area where most use and wear has occurred. We call this the stepping area (Steige-Bereich). It is shown in fig 5 as a hatched pattern, beyond which the cross-hatched pattern indicates the stepping area.
The distance of the tracking points to the enclosing wall is remarkably consistent on this stair (fig. 2 and 3). Apart from two slightly unclear, if not atypical points, a rather stereotypical change from left to right to left to right and so on, is noted. This means that from its construction in 1507 to now, over the last 475 years, the majority of stair users has literally followed in
STAIR
PAGE 163
Fig 4: Stepping schemata showing stepping area, Typical path of a stair user, stepping architectural line and actual stepping line in a schemata including stepping area and stepping field.	stepping zone.
Lauf Unie
= Mittellinie ----
des Treppenlaufes
------------0—
Abb.5 (rechts) Stufenschema mit Steige-Bereich ~=~-~	=
Steige-Feld
The two stepping tracks limit the overall stepping field. It describes the zone on the sum of all steps which was preferably climbed by the majority of stair users. It is distinguished from the stepping-area which also includes less trafficked zones.
the footsteps its predecessors, always choosing the same path, and the same stepping pattern.
To conclude, laws must be in place which constrain the stair user into a certain mode of climbing.
However, at this point in time we are unaware as to why steps are worn down in this fashion. There are not
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Wendeltreppe 'n Turm der Stadtkirche von Michelstadt (Odenwald)", Scalalogia Volume 6, Collectaneen T 1992, p. 52-59
enough comparables available in order to determine if this irregularity in the 'stepping point' sequence is the result of a causality that can be generalized..
At least it can be confirmed with conviction, that the 'stepping points' provide a suitable tool for making generous assumptions, which concern both the idiosyncrasy of the staircase in question as well as characteristic
NOTE: This stair was previously discussed in Collectaneen 1 : Friedrich Mielke, Scalalogia,
Vol. 1, Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985, p. 134/135. It was later revisited in Collectaneen 3, with new extended stair measurements, drawings and a new description / interpretation.
behavior as shown by the stair users. The interpretation of these stepping points forms one of the most important tasks pursued within the context of scalalogical investigation.
PAGE 164
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL 3)
stepping zone: further analysis
In order to represent the stepping behavior of stair users, we have chosen the graphic as illustrated in figs. 1-4, ignoring all references to the circular plan of a spiral stair or the trapezoidal nature of its steps. However, in order to attain a more realistic image, it is now necessary to transfer the gathered information onto a running figure more akin to the spiral staircase.
This will explain several, if not all of the irregularities encountered. Nevertheless, it remains problematic to draw limits for the stepping field. An irregular change of stepping points between left and right, does not always reveal which point belongs to the left and which point to the right stepping track.
Fig. 5 indicates steps 1 to 15, fig. 6 shows steps 16 to 30 of the spiral stair. It becomes evident that the stepping area is only approximately concentric in relation to the running line.
Meanwhile in the second spiral, the stepping area as well as the 'stepping field' approximate an elliptical shape. Also, the elliptical axes intersect off-center instead of central to the newel post. One is tempted to liken these curves to the ones described by planetary constellations.
The stepping field is not consistent in width.
It is only between steps 6 to 20 that the boundaries are near-parallel, describing a circle concentric to the spiral stair. The steps prior and after this segment show a decrease in the stepping field.
Overall the widths vary between a maximum of 25 cm and a minimum of only 8 cm.
It can be assumed that this difference in width is not arbitrary. However, it is unfortunate that at this point we do not know the cause of it.
Fig 5: Steps 1-15 on a spiral, indicating stepping area.
I
Fig 6: Steps 15-30 on a spiral, indicating stepping area.
Steige-Bereich
Steige-Feld
Spurpunkt
Steige-Bereich
Steige-Feld
Spurpunkt
Steige-Linie
Friedrich Mielke, "Der übliche Weg der Benutzer einer Treppe," Collectaneen - Scalalogia -Schriften zur Treppenforschung, Vol 1, (Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985) 135.
(The information on this page is taken from the first of two studies of this stair, published in Collectaneen 1. This stair was revisited in Collectaneen 3, which includes new measurements, drawings and a more detailed descriptio > see previous page.)
STAIR
PAGE 165
PAGE 166
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
the laurin stair, and mielke's adaptation: activating an "elastic" response
The history of the staircase began with a notch in a tree trunk. It gives hold to the foot, protects it from sliding, ensures ascent and descent. It safeguards climbing. This is the most important thing. The distances between the steps are of lesser importance here. Within the range of human strides this length varies.
An exact uniformity of steps in height and appearance can hardly ever be found up until the Renaissance. This had reasons which cannot be explained by a lack of perfection.
The degree of accuracy in the workmanship is a strong indicator of the importance ascribed to the building component in question. If stairs have been built inaccurately for centuries, it proves that they had been classified rather low down in the hierarchy of architectural valuables.
But there was another motive which promoted the production of steps of unequal sizes. It is rooted in the empirical reactions of stair users.
If an event can be predicted and calculated up front, little attention is required when it happens. A certain automation of actions sets in, because the level of surprise is expected to be very low. Nevertheless, should a surprise moment occur, then the smallest irregularity is sufficient to provoke an accident.
At the same time, stereotypically similar stepping inclinations dull the user's attention, and their responsiveness diminishes. If, however, one must climb stairs made of irregular steps, attention levels are heightened step-by-step in order to evaluate possible threats.
Here, too, danger creates an environment for safety, in the sense that it requires 'elastic' reactions.
To transfer such a simple, historically proven safety technique onto today's stairs, seems impossible. Modern man has become a slave to precision work and automation. Contemporary understanding of stair construction requires the stair to be as dimensionally accurate as possible.
Even the human step has become regulated. The model for it probably originates in the pace set by the infantry.
At the same time in the late 17th century, when this pace was rediscovered and exercised in the Prussian army, the French engineer, architect and mathematician François Blondel, in his book Cours d'architecture published in 1675-1683, fixed the rising step at two French feet, which equates to 65cm.
In the 20th century, a staircase built in accordance with building regulations and international standardization must not have any irregular step heights. Moreover, the treads must all be the same depth.
Would any kind of 'archaic chaos' in the form of adding uneven heights now even be conceivable? Is it conceivable and could it be executed? Well, as absurd as it seems, it is not.
Year after year, thousands of tourists flock to ancient and medieval buildings in many countries. The most neglected paths can never be too steep, all are being climbed and visited, and, strangely, hardly ever a person comes to harm. All visitors are aware of any imminent danger and therefore activate their reactions accordingly.
In conclusion, even in the 20th century, these human experiences, gained over thousands of years, are valuable and effective.
Nevertheless, any public regulato body would decline the construct' of an imprecise stepping sequence0 in a public building.
One must ask if, in this context compromises are possible. We' already have some answers. Almost at the same time, two people, one a stair specialist and the other, an' artist, were concerned with the subject of differential inclination and slope ratios.
As an expert, the internationally known stair builder Willibald Mannes published "Ideas of Stairs of Various Kinds" (Ideen von Treppen verschiedenster Art) in his book Stair Sketches (Treppen-Skizzen, Stuttgart, 1990). These are designs of stairs with either progressive or regressive inclinations.
In the same year, the sculptor Werner Baumler, called Laurin, invented a stair whose steps successively increase and decrease in riser height. In elevation, this creates a line that can be likened to a flat S-curve.
With these inventions, the two designers have resolved the archetypes of the stepping tree and the ladder, whose steps have always adhered to a straight line, with the result that at their beginning and end they produce a 'kink' in the stepping path.
From the horizontal plane at the lower level, the flight of stairs abruptly turns into a slope, then again just as abruptly turns into the horizontal upper level.
These rugged transitions could be avoided if one starts the stepping path with very shallow riser heights, increasing in small increments, and then equally decreasing riser heights to provide a smooth transition to planar again.

STAIR	PAGE 167
^¡|e progression and decrease in Ber heights requires difference, it Les follow a uniform system. The adients are not accidental or even arbitrary- The increase and decrease in (1,0 riser heights corresponds with l_aurin to an adequate change of tread depths (Fig. 1). The designer closely follows Blondel's formula 2R + T = 65 crn, to obtain a certain symmetry. The difference in riser heights becomes absorbed by adjusting the depths of treads, in order to remain close to the
formula.
However, once the tread is of sufficient depth/ and in order to allow the stair user to step pro- and regressively without falling into a potentially dangerous monotony, it is appropriate to modify Baumler's idea.
A first variant is proposed by the Centre for Stair Research. It maintains all treads of one flight at the same depth. This, combined with differential riser heights, results in challenging the stair user with changing lengths of step, which activates their reactions.
The basic premise of this thought is that, when climbing a stair, the length of step is more essential than the effort of shifting one's weight up or down the stairs.
If the principle of the Laurin stairs -regardless of its incompatibility with current standards - can be accepted as a possibility, the range of possibilities in stair construction can be enriched. The traditional designs certainly do not become superfluous, but they also do not remain sacrosanct.
Mielke's modification of the Laurin stair, built in his own garden: all tread depths remain the same, only the height of each riser changes gradually (imagine a frozen escalator). Mielke's adaptation is based on the idea that, paradoxically, changing only one aspect of the stair (the height) has a greater destabilizing effect on the user's attention than changing both (height and depth).
■Wtich Mielke, Scalalogia Volume 6, jp ectaneen 3, 1992, "Laurin-Treppe," 88-91.

PAGE 168
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL 3)
MIELKE-LAURIN STAIR
Mielke's adaptation of the Laurin stair. The continuity of the tread depths combined with the differentiation of the riser heights "results in challenging the stair user with changing lengths of step, which activates1000 mm their reactions. The basic premise of this thought is that, when climbing a stair, the length of step is more essential than the effort of shifting one's weight up or down the stairs." (Redrawn by AMO, Dune 2013.)
STAIR
PAGE 169
Wood Risers and Treads
Parameters:
Number of risers: 18
Number of treads: 18
Riser and tread length: 1570mm
Riser width x height: 2 x (20 x 20 mm, 20 x 40 mm,
20 x 60 mm, 20 x 80 mm, 20 x 100 mm, 20 x 120
mm, 20 x 140 mm, 20 x 160 mm), 20 x 130 mm,
20 x 180 mm
Tread width x height: 16 x (143.5 x 20 mm), 2 x (717.5 x 20 mm = 5 x (143.5 x 20 mm))
STAIR
PAGE 171
notation sheets (erfassungsbögen)
One astounding phenomenon throughout art and architectural history is that the stairs often remain unmentioned in literature. It seems that, while taking ¡nventory of a historic building, the stairs generally remained unnoticed.
■^e technical terms are hardly known.
Out of necessity they become replaced by each writer's own creations, which consequently are as diverse as its authors. None of the relevant reference books on the art of stair construction seem to have been read or studied.
The fact that stair construction is an art, is indeed noted once in a while, but ibe fact that this art has at its very foundation a solid craft, is being ignored.
This phenomenon would be unimaginable if the stair was an established subject withing academic education.
The above résumé is necessary, not to reveal any shortcomings, but to suggest solutions. In fact, the entire Manual for Stair Research (Handbuch derTreppenkunde) is dedicated to this purpose. But the knowledge of vocabulary will remain of little use, unless the syntax is mastered.
That is why I started even before 1980 to systematize the subject of stairs, to list all of their details and record the outcome on these questionnaires.
The goal is to capture all of the essential characteristics for each stair type, using 'shorthand', so to speak.
Over the years, the system has been improved several times, the critique of some very knowledgeable colleagues having been very helpful in this process. The important thing is to fix the most important data in such a way that they become comparable with data of other stairs.
The basic scientific principle is based on the comparability of these values.
PAGE 172
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
geradarmige treppe
straight stairs
STAIR
PAGE 173
The A4 sheet is set up so that it fits crosswise in a registry box. The objects are sorted by location, so the locality must be logged on the side of the sheet top right.
The top two rows include details relating to OBJECT and ADDRESS and should be filled out first, so that any confusion regarding the objects is no longer possible.
The information about the CLIENT, BUILDER and CONSTRUCTION TIME are most reliably found from a scientific source. The MATERIAL of the stairs can be most easily identified with wood, stone or metal. It is desirable, however, to include more detailed information, such as oak or softwood, granite, limestone or sandstone, wrought iron, cast iron, bronze, or similar.
For the STAIR TYPE it is sufficient at this point to include a sketch of the running figure, as shown in the types catalogue. For the notation of number-of-steps, inclination ratio and running width, the subdivision of the stair RUNS into arms, has proven useful. For each flight of stairs, the number of steps, the inclination ratio and the running width must be determined separately.
The riser (height of the step) is measured from the top of the step to the top of the next step, in a place where the edge has not been worn away from use. In general, that is at the very end of a step - left or right. The stair tread (depth) is measured horizontally from the front edge.
PAGE 174
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
aussentreppe freitreppe gartentreppe
exterior stairs, free stairs, garden stairs
™	n«n«T	'



STAIR
PAGE 175
Exterior stairs differentiate themselves from 'free stairs' by their architectural relationship with the building to which they belong.
Freitreppen are always an inherent part of an architectural composition. Exterior stairs are not; they could be attached to any random part of the building or taken away completely, without compromising the façade. The character of the house is not influenced by exterior stairs.
The term free stairs refers to the free space that surrounds the steps.
The space, however, is not required to be outdoors; it can also be in a courtyard, a hall, a passageway or another space that is a part of the building interior.
The terms free stairs and interior stairs do not constitute opposites. They can be typo-logically equal. Should this be the case, and it concerns a straight run or a spiral flight figure, one should use the designated data sheet for such stairs.
Garden stairs are design elements in a free space, a garden or a park. They are independent components, even if their position is defined by the visual relation to a construction in the distance.
PAGE 176
STAIR - 10. 1992 SCALALOGY - COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 3)
Wendeltreppe
spiral staircase
STAIR
PAGE 177
Producing a base sketch may not be necessary in most cases, if one uses the lines LOCATION and ENCLOSURE (GEHÄUSE) in the right way.
Spiral staircases are often located in a tower, and the outer shape in floor plan does not always coincide with the inner outline of the tower walls. For example, there are square towers, within which the enclosing stair walls are circular. In this case, in the line that says ENCLOSURE, outer, one needs to tick the far right box, and in the line below for ENCLOSURE, inner, the second box from the left. In this way, the relationship between the tower in plan, and the stairs in plan, can be notated quickly and clearly.
If we are dealing with a free standing stair tower, independent of its outside wall, semi- or wholly included within the plan of the building, it is sufficient to indicate with a line, where and how the exterior wall connects with the tower. For spiral staircases, which are free-standing in space, the first row of floor plans becomes redundant.
Next, the overall diameter of the spiral staircase needs to be registered. Precision work is not to be expected. It is therefore advisable to take several measurements at different heights and then to accept the most common dimensions. The stair width is entered in the line RUN. The diameter of the SPINDLE is noted at the bottom left.
Thus the results produce the following control formula:
2 x stair width + spindle diameter = total diameter.
PAGE 178
STAIR
11.	1992
Stairs in Ingolstad
Objects & stair terminology Mielke's stair Notation forms
STAIR
PAGE 179
Friedrich Mielke Christian Grayer
Treppen in Ingolstadt
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung Band VII
PAGE 180
STAIR-11. 1992 STAIRS IN INGOLSTADT
STAIR
PAGE 181
PAGE 182
STAIR - 11. 1992 STAIRS IN INGOLSTADT
treppen in Ingolstadt: a comparative study
The origins of this book go back to 1986, when scalalogy temporarily became a specialist teaching module at the Catholic University of Eichstätt.
In this context, we primarily looked at local stairs, but very soon it became evident that an assessment of Eichstätt stairs, is only complete if one is aware of its environ, if you know how to procure the stairs of the near and far are.
So I sought to create three groups of students, working respectively in Eichstätt, in Weißenburg and in Ingolstadt. Aside from the possibility of comparing results, these towns also represent places with three very distinguished past, one being a bishop's residence, the next being a Free Imperial town, and finally the seat of nobility, or a fortified town.
From these three examples we try to establish whether a localized culture of stairbuilding exists, or whether techniques of stairbuilding have been so widespread that local idiosyncrasies are not recognizable. Both technical and creative relationships are to be expected between the stairs and these three places, insofar as they are only 40 km away from each other.
Even the first stocktaking revealed that each town contained stairs with its own distinctive character. The image of any stair, not further identified, could almost certainly be associated with one of the places after analysis.
The visual understanding is furthered by analytical inventory. In particular, the dimensions are instructive. Each of the historic towns developed its own system of weights and measures. Eichstätt presumably counted with
the 'Mainz foot' which measured 29.15 cm, and Ingolstadt adhered to the 'Bavarian shoe' of 29.186 cm, which was binding since the middle of the 18th century.
Since the craftsmen had to conform with local customs and footages, it also means that the stairs were of different sizes, which are now measured in centimeters. '1-inch thick' board had a 24.29 mm thickness in Eichstätt, and a 24.32 mm thickness in Ingolstadt.
From these variables alone, we can deduct in which system the measurement was created.
The reader should not expect to find local historical descriptions in this text. These can be found in all the relevant works.
My description is limited primarily to the respective stairs and their individual traits, and secondly attempts to make comparisons that look beyond the borders of these cities.
This reduit is exceptionally generous. The stairs are considerably wider than those of the other fortifications. The stairs measure 26.2 cm width, and the risers have a height of only 15 cm. Even the profiling of its leading edge is formally richer than usual.
All this must have a reason, which we find in the time when the reduit was extended.
This was not only a construction with the purpose of a state fortress for Ingolstadt, but it also had the task to house the Royal Bavarian family and protect its crown jewels in case of war.
The Prince and his court should be able to reside here - maybe even for a long time. They could not be expected to have the same basic facilities as the military.
The desire to provide comfort can be seen, even after 160 years, in the design of the stairs.
Friedrich Mielke, Scalalogia Volume 7, Treppen in Ingolstadt, 1992,"Vorwort," 7-10.
1875 1886 (stair) i Am Stein 1
Commercial and residential: straight
wooden stair turninQa, center, vase-shaped balusters (Dodcen) 1
1909
Am Stein 3
Commercial and residential: straight ' wooden stair with two runs and a turning I landing, upper part with, lower part with^fl stringers: goose-neck"! balusters on the lower levels, baluster posts 1 (Traljen) on the upper- 1 most run.
1828-1841 An der Donaulande
Reduit Tilly. Client: King Ludwig I; architect: Leo v. Klenze. West Stair? Left-turning spiral stair
with stone treads. >
STAIR
DollstraBe 5
Commercial and residential; client, master builder, and construction date unknown. Straight single-run wooden stair with stringers and baluster posts (Traljen).
1840
FriedhofstraOe 41/2
Client: King Ludwig I; architect: Leo v. Klenze. Northest Tower: leftturning spiral staircase with stone treads.
Harderstraße 5
Monastery, Gnadenthal: 5th main building, first upper storey wooden balustrade with baluster posts (Traljen).
PAGE 183
1838-1843
Auf der Schanz 45
Kavalier Hepp; dient: King Ludwig I; architect: Leo v. Klenze. First west-stair: left-turning Spiral stair with stone treads.
Fortifications are primarily non-residential buildings such as factories and bridges. They are expected to comply with an extreme level of functionality.
If an artist, such as Albrecht Durer, designed extensive defense systems, then it was not out of a disposition towards war. The task for him was to associate the useful with the beautiful. Regularity and systemization were the means by which this synthesis should be effected. For centuries, this view determined the scope in military construction.
The fortifications in Ingolstadt contain stairs of a truly monumental character. This good sense for a simplicity in form and for the right proportions created stair towers, which can be described as classical, both in its interior and exterior presentation.
1565
Hallstraße 2
Altes Schloß, Proviantmagazin, today: Stadtbibliothek Bauherr Herzog Ludwig II., der Strenge Constructed: presumably second half of 13th century Right-turning spiral staircase made of bricks.
1898
Goldknopfgasse 2
Commercial and residential: straight two-run stair with stringers, turning landing and baluster posts (Traljen).
The balustrade Is always the most expressive element, its details deserve to be honored. Firstly, the strong 'beginners' post is remarkable. It has a strong-edged base and headpiece. Between them stands a thick column, which looks very 'baroque.' Also, the solid, symmetrical handrail of 48 mm width, benefits from the baroque style. Relating to this group are curved components (Krümmlinge) on the landings. In an elegant, flawless curve they lead from one flight of stairs, to the next.
The 'Traljen' balusters are petite. They also have a strong base, but naturally smaller than the commencing 'beginner'. These 'Traljen' are masterpieces of a master woodworker, pieces of jewelry in stairbuilding terms, whose diversity of ideas and accuracy of execution has rarely been matched.
1630, 1834, 1877
(Main staircase): HarderstraBe 6
Straight three-run stair with two additional steps, oak, ornamental balustrade.
HarderstraBe 11
Commercial and residential: left-winding wooden stair with stringers and baluster posts (Traljen).
PAGE 184
STAIR - 11. 1992 STAIRS IN INGOLSTADT
1746, alteration 1982 LudwigstraBe 5
Commercial and residential Ickstatthaus: straight two-run oak stair with turning landing and ornamental balustrade.
LudwigstraBe 7
Commercial and residential: straight two-run wooden stair with turning landing wooden balustrade.
1819,1902 MoritzstraBe 1
Commercial and residential: straight two-run wooden stair with turning platform and gooseneck railing.
1885
MoritzstraBe 3
Commercial and residential: left-turning wooden stair with stringers and baluster posts.
1773
MauthstraBe 10
Office: straight three
run wooden stair vS; stringers and corner tendings, ornamental balustrade. a
1773
MoritzstraBe 19
Residential and -*• pharmacy: straight two-
run wnnHan	...
'-'-«■yiilXVYÖ
run wooden stair with tg
1 wiin
Stringers and turning landing, ornamental 1 balustrade.
1709? renovated 1980 NeubaustraBe 2
Previously cleric seminary, "Tillyhaus": straight two-run stone stair with turning landing, no balustrade.
1732-1736 NeubaustraBe 3
Civic hall Maria de Viktoria, stairs to the organ: straight two-run oak stairs with one step on the Intermittent turning landing, balustrade.
1899-1901 NeubaustraBe 8
Court building: straight three-run stair with stone wedge-steps and two turning landings end cast iron orna- a mental balustrade, ’i
1418-1432 Paradeplatz 4
Neues Schloß, client: duke Ludwig der Gebartete. First main staircase, 1677. Straight two-run stair made from Solnhof limestone, with a turning landing and solid central wall.
Noteworthy are the shallow risers between 11 cm to just 13 cm in height, the likes of which were only ever created for high-ranking personalities. Should they want to climb the stairs on foot, they could not be seen to be assisted. Should they prefer to be carried up, the inclination must not be too steep so as not to tilt backwards. Even if they decided to ride up the stairs on horseback, this was Indeed possible, even if the smooth limestone may have caused some trouble for the horses.
1418-1432 Paradeplatz 4
New chateau, main building, northern side stair; right-turning spiral staircase made from j stone.
1368
Paradeplatz 4
New chateau, jk 'Feldkirchen' gate, right-turning wooden spiral staircase.;

STAIR
PAGE 185
1434, 1833 Goldknopfgasse 7
Previously a high school.
The 'beginner' carved into an S-curve, shows its origins in the form of two C-curves in opposite directions. However, its creator was not quite familiar with the ornamentation of his time. The upper C-curve Is recognizable, but its base ends In an inverted volute. Also the carving of the side surfaces shows certain uncertainties In the formal language.
1380-1385
KreuzstraBe 13
Cross Gate, left-turning spiral staircase made from brick and limestone blocks on a radial arc.
1885
HarderstraBe 22
Residence, left-turning oak stair with stringers and baluster posts.
The new staircase is very elaborate, It was spared neither the best of timbers nor the craftsmanship. The only problem was a lack of space. The stair builders had to accommodate all the necessary steps in a tight plan, and on top of that make sure that the climb was easy. The risers are only 16 cm high.
1898
KupferstraBe 26
Residence, single-run flight of wooden stairs with stringers and a winding turn halfway, baluster posts.
HarderstraBe 5
Monastery Gnadenthal scala sancta, straight limestone stair: 28 steps 10/19 cm, running width 225 cm.
Sacred Stairs (Scalae sanctae) symbolize the Passion of Christ, where the faithful may commemorate It by climbing the 28 steps, on their knees. The model for all imitations is the staircase on Mount Pilatus palace In lerusalem.
1885
KupferstraBe 27
Residence, straight two-run stair with turning landing and vase-shaped baluster posts.
KupferstraBe 32
Residence, straight single-run flight of wooden stairs with ornamented baluster posts.
PAGE 186
STAIR - 11. 1992 STAIRS IN INGOLSTADT
1773
SchrannenstraBe 26
Residence and commercial, straight two-run stair with stringers and corner landing, ornamental balustrade.
1813
SchulstraBe 27,
Residence, straight two-run oak stairs with stringers and a turning landing, ornamental balustrade.
End of 15th 1507,1635
century_
u7 7'«"‘Sinqu run flight of wooden stairs turning on exit 'Emperor's stair'' ca' balustrade ,Ve<
1897
TheresienstraBe 24
Residence and commercial: straight two-run oak stair with stringers and turning landing, vase-shaped baluster posts.
1771-1773 TheresienstraBe 25
Residence and commercial, main stair: straight two-run oak stair with build-up, turning landing, protruding stringers and ornamental balustrade.
1848
TheresienstraBe 27
Residence and l commercial: straight two-run wooden stair
with stringers and a
turning landing, ornamental balustrade
SchrannenstraBe 6
Residence and commercial: straight single-run wooden stair with baluster posts.
1844
Rathausplatz 9
Commercial: straight three-run oak stair with two corner landings and baluster posts.
Schwanenhals-Stabe
'Goose-neck' is the English translation of the French term 'Col de Cygne.' It refers to the lower end of a metal baluster (barreau), which, as it passes into the stair stringer in a curve, it looks like a curved goose's neck. They are usually made out of cast iron. A small peculiarity is an iron ball at the upper end of the rod, which allows for the handrail to be attached at any inclination.
In Ingolstadt, this type railing is relatively often found. It is not clear whether this is due to a local foundry which manufactured such rods in series. Furthermore, we would like to know when the first banisters of this type were mounted, and in which time they enjoyed their height of popularity.
STAIR
PAGE 187
1882-1884
Rathausplatz 2
Master builder: Gabriel von Seidl, Munich. Right-turning wooden spiral staircase with baluster posts.
Gabriel von Seidl (1848-1913), was one of the most notable architects of his time, much sought after and very busy, and Ingolstadt can be proud to have one of his works, the town hall. Seldl's new building was intended primarily to be representational. The center of the new building is up until this day taken up by this grand winding staircase. With just two runs, it leads to all floors.
Rathausplatz 2
Master builder:
Gabriel von Seidl, Munich. Facsimile of a letter by G. Seidl addressed to the mayor of Ingolstadt, dated May 14, 1887.
'862-1884 6athausplatz 2
Master builder: Gabriel Vo"Beidl, Munich: ^^■iinding wooden «aifwith va flusters.
PAGE 188
STAIR
12.	1993
Handbook of Stairs A catalogue of Components & Types
STAIR
PAGE 189
FRIEDRICH MIELKE
Handbuch
der
Treppen-
kunde

Verlag Th. Schäfer
Extracted from Friedrich Mielke's Handläufe und Geländer, Verlag Ernst Vögel, Stamsried 2003.
PAGE 190
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
11 Vorwort 15 Einleitung
Komponenten
19 Etymologie
23 Symbolzahlen - Zahlensymbole 26 Mensch und Treppe 30 Erlebniswerte 33 Ikonologie 36 Zeremoniell 39 Grundrisse 42 Diagonalen 48 Geschosse und Stockwerke 51 Innentreppen 55 Treppenhäuser 60 Fenster 68 Treppentürme
72	Außentreppen
73	Freitreppen
76 Straßentreppen 78 Architekturtreppen 80 Gartentreppen
84	Wallfahrttreppen
85	Rampen
86	Leitern
89 Nomenklatur
Typen
Geradarmige Treppen
92 Einläufige Treppen
92 Gerade einläufig einarmige Treppen
92	Gerade einläufig zweiarmige Treppen mit Längspodest
93	Gerade einläufig zweiarmige Treppen mit Wendepodest
96	Gerade einläufig zweiarmige Treppen mit Eckpodest
97	Gerade vierarmige Treppen mit 3 Eckpodesten 97 Gerade dreiarmige Treppen mit 2 Eckpodesten
100 Gerade dreiarmige Treppen mit Eckpodesten
102 Mehrläufige Treppenanlagen
102	Gerade mehrläufige Treppenanlagen
103	Gerade zweiläufig parallele Treppenanlagen ohne Längspodeste
104	Treppenanlagen mit 2 und mehr geraden parallelen Läufen und mit Längspodesten
104	Treppenanlagen mit 2 geraden parallelen Läufen in entgegengesetzter Steigerichtung
105	Treppenanlagen mit 2 geraden symmetrisch entgegengesetzten Läufen und gemeinsamem Hauptpodest
106	Treppenanlagen mit 3 geraden Armen und 1 Podest
108	Symmetrische Treppenanlagen mit 2 Läufen zu je 2 geraden Armen und 2 Wendepodesten sowie 1 gemeinsamen Hauptpodest
109	Symmetrische Treppenanlagen mit 2 Läufen zu je 2 geraden Armen und einem Verteilerpodest
110	Gerade zweiläufige Treppenanlagen mit 3 Armen und 1 Wendepodest (Imperiale Treppe)
118 Gerade zweiläufig divergierende Treppenanlagen mit gemeinsamem Antrittsarm und Zwischenpodest
120	Gerade zweiläufige Treppenanlagen mit 4 kreuzförmig angeordneten Armen und mit einem zentralen Verteilerpodest
121	Treppenanlagen mit 3 geraden, konträr gerichteten Läufen ohne Längspodeste
121	Gerade sechsarmige Treppenanlagen mit zentralem Verteilerpodest
Teilgewendelte Treppen
122	Angewendelte, ausgewendelte, an- und ausgewendelte Treppen
123	Einläufige zwischengewepdelte Treppen
Wendeltreppen
124	Einleitung
129 Einläufige Wendeltreppen
129 Wendeltreppen mit zylindrischer Spindel auf kreisförmigem Grundriß
129 Wendeltreppen mit zylindrischer Spindel auf quadratischem Grundriß
131	Einläufige Wendeltreppen mit Auge
132	Einläufige Wendeltreppen mit Hohlspindel
134 Einläufige Wendeltreppen mit Hohlspindel und Wangensäulchen (Wangensäulen)
144 Einläufige Wendeltreppen mit offenem Spindelzylinder
147	Einläufige duozentrische Wendeltreppen
148	Einläufige duozentrisch gewendelte Treppen mit dem Grundriß einer 8
148	Einläufige trizentrisch gewendelte Treppen
149	Einläufige polyzentrisch gestaffelte Wendeltreppen
151 Mehrläufige Wendeltreppenanlagen
151 Einleitung
154 Monozentrische Typen
154 Zweiläufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen (Doppelwendeltreppen) mit zylindrischer Spindel
156	Zweiläufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit Auge
157	Zweiläufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit Hohlspindel
158	Zweiläufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit Hohlspindel und Wangensäulchen
160 Zweiläufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit offenem Spindelzylinder
162 Monozentrisch isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit drei Läufen Tripelwendeltreppen
164 Monozentrisch isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit vier Läufen Quadrupelwendeltreppen
166 Monozentrisch disparradiale und kombinierte Wendeltreppenanlagen
STAIR
PAGE 191
170 Polyzentrische Typen 170 Zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen 172 Zwei läufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen mit Zwischengang
174 Zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen Zwillingswendeltreppen
176	Verdoppelte zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen Doppel-Zwillingswendeltreppen
177	Dreiläufige Wendeltreppenanlagen mit drei Zentren Trizentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen
178	Vierläufige Wendeltreppenanlagen mit vier Zentren Quattrozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen
179	Gewundene Treppen
179	Einleitung
182 Symmetrische Treppenanlagen mit zwei gewundenen Läufen 184 Symmetrische Treppenanlagen mit einem geraden Antrittsarm und zwei gewundenen Austrittsarmen
186	Lauffiguren aus gemischten Treppentypen
187	Spiraltreppen
191	Spiraltreppen in einem Zylinder mit kegelförmigem Auge
192	Spiraltreppen in einem Kegel mit kegelförmigem Auge
193	Spiraltreppen in einem Kegel mit einem zylindrischen Auge
194	Konträr doppelläufige Spiraltreppenanlage in einem Kegel
196	Zentrierte Treppen
,196 Pyramidentreppen
197	Negative Pyramidentreppen
197	Doppelpyramidentreppen
198	Kegeltreppen
199	Negative Kegeltreppen - Hohlkegeltreppen
200	Doppelkegeltreppen
203 Einleitung
206 Geländer-Anfänger 209 Geländer-Typen
209	Vollwandige Geländer
209	Tafelgeländer
210	Geländer aus Stäben
210	Stabwerkgeländer
211	Col-de-Cygne-Geländer - Schwanenhalsgeländer
212	Omamentgeländer 214 Balustergeländer
214	Geländer aus Balusterbrettern
215	Dockengeländer
216	Traljengeländer
218	Figurengeländer
219	Zwischengeländer
Handlauf-Anfänger Handläufe
Herstellungsweisen
Excavistische Verfahren Konstruktive Verfahren Kombinierte Verfahren
Geradarmige Treppen
Holz
Stein
Wendeltreppen
Werksteine
Backsteine
Zentren
Massive Zentren Gebohrte Spindeln Hohle Zentren (Augen)
Spindeln mit Handlauf Überdeckung
Konstruktionen
Stufen-Formen
Stufen-Stime
Stufen-Höhen
Stufen-Tiefen und Auftritte
Schrittlängen
Steigungsverhältnisse
Stufen-Breiten
Geschweifte Stufen
Abgerundete Stufen
Verzogene Stufen
Distanzkerben - Distanzkurven - Distanzrinnen Stufen-Schmuck
Glossar
Literatur
Verzeichnis der Orte und Objekte Personenverzeichnis
DIN 18064 (November 1979) und DIN 18065 (Juli 1984)
Extracted from Friedrich Mielke's Handläufe und Geländer, Verlag Ernst Vögel, Stamsried 2003.
PAGE 192
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
catalogue of stair types: qerman-terminology-
»
EEEfHB
Gerade einläufig einarmige Gerade einläufig
affin®
m
Treppe
zweiarmige Treppe mit Längspodest
Treppenanlage mit 3 geraden Armen und 1 Podest
Gerade zweiläufig divergierende Treppenanlage mit gemeinsamen Antrittsarm und Zwischen-
und einem Wendepodest (Imperiale Treppe)
Gerade sechsarmige Treppenanlage mit zentralem Verteilerpodest
Gerade zweiläufig parallele Treppenanlage ohne Längspodest
Treppe mit Eckpodest
mit Wendepodest
anlage mit 2 Läufen zu je 2 geraden Armen und einem Verteilerpodest
Gerade zweiläufige Treppenanlage mit 3 Armen und einem Wendepodest (Imperiale Treppe)
Spiraltreppe in einem Kegelstumpf mit gleichbleibender Laufbreite und
Einläufige Wendeltreppe, im Brunnen oder dickwandigen Gehäuse, mit Auge
Treppentürme -Turm-Grundrisse
Wendeltreppe mit zylindrischer Spindel auf kreisförmigem Grundriß
Arment und mit einem zentralen Wendepodest
Wendeltreppen mit zylindrischer Spindel auf quadratischem Grundriß
Einläufige Wendeltreppe mit Hohlspindel und
Wanaen-säulchen
STAIR
PAGE 193
TÄ>penanla9e mit 2 Vnd 'T,geraden parallelen
ijufen und mit
-desten
Treppenanlage mit 2 geraden symmetrisch entgegen-gesetzten Läufen und gemeinsamen Hauptpodest
%
Angewendelte, und Ausgewendelte Treppen
Irische Treppenanlage mit 2 Läufen zu je 2 geraden Armen und 2 Wendepodesten, sowie 1 gemeinsamen Hauptpodest
TB)
Einläufige linksgewendelte Wendeltreppe mit Spindelzylinder
BfflM
(ff™
Treppenanlage mit 2 geraden parallelen Läufen in entgegengesetzter Steige-richtung
Treppenanlage mit 3 geraden, konträr gerichteten Läufen ohne Längspodeste
Monozentrisch disparadiale Wendeltreppe mit 2 Läufen
Einläufige poly-zentrisch gestaffelte Wendeltreppe
j^ufige rechts-Jr^'Jdelte Wendeltreppe Renern Spindelzylinder
^ricf
Monozentrisch isoradiale Wendeltreppen mit Auge, mit 2, 3, und 4 Läufen (Doppel-Trippel- und Quadrupelwendeltreppen)
Einläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlage
Melke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
Gerade dreiarmige Treppe Negative Pyramidentreppe Doppelpyramidentreppe mit 2 Eckpodesten
Zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlage -Zwillingswendeltreppe
Zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlage
Dreiläufige Wendeltreppenanlage mit 3 Zentren (Trizentrisch) - Entwurf
Vierläufige Wendeltreppenanlage mit 4 Zentren (Quattrozentrisch) -Entwurf
PAGE 194
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
catalogue of stair types: e n gHsbtra n s latiojv

Straight, single-run stair.
Straight, single-run stair with two flights of stairs and intermittent landing.
straight flights of stairs connected by one central landing.
Three-run staircase with one shared access flight, a central landing and two diverging exit flights of stairs.
Straight double-flight, single-run staircase without landings.
Straight, single-run stair with two flights of stairs and a corner landing.
ffifi
flffl
Straight single-run stair with two flights of stairs and a turning landing.
Symmetrical staircase with two runs at two flights of stairs each, with a central distributing platform landing.
Truncating spiral stair with a steadily reducing width a stair 'eye' or central void, decreasing in diameter towards the top.
Truncating spiral stair with a steadily reducing width towards the top, whilst maintaining a constant diameter of the stair 'eye' or central void.
Different stair towers in plan.
Imperial staircase: One central access flight and two diverging parallel flights of stairs, connected by a platform landing.
Imperial staircase: two parallel access flights and one central flight of stairs, connected by a platform landing.
Single-run spiral stair with an 'eye' or central void, set within a fountain or thick masonry.
®
Spiral stairs with a cylindrical newel post, set on a circular plan.
Straight six-run staircase-with a central distribution»^
landing.
mem
Symmetrical dual-run I staircase with four flights of stairs arranged in a v

Spiral stairs with a cylindrical newel post, set on a square plan.
Single-run spiral stair witM| a hollow newel and smal ^ columns along its central ^ opening.
STAIR
PAGE 195
KjSe with two or more taht parallel runs intermittent
Inga
%
Staircase with two flights or Straight flight of stairs stairs in opposite run	turning on entry or exit,
direction, sharing a central platform landing.


ïïBHî
'Scissor' staircase with two straight, independent parallel runs in opposite direction.
Single-center, dual-run spiral stairs with differing turning radii.
Staircase containing three straight independent runs in alternating directions.
Single-run, staggered spiral stair with multiple turning centers.
i \
Straight flight of stairs turning either on entry and exit.
Straight stair with three flights and two corner landings.
Dual-run spiral staircase with two symmetrical centers - twin spiral staircase.
Straight staiNwtff fouT" flights and three corner landings.
Inverse pyramid stairs.
Triple-run spiral staircase with three centers (tri-centric).
w|i'run right-turning
with a central drum with openings.
Single-center, single-radius spiral staircases with a central 'eye' opening and two, three or four runs (double, triple, or quadruple spiral staircases).
Single-run, dual-center spiral staircase
Melke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
Dual-run, dual-center spiral staircase.
Dual-run, staircase with platform.

Pyramid stairs.
Combined pyramid and inverse pyramid stairs.
Four-run spiral staircase construct with 4 centers (quattrozentric design).
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
All primitive stairs have the disadvantage of immobility: they can not be transported. This shortcoming was overcome by logs with notches, the so-called 'stepping tree' ("Steigebaum"). Although they are heavy, they could at least be moved.
Stepping trees are essentially trunks, fairly in diameter, which were made climbable by cutting in notches.
Their formation is therefore owed to the invention of axes, traceable from the Stone Age (Upper Paleolithic) at around 10,000 years BC.
Their use is directly linked to the construction of permanent residences, which had an upper level. This 'upper level' could be an elevated place to sleep, a spot in the crown of a tree, a solid floor or a flat roof.
Friedrich Mielke, "Steigebäume," Scalalogia Vol. 16: Mensch und Treppe (2008), 26.
Stepping tree model,
Mielke's Regensburg archive.
STAIR
PAGE 197
Type a
Type b
Type c
A large tree trunk provided with notches, is called a stepping tree. It is the most primitive climbing aid, and a precursor to ladders and wooden stairs. There are three types of stepping trees:
Type a: trunk with large notches.
Type b: trunk with rectangular recesses.
Type c: a trunk or several trunks, with two parallel rows of cut-out stepping grooves.
Stepping trees can be found in many countries around the world (* indicates that the stepping trees are still commonly found in the 20th century)
Africa
* Upper Volta/Niger (Gourounsi)	type a
* Mali, Dogon Tribe	type a
* Western Sudan (Mopti)	type a
Asia	
Kamchatka	type a
North China (Anyang)	type b
* Bhuthan (Himalayas)	type b
* Tibet	type a
* Pakistan, Yolk of Kalesh	type a
* New Guinea, Papua	type a
Europe	
Cyprus (Khinokitia) 5000 BC	type a
Portugal (Aljustrel), Roman mine, 1-5.C	types a, b, c
Norway (Roros, Setesdalen others), -1700	types a, b, c
Switzerland (Brione delay, Wiladingen)	type a
Americas	
Graoun Loto	type a
Canada, tribe of the Salish	type a
Friedrich Mielke, "Glossar: Steigebaum," Handbuch der Treppenkunde, (Hannover: Verlag Th. Schäfer, 1993), 296.
Friedrich Mielke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
PAGE 198
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
1233-1239 Mainz, exposed spiral staircase (Viollet-Le-Duc 1861, 326).
1372 Prague Veitsdom: southern transept, diagram showing staggered spiral staircase, Peter Parler. "Single-run, poly-centric staggered spiral staircase."
1538 Nürnberg Albrecht Dürer: "Unterweysung
der Messung mit dem Zirckel und Richtscheyt." ("Instruction for dimensioning with Circle and Protractor.")
In the beginning there was an idea, not a task, and last functionality. Spiral staircases are at the same time wonderful and whimsical constructs. One must wonder why people would have the idea to build helical, twisted stairs.
This comes to show that, what is easy to obtain, seems to be of lesser value. Therefore, an 'ordinary' straight stair rarely receives the same honor, even if it is constructed ever so carefully. If straight stairs seem 'commonplace,' one may conclude that the 'nonstraight', the 'crooked', such as the spiral staircases, must be unusual. Add to this a special technique in construction, andlks leqacyus assured.
The spiral staircase was relieved of its subordinated state and - perhaps for the first time - free-standing, when the so-called Naumburg Master, whose name we do not know, designed a stair for the cathedrals of Mainz (1233-1239) and Naumburg (-1260) which was no hidden, but demonstratively exposed to the outside.
The second, even more significant event, occurred when Peter Parler invented a staggered spiral staircase in 1372, which he exposed on the side of the cathedral in Prague. Peter Parler had raised the stairs to become a notable component in architecture.
In the following centuries the general
interest in the construction of spiral staircases was stirred, and it became common practice in the Hanseatic towns, to install richly carved spiral staircases, not just in the churches, but also in the entrance halls of merchants houses. Whoever desired to indulge, made sure to include in their homes a renowned spiral staircase.
Even kings, as well as the high and low nobility, competitively had them built in their palaces.
Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Einläufige	,
Wendeltreppen," Handbuch der Treppenkun ' (Hannnover: Th. Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 124-
STAIR
PAGE 199
ca. 1510 Königshofen church	1499 Graz castle
Drawing: 3. Reiter, B. Sauer 1979.	Measurement: K. Dänisch, F. Milowiz, H. Zellweger,
Ijwl-ruii single-center spiral staircase	TU Graz, 1964. "Dual-run spiral staircase with 2
construct with a cylindrical newel post."	symmetrical centers - twin spiral staircase."
Masterpieces in stone and wood appeared everywhere, some of which oelong to the most precious items that stair construction ever had to offer.
Spiral staircases were commonly built into towers. But there is no real interdependence between the tower and the spiral staircase.
forscalalogists, it is of course 'Rteresting to trace how and when the f® previously independent structures °f tower and stairs, have influenced each other over the course of time, ariously, the tower dominated over ®'e stairs, and in other epochs, the two Cornbined to one united construct.
1513-1529 Heilbronn
Kilians church, H.Schweiner.
"Single-run free-standing spiral staircase."

Friedrich Mielke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
PAGE 200
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
turning direction of a spiral staircase
1628 1 Jansen, "Perspectiva," Amsterdam: right-turning free-standing spiral staircase with a cylindrical newel post.
1574 Bad Mergentheim, Schloß (B. Berwart, F. Rauscher, 1889): right-turning single-run spiral staircase with a hollow newel and small columns along its central opening.
One peculiarity of the spiral staircase lies in its turning rotation (Drehrichtung). While this is the common way to describe it, it is incorrect: Neither the spiral staircase rotates around its axis, nor does the person climbing it. More appropriately one speaks of the right-or left-turn of the spiral staircase.
The direction is meaningful.
It offers, along with other components such as the stair width, riser height and types of steps, Information relating to the function of the staircase at the time of its construction. Two trends are apparent: one is defensive, the other ar^Wlectufl^ri
In order to understand the meaning one needs to consider the following: Usually, a man going into battle would take his sword in the right hand, and protect himself with his shield using his left arm. Fully equipped, should he now want to ascend a right-turning spiral stair, he would not be able to use the weapon, because the defender, protected by the central spindle of the stair, would be positioned above and on his right, 'vulnerable' side. The aggressor's shield, would not cover him properly, facing the stair's enclosing wall, a side from which no threat is posed. Thus positioned in a right-turning spiral stair, the best equipment is rendered useless, the
1668 3. Wilhelm, Architecture Civilis, Nürnberg: | left-turning single-run spiral staircase with hollow newel.
attacker becomes the victim of the way the stair is constructed.
Where martial considerations became redundant, for example, in the sacral buildings, the master-builder was free to choose the turning direction of the stairs, or even to use both directions an architectural statement. Not a potential aggressor, but the aesthetics in plan, determined the decisionmaking. It became popular to arrange spiral stairs symmetrically in plan. Regardless of the design, a left-turning spiral stair is a strong indicator of a non-war application of the stairs.
The fact that spiral staircase construction enjoyed its height between the 14th
STAIR
PAGE 201
1766 B.A. Vittone, Tab XIX: "Einläufige ■Ädeltreppe mit Hohlspindel und Wangen-Julchen (Single-run spiral staircase with hollow newel and small columns along central opening.)
and 17th century, cannot be explained solely through its technical develo-ment, which led to a real appreciation of the representative task. For our purposes, the precursors for stair construction are important.
This means specifically, pulpit stairs in churches (Kanzeltrepen) and more generally, the spiral stairs which have been used in Islamic minarets for more than two centuries. Even if the minarets ™ not all have a round shape, the Circular plan of the tower typically aPplies. The path from which the Hfezzin calls to prayer is often created faya spiral staircase, either single, double or triple. Right at this time,
17431 Barozzi, "Regole della prospetlva prattica," Tnv. XXXIV. "Zweiläufig Isoradlale Wendeltreppe mit Auge." (Dual-run single-center spiral staircase with an 'eye' central opening.)
occidental master-builders learned to construct the double spiral staircase. The transference of this model coming from the East to the West, may be proven hypothetically, but currently there is a lack of scientific research, pinpointing lines of the spiral staircase construction is indeed to justify hypothetical, but lack scientific research identifying its movement.
To conclude, it is well-known that the Western preference for the construction of spiral staircases has become widespread only after the era of Crusades and their imminent contacts in Europe.
Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Einläufige Wendeltreppen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde, (Hannnover: Th. Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 124-128.
1731 3.1 Schubler, Entwurf. "Zweilaufig isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlage mit offenem Spindelzylinder."(Dual-run single-center spiral staircase with a central hollow drum with openings.)
Friedrich
Mielke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
PAGE 202
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
the twin spiral staircase
Twin spiral staircases have two centers, around which the two runs are lead in mirror-image circles. The center may be a spindle, a hollow spindle or the open 'eye' of a stair.
Each of the two runs forms an independent spiral staircase, who share between each other several overlapping steps. At this juncture, people climbing the stairs have the opportunity to make a choice of which run to take. They may prefer the right-turning, leftturning, or decide to alternate directions with each floor level, which creates a figure of eight in plan.
Twin spiral staircases derive from Gothic modes of construction, and importantly, its architectural tendency is aimed towards the vertical expression of form. Horizontal balance and interest in composition is later established in the Renaissance, which also formed the basis of baroque constructs.
Twin spiral stairCases
KSs
time, a spiral staircase •
the cathedral °fKosiceeln
(Slovakia), whose turn! are not continuously staggered in one direction, but they |e,H back- and forward between two spindles
It may be that a lack of space has exacted this solution. But In addition !t i® so amazingly simple and also unusual, that It took about 60 years until anyone, once again, ventured to construct a twin spiral staircase. The next one was created in Graz for a residential tract, which the Emperor Maximilian I had built from 1494 to 1500.
Therefore, the twin spiral staircase is rarely found in post-gothic times, and was only occasionally admired and imitated.
Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Einläufige Wendeltreppen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde, (Hannnover: Th. Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 124-128.
-1
Graz (A-Stelermärk), Burg (1499ff.), measurment: K. Dänisch, F. Milowiz, H. Zellweger, TU Graz 1964.

STAIR
PAGE 203
16th century Kirchberg hospital (I. and F. H 28.5.1973)
Twin spiral staircase made from cast iron, Augustinian monastery in Vorau, Austria (18th century):
The earliest construction in iron for a stair probably took place in Styria. However, it was the vertical bars which are made of cast iron, while the steps and pedestals are made of timber. It is remarkable that the structural skeleton of a staircase was constructed from iron at this time. It is reminiscent of the lightweight buildings emerging in the mid 20th century and later, but it is by no means commonplace for the 18th century, when stairs in baroque monasteries were mostly constructed with solid heavyweight steps. It seems coincidental that the Catholic Church should again be at the forefront of staircase construction in this case.
The question of why has been studied scrupulously.
The answer is painted on the vaulted ceiling in the library, right above the stairs, showing an emblem with the same staircase. An analysis of the building progression reveals that this emblem must have been painted prior to the installation of the twin spiral staircase.
Therefore, the 'inventor' of this unusual stair design was not an architect, a stair expert, or a blacksmith, but a painter. His name was found to be Ignaz Kroll. Since master Kroll apparently had no idea how to construct a staircase, he used the material most natural to scaffolding structures in his own profession, in order to model and design a double staircase which created a figure of eight when viewed from below. This was undoubtedly successful. The stair is easily recognized as a kind of stairway to heaven, with St. Augustine sitting below and Christ above, to receive the people ascending.
Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Zweiläufig duozentrische Wendeltreppenanlagen - Zwillingswendeltreppen," Flandbuch der Treppenkunde, Hannnover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993, S.174/175
^¡ch Mielke,
Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).

PAGE 204
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
spiral stair designs & curiosities
Single-run duo-centric spiral staircases, creating a figure-8 in plan:
This running figure is frequently found in the literature. But no one has given a thought to the practicality of these very academic figures.
This is shown by some of the drawings published, in which the start of the run is marked, but the end seems to connect directly to the first step. Here, the likes of Maurits Cornelius Escher's stair absurdities come to mind.
As an abstraction, as art for art's sake, the design of a figure of eight stair seems appealing enough.
In practice, however, it could prove difficult to connect between landings and floor levels. Typologically this running figure is akin to the twin spiral staircase. However, as with a true twin staircase, the stair user should be offered the opportunity to choose which run to take, or even when to change direction.
9
Single-run, tri-centric spiral staircases:
In 1909, Gustav Blohm, a Hamburg architect, wrote in his book The Carpentry Trade (Das Zimmererhandwerk) about this type of staircase: "Stairs of this kind are of course very rare, but when they do occur, they require the utmost skill from the stair builder."
His second statement relating to great craftsmanship is certainly undeniable, however, the 'rarity value' is so absolute that no built example of the stair cited has so far been discovered.
It appears instead to be a literary invention, an artistic idea, which has been published several times mainly due to its curiosity value.

Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Einläufige duozentrisch gewendelte Treppen mit dem Grundriß einer 8," Handbuch der Treppenkunde (Flannnover: Th. Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 148.
Four-runs spiral staircase with four centers - quattro-centric spiral staircase:
The design shown here is by the author himself, who reserves all rights of authorship. By doubling the running figure of a twin spiral staircase, this 'quattro-centric' spiral system was formed. Each of the four spiral staircases is individually climbable, but also for transitions at the appropriate levels, to reach adjacent spiral staircases.
Thus, the traffic flow could be split and directed. The practical use for this stair postulates sufficient stair widths in accordance with building regulations.
It is conceivable that this stair could be freestanding at the center of a public building, preferably in a large hall.
Since the exits and entrance landings can be arranged in numerous ways on each floor, there are many possible ways of assigning them.
Friedrich Mielke: "Typen - Einläufige duozentn gewendelte Treppen mit dem Grundriß einer o, Handbuch der Treppenkunde (Flannnover: Th. Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 178.
STAIR
PAGE 205
Ifiultiple-run spiral stairs
1?68 C. Walter, Tab XXXV.
Üroßl efyelineation, Qr :u rrumtre auec 2 entries.
3~ Profil	einer ^rep/rl
um 2 Mnttn&en.
Plan showing stairs with two access points.	Plan showing stairs with three access
points and a central opening.
Friedrich Mielke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
Three-run spiral staircase, Mielke Archive, Regensburg.
Eight-run spiral staircase, Mielke Archive, Regensburg.
PAGE 208
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
multiple-run spiral stairs: applications
The multiple-run staircase has rarely been produced. Double spirals have been carried out though, for the most part up until the end of the 16th century.
Two stair expert authors, Stovesandt and Nix, just like their colleagues hundred of years earlier, attempted to find pragmatic solutions that went beyond the abstract, for these stairs to become useful in everyday life. Thus, Nix describes a circular staircase that follows the principles established in Chambord:
"The spiral staircase could be executed with double-, triple-, quadruple- and more runs. To achieve this, one needs to provide sufficient space in plan, including the necessary widths and partition walls. ... In multi-story homes, these stairs also offer the immense advantage of maintaining a fully separated housing unit, with each apartment claiming its own access stair, while overall the stairs create one singular construct."
The 19th century finally produced a constructed example of a mulitple-run staircase, located in Wiesbaden. However, up until the 20th century, architectural practice has had little regard for the double helix. New construction methods in steel and reinforced concrete have opened the range of possibilities, which have produced playful and graphically elegant multiple-run stairs, though none of which were built in Germany.
19th century Single-center three-run winding stairs, Stovesandt and Nix.
1822-1824 Wiesbaden, DagdschloB Platte, single-center double spiral staircase, ISchrumpf.
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Mehrläufigen Wendelungen: Mehrläufige Monozentrische Wendeltreppen," Geschichte der Deutschen Treppen (Berlin-München: Verlag von Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, 1966), 42-49.
STAIR
PAGE 209
"Spiral stairs for stair lovers who enjoy giving themselves some trouble thinking..."
Four-run spiral staircases have fascinated expert writers and have been selectively mentioned, but were never built. Later on, the idea of the four-run spiral staircase has been used and published by several writers, mostly by copying Palladio's drawing.
Friedrich Mielke, "Typen - Monzentrische isoradiale Wendeltreppenanlagen mit vier Läufen - Quadrupelwendeltreppen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde (Hannnover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 164.
PAGE 210
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
the Imperial staircase
Amongst the many possible combinations for straight stairs, there is one typology which has enjoyed a special popularity. It has two variations which create the same running figure, but in opposite climbing directions.
Morphologically, these two types are the result of two stairs, each of which has two arms. The new type emerging from this, connected the central arm into a single run, so that the staircase only has three arms.
Both variants of the staircase have been hugely successful. Its generous running figures created a signature high standard for architecture.
Its origins are fairly obscure. At least we know that this stair type has been in existence since the beginning of our time, examples being the Colosseum in Rome (70-80 AD) and the Baths of Caracalla (212-216 AD). With a new appreciation for the ancient world, it became inevitable that architects and architectural theorists such as Francesco di Giorgio Martini (1439— 1501), Leonardo da Vinci (1452-1519), Antonio da Sangallo (1484-1546), Andrea Palladio (1508-1580) Bartolomeo Ammannati (1511-1592) and Giovanni Antonio Dosia (1535-1609) would re-discover this historic staircase, produce sketches and incorporate it into construction projects.
Beyond its impressive size and ornamentation, the Imperial staircase distinguishes itself through symmetry. Equality is one of the noblest virtues of a ruler, reflected here in the main staircase of a stately building.
The first executed Scala imperial of the Renaissance is found in the Scuola di San Rocco (1515-1560) in Venice.
It was built in 1544-1546 by Antonio Abbondio Scarpagnino.
Italy is the country of origin of this staircase, twice, once in antiquity and
Consequently, these stairs were once again brought to public attention and became incorporated into major architectural projects of the time.
In literature and art history, both types have become known as an Imperial staircase. The term was probably coined by Nikolaus Pevsner, who defined the "imperial staircase type" in his book Outline of European Architecture.
once again during the Renaissance Other European countries have draw inspiration directly from Italy.
In Germany, elaborate spiral stairs dominated stair construction, especially in the free imperial cities, up Unti.
the Thirty Years'War (1618-1648) '
Since the turn of the 16th century this Italian type, with its two parallel arms and a turning landing, was known but applied only in a very limited circle of builders. Those who wanted build representative stairs for the purpose of reputation, would rather have a stair tower built, also called Wendelstein,
It was not until the end of the 17th century, when a lot of Italian architects were active in Central Europe, that the Imperial stairs were being built, more than two hundred years after its rediscovery by Francesco di Giorgio Martini.
Notwithstanding this long delay, these stairs won a level of popularity in Germany unmatched by any of the neighboring countries. They were imitated, variations were added, enriched by additional arms, and developed into immense 'communication systems' of extravagant stepping sequences. The Imperial stair became exemplary, not only for chateaus, but in the 19th century it was also applied in town halls, courts of justice, schools and many other types of buildings.
Friedrich Mielke, "Typen - Geradarmige Treppe mit 3 Armen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde (Hannnover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 110"''
STAIR
PAGE 211
Vienna, Dr.-Karl-Lueger-Ring, Burgtheater, G. Semper / K. v. Hasenauer (architects).

1913 Jubilee Terrace at Sanssouci park, A. Gezer.
STAIR
PAGE 213
PAGE 214
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
pilgrimage stairs
Pilgrimage stairs are akin to the Freitreppen, but they do not necessarily relate to a building, more precisely a pilgrimage church. They could equally follow the slope of a natural or an artificially created mountain. The final station is always the cross of Christ.
The re-enactment is not bound to the original location of the biblical event and may therefore be designed subjectively.
Friedrich Mielke, "Komponenten - Wallfahrt-treppen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde, (Flannnover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 84.
Since it is impossible that all Western believers should take a trip to Jerusalem, the desire to replicate the Calvary in a location within reach, arose as early as the 12th century.
Thus calvaries, Mount Olive, Holy Tombs, and martyrdoms were created, and around 1500 the "spiritual worship of pilgrimage" was invented. It refers to the so-called Stationsweg, which relates to Jacob's ladder and its subsequent interpretations. In order to re-enact the ordeal, it required the creation of more concrete numbers and measures.
1723 Braga, Portugal, Church Bom Jesus with exterior pilgrimage stairs, R. Reid, Bauwerke (1982), 279.
STAIR
PAGE 215
Spanish steps, Rome. ("Veduta della Piazza di Spagna," Barbault; etching: Freicenet.)
The stair acquired a stand-alone responsibility within the urban scale, Independent from the deployment of staircases in buildings.
The adaptability of street stairs renders them different from Freitreppen in front of buildings, as well as interior, communicating stairs. Street stairs are rarely possible to classify into types. Its inclination is only with difficulty subordinated to regulations, being at times shallow, at times steep.
They became prestigious only in times of dominant master-builders, such as the famous Spanish Stairs in Rome (1723-1725). Rome is host to at least three famous street stairs, which shaped the cityscape: the Spanish stairs, the ascent to the Capitol, and the stairs leading to the church of Santa Maria in Aracoeli.
Friedrich Mielke, "Komponenten - Straßentreppen, " Handbuch der Treppenkunde, (Hannnover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 76-77.
^^Bichelangelo's Campodigllo stairs in Rome. Exterior stairs on the left lead to the church of St. Marla, ■stairs on the right, named "la Cordonata," lead to the capitol square. (G. Cottafavi, "Nuova Raccolta delle Bfipali Vedute di Roma e suoi Contorni.")
'street' stairs
PAGE 216
Friedrich Mielke, "Komponenten-Gartentreppen," Handbuch der Treppenkunde (Hannover: Th.Schäfer Verlag, 1993), 80-83.
1701 Kassel Wilhelmshohe, chateau facing a straight water cascade on the East hill of the Habichtswald forest. Difference in levels: 236 m. Drawing: G.F. Guerniero; design executed on the upper levels only (until 1717). G. F. Guernerius, "Delineatio Montis," 1706.
STAIR - 12. 1993 HANDBOOK OF STAIRS
garden stairs
Bramante's idea to use stairs in gardens in order to set an accent, established a new baseline for design. A stair could now take the place of other, long-established and commonly used accents in the garden such as the pavilion, obelisk, fountain, and so on. The stair is no longer confined to its traditional role as a humble servant within a larger comprehensive system, but is requested to be viewed as a dominant element in its own right.
It is therefore necessary to distinguish between stairs that are acting merely as mediators, and stairs that have become autonomous architectural creations.
This development of autonomous staircase architecture is supported by one essential element in the garden, which does not have a rising, but a falling tendency: the water.
Stairs and cascades became complementary design factors in garden art.
Appreciation of a special kind was given to stairs by the Prussian King Wilhelm IV, who was very keen to transform the surroundings of Potsdam into "the most glorious and grandiose ... living landscape painting." (C.L. Haeberlin, 1855.) The king himself designed architectural accents for the area surrounding the town, which was imagined as being composed of giant gardens, that were made impressive first and foremost by stair constructs.
STAIR
PAGE 217

Friedrich Mielke, Handläufe und Geländer, (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003).
PAGE 218
STAIR
1765 Sanssouci Schloß, Potsdam, vineyard with stairs and garden parterre.

STAIR
PAGE 219
Friedrich Mielke
Treppen in Potsdam
SCALALOGIA
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung Band VIII
PAGE 220
STAIR - 13. 1994 STAIRS IN POTSDAM
Schloß Sanssouci, with six terraces of Weinbergtreppe. Photo: Stegelin, Potsdam.
STAIR
PAGE 221
Vorwort
Einleitung
Heiliggeistkirche, Emporentreppe
Nikolaikirche, gußeiserne Wendeltreppen
Friedenskirche, Evangelien-Ambo
Stadtschloß, Grüne Treppe
Stadtschloß, Haupttreppe
Stadtschloß, Fahnentreppe
Sanssouci, Weinbergtreppe
Gartentreppen
Bildergalerie
Sinesischer Pavillon (Chinesisches Teehaus)
Neues Palais
Communs zum Neuen Palais
Belvedere auf dem Klausberg
Belvedere auf dem Brauhausberg (Louisenturm)
Teepavillon auf dem Pfingstberg (Pomonatempel)
Belvedere auf dem Pfingstberg
Entwurf zu einem Lusthaus bei Potsdam
Schloß Belriguardo
Friedrich-Denkmal auf dem Mühlenberg Winzerhaus auf dem Mühlenberg Müllerhaus der Historischen Mühle Jubiläumsterrasse im Park von Sanssouci Kronprinzenpalais, Am Neuen Markt 1 Schloß auf der Pfaueninsel Marmorpalais im Neuen Garten Palais Lichtenau, Behlertstr.31 Schloß Paretz Schloß Charlottenhof Gärtnerhaus und Römische Bäder Schloß Babelsberg Schloß Klein-Glienicke Klein-Glienicke, Kasino Klein-Glienicke, Große Neugierde Jagdschloß Klein-Glienicke Villa Liegnitz im Park von Sanssouci Schloß Lindstedt
Großes Holländisches Haus, Lindenstr.54 Großes Militärwaisenhaus, Lindenstr.34 a Ehern. Proviantamt, Leipziger Str.7-8 Kriegsschule auf dem Brauhausberg Rathaus, Am Alten Markt 2 Haus der Landstände, Breite Str. 11 (9)
Haus der Landstände, Breite Str. 13 (11)
Zivilkasino, Waisenstr.23-19 Regierungsgebäude, Friedrich-Ebert-Str.79-81 Rechnungshof des Deutschen Reiches, Waisenstr.34-30 Handels- und Gewerbeschule, Berliner Straße Literatur
PAGE 222
STAIR - 13. 1994 STAIRS IN POTSDAM
schinkel in potsdam
Many of the stairs constructed or altered by Schinkel may disappoint viewers who attempt to compare classical architecture with the extensive, spatial creations stemming from of the baroque, or the imaginative solutions brought forth in ancient history.
Schinkel's creative working period lies roughly in between these two art periods. To him, the problems of stair construction were not unimportant; he devoted himself them seriously - but only when necessary.
He did not grant the stairs the same prominent position in architecture as did others, for example, Friedrich Wilhelm (IV) who sometimes did so with emotional exuberance. Schinkel always retained a balanced overall concept, in which stairs took a subordinate position.
The residential house, or Bürgerhaus, in Potsdam, formerly known as Am Kanal 21-22 ... was designed by Schinkel and executed by Christian Heinrich Ziller in 1822-1823. The facade is most obviously designed by Schinkel. Its plan is conventional, around a central structural wall without a corridor.
The stair layout in plan follows the latest efforts to separate the stairs from the ground floor passage leading through the building, and to provide them with a separate enclosure. In one such separate room we find in house No. 22 a straight stair with a very generous width and three arms, of the type that had become popular in Potsdam since 1750. Its inclination is comfortable (16.9/25 cm) with a stair width of 1.37 m.
Potsdam, am Kanal 21-22.
Potsdam, am Kanal 22, floorplan
Karl Friedrich Schinkel (1781-1841).
The Traljen banister follows the domestic traditions of the baroque style. The balustrade beginners take cues from the formal repertoire of Schinkel.
The generous staircase in House No. 22 is surpassed only by the neighboring staircase in house No. 21.
There, the staircase winds itself around a central circular opening, the 'eye', which has a diameter of 1.8 meters. The minimum tread width along the stringer is therefore 21 cm, at a riser height of 17 cm. Such artfully constructed stairs have become commonplace in these Potsdam town houses since the seven-year war, and yet these stairs designed by Schinkel command a supreme position.
Friedrich Mielke, Scalalogia Vol. 2, Collectaneen II (Elchstätt/Wien: Franz Sales Verlag, 1986), in: "Schinkel und die Treppenbaukunst seiner Zeit": "2. Architektonische Entwürfe," 16, 17.
1954 Potsdam, am Kanal 22: plan of a winding stair and unwinding of the stringer. Measurements: Fluschke; drawing: F. Mielke, 1986.
STAIR
PAGE 223
zivilkasino
In parallel with the double house on the canal, King Friedrich Wilhelm III commissioned Schinkel to design a casino for the Potsdam citizens.
The commanding expanse of the ground floor plan took its toll on the stairs. Being quite eccentrically located, a solution was sought that could effect a ceremonial ascent, regardless of the very confined space.
There was no way of extending the stairs's length, so Schinkel ordered three parallel runs, which should make up for what was lacking in overall width and decoration of the staircase.
One notable element is the two rows of staggered "column tabourets," which were intended to carry flower boxes, and effectively separate the stair runs. A very wide set of steps was consequences divided by staggered building components, so that individual runs would be created, without losing the overall grandeur. All flights combined create a compact staircase construct.
Friedrich Mielke, "Die Baupraxis," Scalalogia Vol. 2, Collectaneen II (Eichstätt/Wien: Franz Sales Verlag, 1986), 26-27.
1819 Zivilkasino, casino "for the public," from
architektonischer Entwürfe" (1866),
PAGE 224
STAIR - 13. 1994 STAIRS IN POTSDAM
schinkel's "stair-dreams"

STAIR	PAGE 225
The works published in the Sammlung architektonischer Entwürfe (Collection of architectural designs) are all bound together by the one intention of preparing for a practical implementation.
What Schinkel's dreams looked like,
we learn - in relation to stairs - from sketches, drawings, and paintings.
He never went so far as to trail off into utopian visions, but he took advantage of the arts and the freedom they offered from territorial, technical and financial constraints, as well as the opportunity to be unbound by client's desires.
Apart from his Freitreppen, Schinkel has always given priority to the architecture of the building, and organized interior stairs in such a way that they remained invisible from the outside.
This applies to Schinkel's practice.
In theory, however, he allowed himself some liberties.
A strange quirk must have caused Schinkel to design a "pleasure house near Potsdam," which included an elliptical staircase. Presumably the stair is not an exact conic section in plan, but an arched construct.
Friedrich Mielke, "Schinkel und die Treppenbaukunst seiner Zeit: 3. Treppen-Träume," Scalalogia Vol. 2, Collectaneen // (Eichstätt/Wien: Franz Sales Verlag, 1986), 18-20.
1855 Chateau in Belriguardo auf dem Tornow, Potsdam, drawing after Schinkel (1823) by G. T. Schirrmacher.
PAGE 226
STAIR - 13. 1994 STAIRS IN POTSDAM
designs for potsdam
ca. 1830 Chateaus and Gardens of Potsdam-Sanssouci (unknown artist).
STAIR
PAGE 227
1770-1772 Belvedere on Klausberg hill, client King Friedrich II. Master builder: G. Chr. Unger.
1702 Rome: design of an architecture with different runs of stairs, A. Pozzo: "Perspectiva atque architectorum," Bd. II, Fig. 112.
;J875 Design of a Friedrich Memorial on Muhlenberg hill, Potsdam. ■Swings by L. Persius after sketches by Friedrich Wilhem IV. Section and r,e Plan, F. Mielke, XSimson: "Das Berliner Denkmal für Friedrich II."
PAGE 228
STAIR
14. 1996
Spiritual stairs between earth and heaven
STAIR
PAGE 229
STAIR
PAGE 230
15.1999 Gothic and Renaissance stairs
The premise for this research was the idea that a new feel for life intrinsically had to produce new products, that alongside the emergence of a new architecture, new stairs would arise.
The stairs form part of valuable haptic experiences. Among all the building components, they reflect most accurately the habits of its users. An examination of their original texture and their consequent changes may allow for conclusions to be drawn, which can answer the question raised above regarding the time when lifestyles changed. In order to obtain the most convincing results possible, this general question is broken down into 14 sub-items:
Friedrich Mielke, "Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance," Scalalogia Vol. 9(Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für Flandwerk und Denkmalpflege, Propstei Dohannesberg, 1999).
STAIR
PAGE 231
Friedrich Mielke
Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance
PAGE 232
STAIR - 15. 1999 GOTHIC AND RENAISSANCE STAIRS
gothic and renaissance stairs
In this book, the Gothic and Renaissance periods serve as the objects in an experiment, which was carried out with the help of stairs.
Stairs are not ranked at the forefront when attaining an assessment in art history, but they have the advantage of being more closely associated with lifestyle, with the desires and ability of their clients, as well as with their builders and users, than any other component in the building industry.
They reflect the 'sensory' element related to their time of creation, better than the decorative arts.
If the Renaissance, as it is claimed, is the expression of a new feeling for life, this new expression must differ substantially from the previous, old condition, and become apparent in the construction of stairs.
Every period is represented by its people who perceive and represent its spirit. Fashion phenomena are often based on criteria that have been assimilated, they are not expressions of an endogenous character. If we want to know whether lifestyles have changed more fundamentally, we must examine indicators that relate directly to the people.
Friedrich Mielke, "Einleitung," Scalalogia Vol. 9 (Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für Handwerk und Denkmalpflege, Propstei tohannesberg, 1999),
10-13.
"Since we have no direct access to the people of long-aone epochs, we need to look closely at the exponents of their daily lives which are general in nature, so they may best relate to most people. These include primarily objects close physical contact, and of daily use, such as clothing or stairs."
STAIR
PAGE 233
convenience & comfort: riding stairs
Riding stairs have low and very deep steps, most often with upwardly sloping treads. They are equal to a riding ramp in their transitory function, however, more advantageous in that the steps slope at a much smaller gradient on the same foundation.
They appeared at a time when the aristocracy began to build palaces instead of castles and when the desire for comfortable living incorporated new modes of exterior communication. They are the predecessors to elevators and escalators in the history of technology.
iedrich Mielke, "Reittreppen und Reitrampen," ialalogia Vol. 9: Treppen der Gotik und tnaissance, (Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für indwerk und Denkmalpflege, Propstei ohannesberg, 1999), 42-43.
1507 Palazzo d'Accurslo, Bologna, Palazzo Comunale. riding stairs, Bramante.
PAGE 234
STAIR - 15. 1999 GOTHIC AND RENAISSANCE STAIRS
representation: central stair towers
1471-1485 Meissen, Albrechtsburg, Arnold v. Westfalen. Court view with stair tower, first floor.
The architects of the Renaissance followed a very long tradition when they placed the stair tower at the center of a building. Fronting the building externally, the spiral staircase is awarded a special prominence. Hidden in a tower, the stairs can still benefit from this position.
If ever a high point has been recorded in the art of staircase construction in the Renaissance, then it is in the chateaus at Meissen, Torgau and Berlin. In these, the skill of the masters has reached its pinnacle, both in the desire to exhibit the staircase as well as in the desire to provide maximum convenience of ascent.
There are no comparable staircases of this time. Even the renowned French stair architecture offers no staircase which could be paralelled with these three creations of the German Renaissance.
Even the much revered Escaliers d' honneur in Blois (1515-1524) and in Chambord (1524) are only superficially impressive. If one studies their way of construction, a strong need for security becomes apparent, which was largely ignored by the German masters.
Moreover, compared to the German examples, only few of the French Spiral staircases were so ostentatiously placed in front of the facade.
Friedrich Mielke, "Position der Treppen im Gebaudegrundriß," Scalalogia Vol. 9: Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance (Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für Handwerk und Denkmalpflege. Propstei tohannesberg, 1999), 14—27.
1515-1524 Chateau de Blois, Loire Valley. Stair tower constructed by François I.
Delagarde: Chateau Chambord on the Loire.
1535-1536 Chateau Hartenfels, Torgau, Sachsen. Great stair tower, K. Krebs.
STAIR
PAGE 235
elevated position & accessibility: freitreppen
To combine plastic and inverted plastic sculpture was a stroke of genius. He instantly enriched the existing repertoire of stair running figures, which - apart from the pyramid stairs and cone stairs - consisted only of continuous steps, lined up like strings. Inspired by the difficult condition found in the Cortile del Belvedere of the Vatican, Bramante converted the continuous sequence of steps into a sculptural stair which can be ascended from all sides of a semicircle.
I^e ornamentation of a building consists not only of well-proportioned facades and embellished entrances,
Lt it also included the entrance stairs.
ina 1788 publication named "Studies |n the character of buildings; regarding the relationship between architecture and the fine arts, and on |f,e effects which should be produced Ey the same," an anonymous writer emphasizes, "just how much a stair, composed of several steps, can refine a building exterior."
This insight is not novel to the 18th century, but rather presents an achievement of the Renaissance, notably the civil, or bourgoise architecture of the 15th and 16th century, with its after-effects in the 17th century.
Entrances to chateaus remain, conveniently, at ground level, so as not to pose a hindrance to carriages and riders on horseback. Lower-standing members of the council, however, sought to compensate for their inferior position with imposing, often doublerun stair designs.
By its nature, the Freitreppe is comparable to stage stairs, whose lone purpose is to elevate and set the scene for celebrities or a group of performers.
Double Cone Stairs
When Bramante had to design the Cortile del Belvedere in Rome at the beginning of the 16th Century, he ended the garden axis in a huge semi-circular indentation.
There, Bramante invented a special kind of transition. He combined the convex curves of "cone stairs" known S|nce ancient times, with a staircase C'ade of as many concave steps; ■¡sway Bramante invented the new type of the "double cone stairs".
Rome, Belvedere courtyard at the Vatican, double cone stairs; D. Bramante ca. 1510 S. Serlio: "Tutte I'opere ..." Venezia 1619, III 120, Reprint 1964.
Friedrich Mielke, "Außentreppen und Freitreppen," Scalalogia Vol. 9: Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance, (Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für Flandwerk und Denkmalpflege, Propstei Hohannesberg, 1999), 28—41.
1914 Rome, Belvedere Courtyard at the Vatican, longitudinal section.
PAGE 236
STAIR - 15. 1999 GOTHIC AND RENAISSANCE STAIRS
Stair model, Biblioteca Laurenziana, Regensburg Archive.
1557 Laurentian library, Florence; freitreppe in the entrance hall. Sketch by Michelangelo.
STAIR
PAGE 237
freitreppe: laurentian library
Its reading room is located about three and a half meters above the entrance hall. This level difference was to be accommodated with a staircase. For this purpose, Michelangelo, who was at that time active in Rome, produced a few sketches.
In 1557 Michelangelo made a model and sent it to Florence, where Bartolomeo Ammannati built the staircase in 1560. His design follows Michelangelo's lead, bar a few of his own reservations. We notice immediately that Ammanati,
Laurentian library freitreppe.
Another jewel, comparable to the likes of Bramante's Belvedere garden in the Vatican, was built in Florence half a century later. It is found within the Church of the San Lorenzo library, the Laurentian Library.
Laurentian steps, drawing by Mielke.
f Florence, Biblioteca Laurenziana, gfeitreppe" in Innenraum.
Model: Michelangelo, 1557 Execution: Ammanti, 1560 Antritterme (height 191 cm)
Center: 10 x 18.5 - 19.5/36 - 36.5 cm S'des: 11 x 17.3 - 17.4 /37 - 37.5 cm ■torittsarm (height 97 cm) 5x19-19.5/36.9 cm J-C. Raschdorff, 1888.
more so than Michelangelo, perceived the stairs as plastic, being as much a sculptor as a builder.
For its construction, it seemed important that the stair increases in emphasis towards the center:
The design intent was evidently more important than any safety considerations, especially since it is uncertain if the two lateral flights of stairs were intended for lower-ranking persons (flanking accompaniment).
Ammanati inserted an intermediate landing at which both flights end. People ascending along the sides need to change to the main central flight at this point. From here they must follow suit behind their superiors.
Furthermore it is noteworthy that the lateral runs were fitted with one more step than the main flight of stairs, which results in lower risers than applied to the central stairs:
The servants are offered the convenience of risers at little more than 17cm height. The superiors must ascend with an increased riser height of 19cm on the central flight of stairs.
The pursuit of comfort here does not benefit the socially superior, but their subordinates.
Did the Italian Renaissance produce its own jurisdiction, which can not be compared with other countries?
The answer is 'yes' to and 'no' alike.
For the heirs to Roman construction, for Italians, high risers were never a problem, even in public places of assembly. They were commonplace, even for people in the Renaissance.
The other aspect, which does not relate to the ancient world and their consequences, is of sociological, not ergonomic nature: Naturally,
God deserves the highest honor {Ad majorem Dei gloriam).
Therefore one may conclude: only the superiors may reach up high.
Friedrich Mielke, "Außentreppen und Freitreppen, Scalalogia Vol. 9: Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance, (Fulda: Deutsches Zentrum für Flandwerk und Denkmalpflege, Propstei lohannesberg, 1999), 28—41.
PAGE 238
STAIR
16. 2000 Stairs in Art
Mielke's stair poem
VORWORT
LITERATUR
Dante Alighieri: »La Comedia«
Christian Weise: »Gute Gedanken, wenn man eine Treppe hinaufsteiget«
Ludwig Tieck: »Die Spanische Treppe«
Ludwig Tieck: »Des Lebens Überfluß«
Paul Heyse: »Das Goethehaus in Weimar«
Rainer Maria Rilke: »Die Treppe der Orangerie«
Frank Wedekind: »Schloß Wetterstein«
Albrecht Schaeffer: »Elli oder Sieben Treppen«
Erik Satie: »Un Grand Escalier«
Sergej Michailowitsch Eisenstein: »Panzerkreuzer Potemkin«
Fritz Lang: »Metropolis«
Alan Alexander Milne: »Halfway Down«
John Buchan: »The Thirty-Nine Steps«
Willi Emrich: »Die Treppe und andere besinnliche Betrachtungen«
Hermann Hesse: »Stufen«
Robert Siodmak: »The Spiral Staircase«
Erhärt Kästner: »Stufen zur Akropolis«
Heimito v. Doderer: »Die Strudlhofstiege«
Schlehdorn: »Die zärtliche Treppe«
Erich Fried: »Die Treppen von Graz«
Elisabeth Dored: »Die Phönizische Treppe«
Catherine Mary Nicholl: »Die Spanische Treppe«
Charles Dyer: »Staircase«
Hans Max von und zu Aufseß: »Die Wendeltreppe«
Otto Nüßler: »Stiegauf, stiegab«
Norbert HofFmann: »stufen weise«
Thomas Michael Disch: »Descending«
Thomas Medicus: »Von der Gefährlichkeit des Treppensteigens«
Hubert Mackedanz: »Die Treppe«
Barbara Vine: »Das Haus der Stufen«
Friedrich Mielke: »Scalae aeternae«
BILDENDE KUNST
Pharao Narmer auf dem Thron eines Sedfestpavillons APOLLONIA, Abstieg in die Unterwelt PENTESKOUPHIA, Töpfer bei der Arbeit ERCOLANO / HERCULANEUM, »Gottesdienst im Isistempel«
REICHENAU, Lektionar, Initiale » I «
»Ascensus purpureus«
Donatello: »II Convito di Erode«
Meister von UTTENHEIM: »Die hl.Monika beim Bischof Ambrosius in Mailand« Leonardo da Vinci: »Adorazione dei Magi«
Michelangelo Buonarroti: »Madonna della Scala«
Nicolas Dipre: »Présentation de la Vierge au temple«
Albrecht Dürer: »Rast der heiligen Familie in Ägypten«
Albrecht Dürer: »Christus vor Pilatus«
Jacopo da Pontormo: »Joseph in Ägypten«
Balthasar Böhm, Psalmenleiter VILLELOUP, Die heilige Barbara Lorenzo Lotto / Giovanni Francesco: »David und Goliath«
MULHOUSE / MÜLHAUSEN, Buffet und Lavabo mit Intarsia Paolo Veronese: »Das Martyrium der Heiligen Markus und Marcellinus« Bernardo Buontalenti, Stufen zum Chor in S. Stefano, Florenz Anton Ort: »Porta coeli. scala coeli«
Jacopo Palma il giovane: »II sogno di Giacobbe«
Nicolas Poussin: »Treppenmadonna«
Rembrandt Harmensz van Rijn: »Meditierender Philosoph«
Pieter Jansz Post: »Die Treppe des Lebens«
Giovanni Battista Piranesi: »Tempio antico ... della Dea Vesta«
Giovanni Battista Piranesi: »Veduta del Porto di Ripetta«
Hubert Robert: »Capriccio mit dem Pantheon vor dem Hafen der Ripetta« Franz Seraph Zwinck: »Christus vor Pilatus«
Carlo Carlone, Scheinarchitektur mit Treppenanlage Julius Franz Lux, Deckengemälde
Karl Blechen: »Steinerne Wendeltreppe in der Meißener Burg«
Adolf Menzel, Wendeltreppe William Blake: »Jacobs ladder«
Sir Edward Coley Burne-Jones: »Die Goldene Treppe«
Carl Friedrich Schinkel, Pompejanische Wanddekoration
N.N.: Mittelalterliches Stadtbild
Carl Spitzweg: »Wäscherinnen am Brunnen«
Oskar Schlemmer: »Bauhaustreppe«
Alfred Kubin: »Paar auf der Treppe«
Maurits Cornelis Escher: »Relativiteit«
Marcel Duchamp: »Nue descendante un escalier«
Gerhard Richter: »Erna - Akt auf einer Treppe«
Mel Ramos: »Nude descending a staircase«
Istvän Orosz: »Anamorfikus testtäjak 1«
Renato Paresce: »Statua e scala«
Anna Alexandrovna Exter, Bühnenbild Aldona Mickiewicz: »Stopnie«
Karl-Henning Seemann: »Kaukasischer Kreidekreis«
Karl-Henning Seemann, Treppe zum Landratsamt in Schwäbisch Hall Hannelore Landrock-Schumann: »Nachtwandler und Sonnenanbeterin« Hubert Kickol: »Neun Treppen«
Ha ns-Peter Reuter: »Dokumenta-Raumobjekt«
WIEN, Kirche am Steinhof
Walter Rollemann Habicht: »Der Harlekin«
Roger Suraud: »La Ballerine«
Sam Szafran, Escalier Josef Lull, Doppelwendeltreppe Waldram Geis, Fassadenmalerei Ltvan Orosz: »TivoLiszt«
OI,*hlr EllaSSOn’ DoPPelspiraltreppe »Umschreibung«
ANHANG
vrR/nr^ISDERPERSONEN i-R/uchnis der orte SCALALOCIA - Bände
STAIR
PAGE 239
Friedrich Mielke
Treppen in der Kunst
STAIR
PAGE 241
MIELKE, Friedrich (* 1921):
»Scalae aeternae«, 1991
Selten finden Treppen die Wertung, die ihrer Schöpfung gemäß ist.
Mit Füßen werden getreten die Stufen und keines Gedankens gewürdigt.
Erhobenen Blickes übersieht sie der Nutzer, ohne Rücksicht darauf, daß die Tritte es sind, welche ihm dienen.
Sie sind der Grund, die tragenden Teile, welche dem strebenden Geiste erlauben, festen Fußes höheren Zielen zu nahn.
Erst das gemeinsame Wirken von Stufe und Fuß, von Treppe und Mensch, von Stoffund Idee, geistiges Wollen, das die Materie zwingt, schafft die gesteigerte Leistung.
Daß die Treppe zum Kunstwerk geriet, ist der Verbindung zu danken, welche Können und Wollen vereint.
Beides ist nötig, die Hand des erfahrenen Meisters und das gedankliche Schweifen, das die Ökonomie überwindet und schmückend gestaltet.
Schmuck sei die Treppe dem wohnlichen Hause und Bauten, die alle wir nutzen.
Schmuck für die Augen und Glück der Empfindung, welche uns bis in die Füße durchströmt.
Wohlsein sollten die Treppen vermitteln, keine Mühsal des Steigerts, die beschweren uns könnte.
Friedrich Mielke, "Scalae aeternae," Scalalogia Vol. 10: Treppen in der Kunst, 102.
PAGE 242
STAIR
17.2001
Collected Writings (Vol. 4)
STAIR
PAGE 243
Friedrich Mielke
Collectaneen 4
SCALALOGIA
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung Band XI
PAGE 244
STAIR - 17. 2001 COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 4)
STAIR
PAGE 245
(he acceptance of measure
1,0	other building component exhibits Afferent levels of acceptance so dearies a staircase.
Stairs are either created for the specific needs of individual clients, or for a society that can only passively influence
their design.
[:vgi-y mode of human movement requires a level of passive acceptance. Be it for men, women, adults, children, for the young or the old, the healthy or the sick, the aim is to find a common degree of acceptance for all. The correct solution will ultimately decide the usefulness of the stairs.
This applies in the first instance to the stair inclination. The difficulties here are not of a technical nature.
From a construction point of view, it is straightforward to build steps at any size. People are physically capable of climbing stairs of heights up to 50 cm. The problem arises from custom.
Habits in the form of Tradition and Education have influenced the construction of stairs.
These stepping habits are subject to seasonal influences, ethnic traditions, societal needs as well as the physical condition of the individual.
In the late Middle Ages, a general tendency towards convenience asserted itself in the lifestyle, which in turn reduced the average riser heights for steps, both in castles and residences. While the bourgeois remained at a riser height between about 17 cm and 20 cm, the nobility and rich clients pushed #e trend towards convenience even further, with step heights between fOcm and 15 cm.
Anew lifestyle coined new habits, from high society to the lower-class bourgeoisie, and it influenced the inclination of stairs. Meanwhile, in farmhouses in the lowlands, we still find stairs with inclination ratios of 19/10 •etn-19/18 cm or even 22/13 cm. In its ^epness, which allows for only small
riser depths, a consideration for economy becomes evident. In this context, the heights of the steps were most likely not perceived as excessive.
It's a different scenario for the stairs of mountain farmers. People who live in the mountains have a different acceptance of steepness than those living in the flat country. The length of pace of mountain hikers is longer than that of hikers in the planes. The Folk Museum in Oslo contains stairs of mountain farmers from the 16th and 17th century with riser heights of up to 36 cm and 45 cm. They are approximately twice as high as comparable stairs found in the lowlands.
Routine habits of taking steps, derived from daily life, tend to always determine one's measure of pace.
Taking into account these tolerances is as instructive as measuring the absolute or average values. As different as these individual dimensions may be, they are constrained by minimum and maximum values which were acceptable within a certain era, and are therefore typical for this time period.
It is obvious, and therefore common practice, to determine stair measurements according to their function. Today, regulations differentiate between stairs for residential buildings, public buildings, factories, hospitals, etc. The limits for riser heights in public buildings in Germany are currently set at 16 cm and 17 cm. Absolute maximum levels are 19 cm, with the exception of workplaces (factories) where riser heights of up to 25 cm are allowed.
Since industrialization in the 19th century, the stair has been subject to the pursuit of precision. Unequal step measurements within the same run are considered inadequate. The political concept of 'Egalite' received its counterpart in technology, and inevitably reduced the levels of acceptance to an absolute minimum.
The former variety of riser heights ranging from 1 cm to 50 cm, which reflected the diversity of individuals using stairs, has been regulated. The normative dimensions of today's stairs, no longer reveal the plurality of people from different nations and backgrounds, who were formerly shaped by their strength of rituals and customs.
The new regulated stair dimensions no longer allow for any conclusions to be drawn with regards to the original builders and circumstances. Such opportunities for deduction are now limited to historical stairs. Their number is dwindling and with them vanish all testimonies of what people were once willing to accept.
Friedrich Mielke: "Mensch und Treppe, oder die Akzeptanz der Maße," (ders., Hrsg.) Collectaneen 4, Band IX der Scalalogia-Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2001), 74.
PAGE 246
STAIR - 17. 2001 COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL. 4)
ghorfas
There are two major groups of Berbers, the settled Moors (Mauren) and the nomadic Numidians (Numidier) who were shaped by the Phoenician-Carthaginian culture. The two groups of Berbers mentioned, one sedentary and the other nomadic, produced two types of corresponding settlements, along the mountain slopes and in the plains.
But in narrow streets not facing squares, frequent transport with packed animals and bulky carts was not be hindered; therefore the stairs which required extremely tight running widths were added parallel to the front wall.
In the planes, large storage reservoirs, called Ghorfas, are horizontally aligned and vertically stacked, which enclose a large open space. The entire complex is called Ksar and was originally fortified. One last remaining Ksar of originally 27 is still present today in Medinine.
The upper storage levels can be reached via stairs. Whenever the large squares offered enough space, steps could be created perpendicular to the front of the Ghorfas terrace.
Ksar, Tataouine, Tunisia.


Friedrich Mielke, "Ghorfas," Scalalogia Vol.11: Collectaneen 4 (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), 80-87.
Ksar, Medinine, photo by Mielke, December 27, 1998.
STAIR
PAGE 247
Medinine, Einläufige Rißentteppe zu einem Ghorfa, flfbreite 34-48 cm,
K,e 166 cm, 7 Stufen

166
Ksar, Medinine: two exterior stairs (Außentreppen). Drawings: F. Mielke, 1999.
The stairs found in Ghorfas, through scarcity of available space and the uneven heights of entrances, forced adventurous, scalalogically risky, but graphically attractive level combinations - usually without handrails or handrails.
The locals are not used to anything else; they have used these steps from childhood on. For them, no externally imposed symmetry is necessary in order to tread safely.
Because peoples such as the Berbers accept this richness of variety, they engage with the natural irregularities and hence protect themselves from any harmful automatism and the modern addiction to systemization, They remain elastic in face of the vicissitudes of life and responsive towards the unpredictable.
So even with these Berber stairs, steps can never be too wrong or crooked, too big or small for the stair user to be surprised or overwhelmed. Whatever their inclination, the user will know how to take it.
What is most important here is the haptic contact of the feet with the steps. The stairs are used barefoot, in order to feel the nature of the material from which they were manufactured. The sole of the foot adapts, scrapes, and does not rub. It is for this reason that no stepping traces are formed...
Friedrich Mielke, "Ghorfas," Scaialogia Vol.11: Collectaneen 4 (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), 80-87.
É
PAGE 248
STAIR - 17. 2001 COLLECTED WRITINGS (VOL 4)
measurements
		Schrittmaß
Höhe	Tiefe	x = 2 + a
19	Podest	
12	12	36
14	11	39
10	9	29
18	10	46
19	10	48
12	14	38
13	12	38
14	10	38
16	13	43
11	14	36
13	Podest	
43	23	113
41	19	101
43	20	110
33	20	86
22	36	80
14	21	49
18	21	37
1. Arm		
43	36	Maximum
14	19	Minimum
30	36	max. Differenz
4	1	min. Differenz
27,8	22,8	Mittel
2. Arm		
19	14	Maximum
10	9	Minimum
8	4	max. Differenz
1	0	min. Differenz
14,4	11,3	Mittel
Ksar, single-run exterior stair with two-flights, stair width 41-64 cm; stair height 391 cm, 19 steps. Drawing by Mielke, December 27, 1998.
So the aim was to determine approximations, which, in summary, offered a good estimation of the stepping conditions offered. In the same sense, calculation the step lengths is revealing, even if one has to imagine that with tread depths of 10 cm, one's foot can not be placed head-on, but needs to be placed sideways, comparable to a side-step.
It remains to be seen whether in this context Blondel's formula exceeds its limits of authority. However it is a useful device in order to demonstrate the conditions of inclination, with
distances changing from step to step.	......... ,	,,
Friedrich Mielke, Ghorfas, Scalalogia VoI. 11: Collectaneen 4 (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2001), 80-87.
STAIR
PAGE 249
Ksar Haddada, corner-formation of a single-run exterior stair. Drawing: F. Mielke, 1999.
		Schrittmaß
Höhe	Tiefe	x = 2s + a
25	Podest	
22	16	60
21	11	17
20	19	19
20	11	11
17	10	44
24	24	72
28	20	76
48	18	114
48	24	Maximum
17	10	Minimum
20	14	max. Differenz
0	1	min. Differenz
25	17,1	Mittel
Ksar Haddada, single-run exterior stain-
stair width 50 cm; stair height 225cm, 9 steps.
Measurements: Karolina Naujokat, January 2, 1999.
PAGE 250
STAIR
18. 2001
Spiritual Stairs, Fictional Stairs Ascension to altars, palaces and thrones
Vorwort
Die Hieroglyphe und die Treppengiebel
Himmelstreppe und Tugendleiter
Aufstiege zu Altären
Stufen zu Thronen
Treppen zu Plätzen der Predigt
Vorderasien, die Antike und der Hohe Chor christlicher Kirchen
Wanderungen zu höheren Zielen
Stufenportale
Maria und die Greden
Namen von Orten und Familien
Ränge und Ordnungen
Ton-Leitern
Indianerkulturen
Literatur
STAIR
PAGE 251
PAGE 252
STAIR- 18. 2001 SPIRITUAL STAIRS, FICTIONAL STAIRS
12th century Moral ladder (Tugendleiter), by Johannes Klimakos, with 30 rungs, Sinai, Katharinen monastery, E. Coche de la Ferte, plate
132.
STAIR
PAGE 253
Amarna, Egypt: stair altar of
Pharao Echnaton (1379-1362) in relief.
K, Galling, plate 1,9, 10.
Petra, temple of Eder, altar with two flanking stairs around a niche. Five stages, each of 20 cm height. K. Galling, plate 12.
Petra, zibb'atuf, step altar, four stages of 12-32 cm, running width 100 cm.
K. Galling, plate 11, 7, 8.
th-6th century BC Doger, Turkey: "Kucuk Kapi "Phrygian cave altar with steps, "Antike ■t" 2/1994, S.171. Photo: H. Ehringhaus.
Babylon, ziggurat reconstruction by Walter Andrae, "Mitteilungen der Deutschen Orient-Gesellschaft," 1932.
PAGE 254
STAIR - 18. 2001 SPIRITUAL STAIRS, FICTIONAL STAIRS
Constructed 1420,1530,1749
"Circular Mound Altar of heaven," Beijing: three terraces, four stair runs of three arms with nine steps each.
STAIR
PAGE 255
1723-1735 Beijing, harvest sacrificial ceremony in the era of Yongzheng, L. Ledderose, Fig. 32.
Moral ladder (Tugendleiter), rise hindered by poverty, disease, lust, and early death. Cicero: "Von den tugendsamen ämtern," 1531.
(H. Biedermann: "Knaurs Lexikon der Symbole," 1994, 264.)
Louchou (province of Szechuan) Confucian temple, Gesamtanlage, E. Boerschmann, Fig. 154.
B® seven levels in the cult of Mithra:
Pater - father P®liodromus - sunrunner Parses - perslan leo - |ion railes - soldier Pytnphus - spouse aorax - crow
K°r mosaic from Ostia, Italy. »Scwertheim: "Mithras, seine Denkmäler “Pd sein Kult" In "Antike Welt" 1979, 57.
Teacher and pupil In an allegory of nature and art: nature has to guide art. Via five levels you will get where the finger of the teacher points: to the top, to the height of art. Illustration by Giullano da Sangalla for Dante's Divine Comedy, (Inferno XI, 103-105), (Rome, Biblioteca Valllcelllana: Christoforo Landino 1481).
45-32 BC Temple of Bel, Palmyra. Isometric of theoretical reconstruction. H. Seyrig, R. Amy, E. Will: "Le temple de Bel a Palmyre," Paris 1968, album, 140.
L
PAGE 256
STAIR
19. 2002
Stone Spiral Staircases in Turkish Minarets
Etymology of the spiral and double-spiral staircase Minarets: objects & drawings
STAIR
PAGE 257
Ülkü Kulag
Steinerne Wendeltreppen in türkischen Minaretten
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung Band XIII
PAGE 258
STAIR - 19. 2002 STONE SPIRAL STAIRCASES IN TURKISH MINARETS
/
Schematic representation of winding single-run staircases in minarets.
Schematic representation of mono-centered winding multi-run staircases in minarets

STAIR
PAGE 259






PAGE 260
STAIR - 19. 2002 STONE SPIRAL STAIRCASES IN TURKISH MINARETS
spiral staircases in turkish minarets
The oldest, dated, minarets have a circular cross-section. Minarets that were constructed before the 11th century can not be dated securely.
These constructs usually have an octagonal cross-section, complete with round pillars. They are believed to have originated in the 9th century.
The eastern Islamic minarets belong to two basic types:
I.	The round minaret
a.	without a base
b.	with an octagonal base
c.	with a square or rectangular base
II.	The polygonal minaret
a.	star-shaped octagonal base with a roun
b.	octagonal base with round upper part
Ulku Kulac (Herausgeber: Friedrich Mielke), "Ostislamische Länder," Steinerne Wendeltreppen in türkischen Minaretten (Offizin der Scalalogie, Konstein, 2002), 28-31.
Triple-run monocentric spiral staircase.
yngle spiral staircases
STAIR
PAGE 261
¡077-1308 Ulu Cami Great fsque, Sivas.
Süleymaniye mosque, Edirne.
.j n
Buchara, Turkestan, Kalyan-Moschee, Minaret.
Suleymaniye mosque, Edirne, preserved steps.
' SPITL o	1.0
1077-1308 Ulu Cami, Great Mosque,
Silvas, single spiral staircase, construction diagram.
ZIEKl-
UMFASSUNGS-
MAUER
PAGE 262
STAIR - 19. 2002 STONE SPIRAL STAIRCASES IN TURKISH MINARETS
the invention of multiple-run spiral staircases
We have the Muslims to thank for a further achievement in the construction of spiral stairs: the double spiral. In Islam this was considered to be an homage to Allah. The Europeans adopted the invention for logistical reasons: one flight is for ascending, the other flight is intended for descending.
The earliest double spiral staircase, with a massive newel, that we know of today emerged in the Muslim cultural sphere.
While European architecture in the Middle Ages was still restricted to Roman architecture and building technology, the Arab master builders were unaffected by these traditions and could develop their own ideas. In the building of stairs, they grappled with the Roman art of arches and found a more rational method to construct spiral staircases. They devised the préfabrication of steps, which, when placed upon each other, make it possible to create a perfect spiral without the need of supporting arches underneath.
Friedrich Mielke, "Islam und seine Neuerungen im Treppenbau," Scalalogia Vol 76: Mensch und Treppe (2008), 50
Bursa, Ulu Caml, northwest Minaret.
STAIR
PAGE 263
■
■pjral-shaped minarets
■amarra, Great Mosque
1^e minaret, known as "Manarat a[.Malwiya" or "Malwiya" (spiral), was uuilt in the Abbasid period 849-852 AD, lyal Mutawakkil, the heir to the Qa|jph al-Mutasim.
«is located outside the mosque,
27.25 meters from the south wall and accurately positioned on its south-northern longitudinal axis.
The 60-meter high construct is divided ¡nto three sections:
_A lower square base with a length of 33 m -Aspiral-shaped body -Upper cylindrical component
The lower part takes up approximately two-thirds of the total height and is provided on all sides with niches. Originally the base was said to be connected by a 2-meter long and 12-meter wide ramp to the middle gate of the mosque complex. On top of the base sits the main part of the spiral minaret. In five tapered turns, an external staircase leads to the crowning cylindrical structure. The climb commences on the side which faces the mosque, and circles around the evenly tapering core counterclockwise. The steps are executed in brick and are comfortable to use based on the Minaret's large diameter and a low stepping inclination. The stair width is 2.3 meters.
The cylindrical conclusion at the top is decorated with niches. On the south side a narrow entrance leads to the interior and to a steep stair, which, within a half-turn, leads to the upper Platform, the Müezzin's spot.

PAGE 264
STAIR
20.2003
Handrails and Balustrades
Objects/drawings
Profiling
Nomenclature
Reduction of types over time
STAIR
PAGE 265
FRIEDRICH MIELKE
HANDLAUFE UND GELÄNDER
Offizin der Scalalogie
PAGE 266	STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
STAIR
PAGE 267
PAGE 268
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
nomenclature of profiles in different countries
The art of profiling demands a kind of syntax in order to enable a meaningful statement to emerge from meaningless single elements strung together. The analogy to language comes naturally.
STAIR
PAGE 269
I^e Germans, more so than any other pgtion, are eager to describe forms in Retail without omitting anything.
.^¡g national character is reflected in tf,e comparison below. The German list ¡nC|udes a name for each and every form, while the other lists display a ^ore loose method in which the craftsmanship is approached.
Not every detail has to be fixed by name. One allows for designations to remain open and one makes do with analogies such as in France, where three different curves are described with the term 'doucine.'
We are on very uncertain ground when investigating the terms of antiquity. There is no one to consult with.
We rely on written records and evidence which is often ambiguous, mainly because the authors were not necessarily experts in this subject.
Friedrich Mielke, "Nomenklatur der Profile," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 46-53.
PAGE 270
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
the art of profiling handrails
The upper completion of a banister is most easily accomplished with a wooden handle bar, which primarily serves technical stability. If it also proves helpful and convenient to the stair user, the effect is merely a consequence rather than an intention.
The handle bar has no profile, and the width is not easily gripped. One assumes that the user of the stairs does not need the banister.
Therefore, consideration for the characteristics of the human hand seems to be unnecessary.
This simplicity of form may have been accepted at the time.
Today, however, it is extolled by the new primitives as an achievement of Modernism.
Friedrich Mielke, "Primitive Flandlaufquerschnitte aus Holz," Handlaufe und Gelander (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 72-73.
STAIR
PAGE 271

pe study of profiles is similar to the learning process in LuSical education.
pjrst one must learn how to read notes and practice scales. Once this foundation is established, one advances to a ■lrrT1onic series of notes - to melodies, which can be coinParec^ f'ne Profiles- The next step is to be able to |Sten to great works of music, to feel them, to play them, Kfeven to compose them. One can only understand these ,jeces when one has grasped the interconnecting parts.
¡ßli niiK 11STADT/ Eider, |j„f Mtltdbtogwall 24-26,
I ihdldydcrluiHs«', M. 17. Jh.
h35i
fllßUM, Wassermhc 31, »Sunvi IEins«, 1730
80
mlN(¡()ESIADTI Theresicnstr. 25, I mbentreppe, 1771-1773
(II.I)ENIIURG, Damm 8,1792?
I tyllSSENHlIRG (Mill cl franken),
I mm in Put her PI. 9, mfbein. Lateinschule, 1581
rimitive wooden handrail sections.
REGENSBURG, Rathaussaal, Emporentreppe, 1408
OCHSENE U RT (Mfr), Rathaus, 1484?
86
GENGEN BACH, Kirche St. Martin, Emporentreppe, ~1690
63
POTSDAM, Lindenstr. 26, 1734/35
r-”-i
LYS0YEN (N), Villa Oie Bull, Freitreppe 1872 f.
----86
FRIEDRICHS!A DT/ Eider, Markt 19, Apotheke, 1630
With profiles, the grasping is meant literally. If a person is not a producer of profiles, such as a plasterer, a stonemason or a wood turner, he can cultivate his grasping abilities by following contours with his fingers. As he feels the forms, his understanding for curves and edges, for exact and stilted semicircles, for ellipses and ovals, for shallow and steep rails and for all other details, will grow.
In order for the sequence of profiles to become a 'melody,' one must find the right division and the right crossovers. The simple addition of equal elements is stupid and optically ineffective.
Friedrich Mielke, "Nomenklatur der Profile," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Emst Vogel, 2003), 46-53.
MONHEIM, Rathaus, zw. 1714 und 1720

HÜRBEL (Kr. Biherach), Schloß, 1726
70 H
INGOLSTADT, Theresienstr. 24, 1897
173
/»//.SSV l.DORT-KAISERSWERTH, Alle l.imhlr. 179, IW-
n.l.WANGEN,
ehern, ¡eautenhollegium, 1720-1722
180-----------1
I l 'ltlt K. Kimigstr. 21,
1778
Symmetrical rail sections without handle.
Wide rail with added handle.

T
PAGE 272
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
---------- 328
HKIXEN, Klosln ÑcnslI/1, \\ cslh.ikl, I/7N?
INGOLSTADT, Schranncnsir. 6
LUDWIGSBURG, Neues Schloß, östlicher Kavalierbau, 1715 f.
PAPPEN HEIM, Altes Schloß, 1608
LUDWIGSBURG, Neues Schloß, Treppe der Königin, 1725 ff.
LÜBECK, Königstr 11, 1778f
ELLWANGEN, Schloß, nach 1720
HAMBURG, K.illhmnenstr. 10, 1782:
STADE, Rathaus, Haupttreppe, 1672
TROCKAU (Ofr), Schloß um 1170
Symmetrical handrail sections without added handle bars.
OFTEN BURG, Kornstr. 12, 1764
NÜRNBERG, Weinmarkt 6, Trep zur Hof galerie, 1617
AUGSBURG, Wasserturm, DoppePivendeltreppe, 1742
MÜNSTER, Hollenbeckerstr. 9,
DINKELSBÜHL, Weinmarkt 9, -1735
- 6o—I
OFTEN BURG, Hauptstr. 78, ~1770?
Wooden handrail with a vertical handle bar.
¡—48 H
INGOLSTADT, Johannisstr s
-1770	¥$fí§
r 3ó-
ERI ED RICHSTADT/Eider,
Prinzenstr. 28, 1637
\---73-----i
POTSDAM, Am Neuen Markt2, 1773
h-55 —
WEIMAR, Schloß, Bibliothekturm, Wendeltreppe, 1818
PAPPENHEIM, Neues Schloß, Haupttreppe, 1820
WUPPERTAL-BARMEN, Friedrich-Engels-ABiet S3, 1825 }.
STAIR
PAGE 273

TOURS (F), Hotel Briconnet (maison Tristan), 15. Jb.?
NÖRDUNGEN, St. Georg, SW-Treppe 1507f.
AHORN (Oberfranken), Schloß, 1555?
BRACKEN I HUM (W/irtlemberg), S< bloß. Marlin Berwart, / S /.
HABELSEE (Mittelfranken), Schloß, ~1588
ANSBACH, ehern. Kanv.lei, Gideon Bacher 1594
GRAZ (A-Steiermark), Mausoleum, ~1615
ROTHENBURG o. d. Tauber, Gymnasium,
Leonhard Weidmann 1589-1593
ANSBACH ( Mittelfraukvn), / fU/Jgerùbtt l'>02
OFFENBURG (Baden), Lange Str. 18, 16. Jh.
ROTHENBURG o. d. 77, Rathaus, Haupttreppe,
Leonhard Weidmann 1572-1578
DINKELSBÜHL, Segringer Str. 2, ehern. Ratstrinkstube, ~1600
OFFENBURG (Baden), Kornstr. 7,
A. 17. Jh.?
"Profiles are best recorded in three steps:
1.	Coarse profiles
The best way to become acquainted with the basic forms is without any attached profiles. This step is simply about defining the elementary components.
2.	Fine profiles
The combination of coarse profiles molds the fine profiles. They belong to a superordinate program with introductions and transitions. The profile is applied to a main contour. There are exposed or elevated, incised or deepened profiles.
3.	Rules for the order of profiles
Their construction and their effect are often time-conditioned. They were different in the Renaissance than in the Baroque or Classical eras. In the 19th century, new facets of profile sequences were created that, in turn, took on innovative and unconventional forms in the Dugendstil period.
Friedrich Mielke, "Nomenklatur der Profile," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 46-53.
PAGE 274
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
handrails: reduction of types over time
It is not possible to cover the entire magnitude of the objects and their divergence. A quantitative registration is really only possible within the framework of a narrowly restricted area. I took advantage of this opportunity in the 1950s in Potsdam.
In the process of my research, it became clear that there was much more variety of handrail types in earlier decades than in later ones. Each craftsman seems to have endeavored to create as many unique handrails as possible.
Friedrich Mielke, "Handläufe und Griff leisten,"
Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst
Vogel, 2003), 58-65.
STAIR
PAGE 275
Over the course of development, some of the profiles were more successful on the market than others. The number of varieties decreased.
Potsdam, historic handlebar sections from 1722 to 1834, notation and drawing by Mielke, 1956.
PAGE 276
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
ornamental balluster beginner posts
Why choose the 'C'?
Does it have a certain quality as a letter that recommended it before all other letters? If we delve further into the matter, it becomes clear that a foreign form was borrowed - not its meaning, but solely the optically effective curve. In China, it was a common symbol for happiness (yin), and it had a meaning that could not be recognized in Europe: the traditional Far Eastern representation of clouds as elongated semicircles. The surface-covering ornamental form in the East suggested heavenly spheres, but in the West, it was stylized and isolated, identified as the known letter 'C' and used as an easily managed stylistic device. The wide prevalence of the C-starters throughout Europe is explained by the malleability of the principle.
Baluster beginner posts with a pedestal between C-curves.
PARIS (F), 34, rue des Bourdomitiis, Ende 17. Jb.
[> R. LECOq, 1961 b
STRASSBURG, Metzgergirßai IY t> T. STOEIIR, 1927, Taf 19
Klangsu (China), PaoHuaShan,
Hui Shü Ssu, Kloster; Marmorgeländer mit Wolkenmotiven,
1 Prip-Moller, 1982, S. 280.
Friedrich Mielke, "C-förmige Geländeranfänger," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsrled: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 104-114.
STAIR
PAGE 277
|g.shaped baluster beginners
Since time immemorial, the S-curve has
(jjgen admired in various cultures. It ends ¡n opposing, rolled up volutes and can be used in any position - vertically, diagonally or horizontally. In Potsdam, lengthened and appliqued C-scrolls accompany the S-curve on the outer edge. Defining the contour, their role is purely decorative, not structural.
The transformation of the S-curve in (he geometric form language of Classicism in the first third of the 19th century ¡s interesting. The elegance of the S-curve was replaced by an equally graceful concave line.
STRASSBURG, Goldschmiedgasse 3.
> F. STOEHR, 1927, Taf. 26 c
NÜRNBERG, Burgstr 12, 2. H. 18. Jh. >F.T. SCHULZ, 1933, Bd. I, S. 201 d
POTSDAM, Schockstr. 27, ~1781
Stone baluster beginner posts in an S-shape.
Wooden baluster beginner post in an S-shape.
Friedrich Mielke, "S-förmige Geländeranfänger,"
Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst
Vogel, 2003), 115-117.
Metal baluster beginner post In an S-shape; all drawings by Mielke.
O A. Ch. DAV1LER, Paris 1696
f
[> B. A. VITTONE, Lugano 1766 g
> T. HÙLZEL, 1831
PAGE 278
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
Dutch wooden Baluster Beginners
UTRECHT (NL), Nieuwe Gracht 19	UTRECHT (NL), Agnietenstraat 5
b
d
ROTTERDAM (NL), Notarishuis,
Geldersche Kade 24, Erdgeschoß
UTRECHT (NL), Agnietenstraat 5
STEVORT (B), Kasteei, Staatstreppe
DEN HAAG (NL), Prinsegracht 15
h
NAMEN (B), Kasteei de Freyr, Treppe im Vestibül der Kapelle
rue de Bruxelles 55
STAIR
PAGE 279

»specialty found only in the Netherlands, kj^jcFTricludes also the Flemish areas of gelgium. No other place in Europe has such L rich culture of stair- and balustrade-construction in timber. The reasons are envious. Firstly, the construction of ships requires perfection, and secondly, the revision of timbers of any kind emerging from the Dutch colonies overseas goods, a|lowed for the presentation of the most expensive and elegant staircases of that time- By the year 1713, the Netherlands was the leading naval and commercial power in Europe. The 17th century was the "Gouden eeuw," the Golden Century. Master craftsmanship and financial prowess combined Kupferstr. 32, with precious timbers paved the way for / luxury balustrades.	Thereskastr. 19
1773
The formal repertoire is astounding. One of the more extreme balustrade beginners is found in Rotterdam. Not only is it crafted very thinly, but the timber also twists into itself.
These balustrade beginners were handcrafted by seasoned masters who detested mind-numbing systemization.
In this group, details do not matter. What is important is the outline. Volutes are no longer shown, but merely indicated in the contour of the balustrade beginner. These are 'late' forms, which require from the viewer a familiarity with basic ornamentation and its development over time.
They are a kind of 'shorthand' of what previous generations were driven to represent excessively. The lush, abundant forms of early S- and C- beginners are reduced to mere hints.
The fact that these new, reduced forms are easier to craft than the refined inventions of the Baroque and Rococo, could be classified as their weakness. These beginners are characterized as stylized and do not require the hand of a skilled master, no artist is asked.
Such simple shapes can be produced by a mere apprentice.
Auguststr 69, 1794
jjiedrich Mielke, "Stilisierte Geländer-Anfänger," P
Jfadläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, Neue Friedrichstr. 56
|P03), 124-125.
a
Stylized Baluster Beginners
Drawings: Mielke, A, Losch.

m
CI
'i!
ill IL,
Bf
Harderstr 18, ~1773 h
Kupferstr. 18
Ingolstadt
bV
Kiezstr. 20, 1786
Potsdam
Brandenburger Str. 34 n
Friedrichstr. 8, 1827
Berlin
Landsberger Str. 33
Klosterstr. 63/67
PAGE 280
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
chínese balustrades
The model for European latticework balustrades was imported from East Asia. They developed in the wake of landscape parks and Chinese erotic art.
In Germany, Dohann Gottfried Grohmann, professor of philosophy at Leipzig, became the first advocate for lattice work of Chinese origin, at a time in which repeated slats or iron trellises were already used for climbing plants (first half of the 18th century), which served as protective niches for ladies and gentlemen in the Rococo era.
Another route which was previously unrecognized, seems to have paved the way for graphic art coming from China to Europe. This art predominantly distinguished itself with grandiose landscape drawings, and in this context, stairs and balustrades are not important. The Chinese term for landscape (shan-shui) means 'mountains and water.' Stairs in China were never given the chance to become a factor in design. They belonged to the private sphere of their owners.
The Chinese latticework differs from the European in that they are designed according to aesthetic considerations. The motives drawn are marked by ceremonial harmony and carry a deeply rooted meaning. The Chinese formality is a cipher of a world that remains hidden to Western-oriented people. Europeans will only recognize the appearance, not the core meaning.
The Western world is guided by pragmatic thought and recently also by safety considerations. Such wide spacings between bars, as seen in these examples from the Far East, are definitely not allowed in Germany.
Friedrich Mielke, "Chinesische Geländer," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 318-325.
STAIR
PAGE 281
PAGE 282
STAIR
iron balustrades, germany
STAIR
PAGE 283
plank timber balustrades, germany
PARLOW (Pommern), Gutsbaus, 1716.	NOTTWIL (CH),
: G. BRONISCH/W. OHLE, 1939	Haus Mittler-Huprächtigen, 1734.
D> E. BRUNNER, S. 159

RHEINE, Kloster Bentlage, Ost-Trakt, OG, 1728. Aufmaß: B. Seifen, 1994
EISSENBURG (Bayern), Am Markt 9, 1786
BENSHEIM an der Bergstraße, Darmstädter Str 5, Rodensteiner Hof, 1739.
[> H. GÖBEL, 1908
BENSHEIM an der Bergstraße, Darmstädter Str. 5, Rodensteiner Hof, 1739.
> H. GÖBEL, 1908
W EYHAUSEN (Kr. Gifhorn),	BALLIN (Mecklenburg), Kirche,
Haus Nr. 18, 1833.	Orgelemporentreppe, -1740.
> O. KIECKER/H. LÜTGENS, 1931	0 G. KRÜGER, 1929, S. 229
.
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
PAGE 284
plank timber balustrades, eichstatt
oben und links:
EICHSTÄTT, Pfahlstr 1,~ 1730? Aufmaß: E. Grundmann/]. H. Min/ /. Stranzenbach;
Zeichnungen: E Mielke ¡989
oben und rechts:
EICHSTÄTT, Philipp-]eningen-Pl. 4; Verziehen eines Band-Ornament-Geländers und Analyse.
Aufmaß: J. Stranzenbach; Zeichnungen: P. Mielke 1989
Verziehen eines Brettes.
> G. WOLF, 1901, Fig. 171
Distortion of a "Plank" Balustrade, G. Wolf, 1901, Fig. 171.
"kugeldocken" in eichstätt
Round balusters Imply the presence I 0f wood turners. This should be erT1phasized, because there are areas E, which the stairs are fitted neither • with trailles nor with docks. In the ■tiouses of Eichstätt, trailles of the I f8th century can hardly be found.
|n the area of Eichstätt, vase-shaped, spherical docks were much more ■popular than trailles.
Docks are lathed baluster posts.
They are much thicker than trailles.
One general criterion can be assumed: with docks, the widest diameter of the shaft tends to be thicker than the diameter of the socket.
S Friedrich Mielke, "Kugeldocken," Handläufe 4 undGe/änder(Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 270-285.
a Luitpoldstr.36
b Domplatz 3,
I Gasthof "Krone"
c Domplatz 3, Turm d Luitpoldstr. 28 e Marktplatz 22
Aufmaße:
PAGE 286
STAIR - 20. 2003 HANDRAILS AND BALUSTRADES
traljen in potsdam
It is not possible to compile a list of general rules for the proportionina of trailles.
First of all, the proportions that apply to columns are useless for the much smaller docks and trailles. Secondly there were very few writers explicitly specializing in the subject of docks and trailles. Third, craftsmen seldom had the ability to buy and study expensive architecture tractates.
The wood turner does not aestheticize at the drawing board, but rather puts his form ideas into practice in the most natural way. The starting material is a squared piece of timber with a cross section of 60/60 mm up to ca. 80/80 mm.
The two ends (sockets) remain angular, while the shaft in between is turned into a cylinder. Its diameter is equal at every point, and only minimally less than the original cross section of the wood. The size of a sphere never exceeds the predetermined measurements of the baluster. It is simply limited by the dimension of the wood post.
1735-1827 Development of 'Traljen' in Potsdam.
STAIR
PAGE 287
lank timber balustrades, netherlands
ROTTERDAM (NL), Huis de Donck, -1740. Zeichnung: F. Mielke
Balustrades made out of simple planks can also be found in the Netherlands. They are commonly found, if not quite as rich in variation as in Germany. It is obvious that no one paid them much attention. In contrast, the main staircases in the houses of the merchants present a magnificent richness in form. Judging from the thickness of the materials, many of these balustrades still belong to the category of plank balustrades. However, their effect is like that of a baluster, due to the highly sculptural carved work that enriches the surface. Similar ones can hardly be found anywhere else.
Friedrich Mielke, "Niederlande," Handläufe und Geländer (Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vogel, 2003), 162-169.
PAGE 288
STAIR
21.2007 Stair models
STAIR
PAGE 289
Friedrich Mielke
Treppen im Modell
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
Band XIV
PAGE 290
STAIR
22. 2008
Stairs in Nuremberg
Characteristics of human ascension
Die mit * bezeichneten Objekte
haben die 59 Luftangriffe im Zweiten Weltkrieg
mehr oder weniger beschadet überstanden.
STAIR
PAGE 291
Friedrich Mielke
Treppen in Nürnberg
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
Band XV
PAGE 292
STAIR
23. 2008 Man and stairs
STAIR
PAGE 293
Friedrich Mielke
Mensch und Treppe
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung
Band XVI
PAGE 294
STAIR
“how do people walk on stairs?"
For the study of human behavior on stairs, both as a whole and individually, three different methods may be applied:
1.	A laboratory experiment, with a programmed observation of people walking on stairs
2.	A covert observation of random people walking on stairs
3.	The notation of stepping paths on worn stairs (Steigespuren)
The aim is to examine these stepping paths (Spurpunkte), it is important to notate traces on each step and to graphically document them. When we connect all these points on a flight of stairs, it results in stepping path, which marks the most frequented path common to all users.
The result is accurate within limits. None of the stair users had any knowledge of our intentions. None of them was asked to act a subject in the experiment. None of them were able to make predetermined arrangements. Moreover, the traces were made over a long period of time. Everyone who contributed to the wear, did so unconsciously and unaffected.
The stepping path is an exact documentation of the preferred path of a number of anonymous people of different genders and ages.
Friedrich Mielke, "Das Menschliche Steigeverhalten," Scalalogia Volume 16: Mensch und Treppe (Potsdam: Knotenpunkt Verlag, 2008), 62-69.
"The foot raises 1-2 cm above the front edge of the step and brushes a few centimeters above the front edge of the next step, before it sets down at a right angle."
— L. Kvarnstrom, 1977.
"The foot passes over the edge of the step at a height of a few centimeters, before it reaches the next tread"
— L. Kvarnstrom, 1977.
STAIR
PAGE 295
PAGE 296
STAIR
24. 2009
Pupils look at stairs
STAIR
PAGE 297
PAGE 298
STAIR
26.2010
Stairs in the wild Objects, drawings, notations
STAIR
PAGE 299

Friedrich Mielke
Wilde Steige
SCALALOQIA
Schriften zur internationalen Treppenforschung Band XIX
PAGE 300
STAIR - 26. 2010 STAIRS IN THE WILD
Mdina cathedral, Malta: alternating tread stairs model, Regensburg Archive.
STAIR
PAGE 301
Melina cathedral, Malta: alternating tread stairs. Measurements: I. and F. Mielke, January 26, 1982.
alternating steps
These alternating tread stairs are advantageous only in their space-saving, not so much in their use.
It is possible to get used to the alternating steps when climbing this stair. In descending the stair, however, danger lurks in the constraints imposed by the stepping sequence as well as in the irregular step height. Due to its location at a great height on the roof of a cathedral, this stair is presumably used only for inspection, therefore the danger is limited to few individuals.
Exterior stairs
n9randes de Touraine, France, wterior stairs showing friction, rawing: F. Mielke.
Ingrandes de Touraine, France. Farmhouse. Photo: F. Mielke, 24.5.1979.
PAGE 302
STAIR STAIRS OF THE WORLD
27.2011
Stairs of the world
STAIR
PAGE 303
Treppen der Welt
PAGE 304
STAIR
3,500 years old: Europe's oldest wooden staircase, found in Hallstatt, Austria. Used by workers in the Bronze Age to descend into a salt mine 100 meters below ground.
STAIR
PAGE 305
Redlich mielke bibliography
|H/lielke, Friedrich and Christian Grayer. gppen in Ingolstadt. Allersberg: Lcob-Gilardi-Verlag, 1992. Print.
^¡elke, Friedrich and Jolanda Stranzenbach. ITrepPen ,n Breslau, ßand IV. Schriften zur Internationalen mppenforschung. Konstein: 1990.
yllelke, Friedrich and Peter Tölzer. jreppen in Wien. Band V. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: 1990.
ylielke, Friedrich. Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Textteil). Tübingen: Verlag Ernst Wasmuth, 1972. Print.
IVlielke, Friedrich. Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Bildteil). Tübingen: Verlag Ernst Wasmuth, 1972. Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen.
Band I. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Gunzenhausen: jchrenk-Verlag, 1985.
i/lielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen 3.
Band VI. Schriften zur Internationalen ppenforschung. Allersberg: Jacob-Gilardi-Verlag, 1992.
Mielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen 4.
Band XI. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2001.
Mielke, Friedrich. Die Geschichte der m)eutschen Treppen. Berlin, München:
Verlag von Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, 1966.
Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Ein Fotograf sieht Treppen. Band XVIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung.
Konstein: Offizin der Scalalogie, 2009
Mielke, Friedrich. Geistige Treppen.
Treppen des Geistes. Band XII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 1990.
Mielke, Friedrich. Handbuch der Treppenkunde. Hannover: Verlag Th. Schafer, 1993.
Mielke, Friedrich. Handläufe und Geländer. Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003. Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Mensch und Treppe.
Band XVI. Schriften zur Internationalen Mppenforschung. Potsdam: Knotenpunkt ''erlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Scalalogia. Band II. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Eichstätt, Vienna: Franz-Sales-Verlag, 1986.
Mielke, Friedrich. Schüler Sehen Treppen. Band XVII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Hanau: Naumann, 2009
Mielke, Friedrich. Steierne Wendeltreppen in türkischen Minaretten. Band XIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2002.
Mielke, Friedrich. Transzendente Treppen. Treppen zwischen Erde und Himmel. Eichstätt: Hermann Holzbauer: 1996.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen der Gotik und Renaissance. Band IX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschun. Propstei Johannesberg: Fuldaer Verlagsanstalt GmbH, Fulda, 1999. Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen der Welt.
Band XX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein, 2011.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in der Kunst.
Band X. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Edelshausen: Hupfauf Druck & Verlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Eichstätt.
Band III. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschun. Konstein, 1989
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Nürnberg.
Band XV. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Potsdam: Knotenpunkt Verlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Potsdam. Band VIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Allersberg: Jacob-Gilardi-Verlag, 1994.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen im Modell.
Band XIV. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Edelshausen: Hupfauf, 2007
Mielke, Freidrich. Treppen. Zwischen Tauber, Rezat und Altmühl. Treuchtlingen: Verlag Walter E. Keller, 1989.
Mielke, Friedrich. Wilde Steige.
Band XIX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: 1996.

PAGE 306
STAIR
I ¡inage sources and courtesy
■ rriielke, Friedrich and Christian Grayer. ■7?epPen in Ingolstadt. Allersberg:
Jacob-Gila rdi-Verlag, 1992. Print.
fi/lielke, Friedrich and Jolanda Stranzenbach. Treppen in Breslau.
§ ßand IV. Schriften zur Internationalen Wkreppenforschung. Konstein: 1990.
1 Mielke, Friedrich and Peter Tölzer. mfreppen in Wien. Band V. Schriften zur minternationalen Treppenforschung.
| «onstein: 1990.
Mielke, Friedrich. Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Textteil). Tübingen: Verlag Ernst Wasmuth, 1972. Print.
Ivlielke, Friedrich. Das Bürgerhaus in Potsdam (Bildteil). Tübingen: Verlag Ernst Wasmuth, 1972. Print.
Ivlielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen.
Band I. Schriften zur Internationalen
i Treppenforschung. Gunzenhausen: Schrenk-Verlag, 1985.
v Mielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen 3.
Band VI. Schriften zur Internationalen mfreppenforschung. Allersberg: lacob-Gilardi-Verlag, 1992.
Mielke, Friedrich. Collectaneen 4.
Band XI. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Stamsried:
Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2001.
Mielke, Friedrich. Die Geschichte der mDeutschen Treppen. Berlin, München:
Verlag von Wilhelm Ernst & Sohn, 1966.
Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Ein Fotograf sieht Treppen. Band XVIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung.
Konstein: Offizin der Scalalogie, 2009
Mielke, Friedrich. Geistige Treppen.
Treppen des Geistes. Band XII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 1990.
Mielke, Friedrich. Handbuch der Treppenkunde . Hannover: Verlag Th. Schäfer, 1993.
Mielke, Friedrich. Handläufe und Geländer. Stamsried: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2003. Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Mensch und Treppe.
Band XVI. Schriften zur Internationalen BF'eppenforschung. Potsdam: Knotenpunkt Verlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Scalalogia. Band II. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Eichstätt, Vienna: Franz-Sales-Verlag, 1986.
Mielke, Friedrich. Schüler Sehen Treppen. Band XVII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Hanau: Naumann, 2009
Mielke, Friedrich. Steierne Wendeltreppen in türkischen Minaretten. Band XIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: Verlag Ernst Vögel, 2002.
Mielke, Friedrich. Transzendente Treppen. Treppen zwischen Erde und Himmel. Eichstätt: Hermann Holzbauer: 1996.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen der Gotik und Renaissanc. Band IX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschun. Propstei Johannesberg: Fuldaer Verlagsanstalt GmbH, Fulda, 1999. Print.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen der Welt.
Band XX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein, 2011.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in der Kunst.
Band X. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Edelshausen:
Hupfauf Druck & Verlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Eichstätt.
Band III. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschun. Konstein, 1989
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Nürnberg.
Band XV. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Potsdam: Knotenpunkt Verlag, 2008.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen in Potsdam.
Band VIII. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Allersberg: Jacob-Gilardi-Verlag, 1994.
Mielke, Friedrich. Treppen im Modell.
Band XIV. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Edelshausen:
Hupfauf, 2007
Mielke, Freidrich. Treppen. Zwischen Tauber, Rezat und Altmühl. Treuchtlingen: Verlag Walter E. Keller, 1989.
Mielke, Friedrich. Wilde Steige.
Band XIX. Schriften zur Internationalen Treppenforschung. Konstein: 1996.
P306 Collage by Annie Wang.
ESCALATOR
2017 Escalator at the Elb-philharmonie, Hamburg, the longest in Europe, moves in a curve - the escalator is endless...
escalator
• born in the rush of industrial inventiveness and science fiction of the late 19th century, the escalator begins life as a huge attraction at the Paris Exposition of 1900... the escalator's placid movement smoothens the transition from industrial to consumer capitalism, enables the growth of the city into the metropolis, connects the unforgiving spaces of mass transit, and creates the modern department store and shopping mall... seamless facilitated ascent becomes a universal requirement for shoppers... today we ride a device that has not changed in the last 100 years (long-held dreams of a spiral escalator all but abandoned)... in developing countries, the escalator's never-ending hum announces the miminence of the 'developed'... the escalator is a particularly efficient emblem of our global system, churning with silent dynamism, offering the exact same conditions everywhere, while haunted - possibly - by the suspicion that business as usual can't go on forever...

PAGE 2
PAGE 3
METROPOLIS MACHINE
The escalator, by design, represents an assault on the basic logic of the stair, rather than a development of it: a stair is a means of active conveyance while the escalator can be passive. It is a device designed not just to augment the potential of the stair but to displace it, as the car replaced the horse-drawn carriage. Since it fails to entirely replace the stair, the escalator achieves a separate life, as a separate element, with its own semiotics, its own typology, its own architectural destiny.
Born with the rush of industrial inventiveness in the 19th century, the escalator is at first a fantastic attraction at the Great Expositions and later at Coney Island. Engineers and entrepreneurs are drawn to the "movable ramp" as much for its aesthetic and physical thrill as for its practical applications.
The latter, however, soon dominate. A quarter century after the Great Paris Exposition, with its bouquet of escalator types, the Otis Company consolidates its "Escalator" into something very much like what we know today, pushing this basic design relentlessly forward. Seamless assisted ascent becomes a universal standard for shoppers. The escalator smooths the transition from industrial to consumer capitalism by enabling the modern department store; it also facilitates the transition from town to metropolis, by knitting together the immense spaces of mass transit, the former street level and the multiple levels of new typologies such as the skyscraper and the mall.
In the process, the escalator's magic is rationalized. Where its names were as various as its possible trajectories - which could also be horizontal, spiral, or curved - the escalator, a key instrument of consumerism, becomes a product itself, standardized and optimized into the straight, seamless path, the better to float modern subjects to new destinations.
As developing countries have risen in recent years, vast new terrains have been conquered by the escalator's steady rhythm. Escalator systems have reconfigured the fabric of Hong Kong, rejuvenated a Colombian slum, and taken off with China's boom. Dust as its relentless motion connects different levels of architectural space seamlessly, so does its steady typology connect the world aesthetically.
Everywhere today we ride a device that is outwardly the same as the one we were riding 50 years ago. Only the threat of ecological catastrophe (flooded subways?) and the imperatives of sustainability promise to change the escalator's fundamentals. The escalator might be a metonym for the (ideally) frictionless global system of commerce and transportation that it has helped create. Like this system, the escalator churns outwardly with continuous dynamism, but offers the exact same thing everywhere, and it is haunted in its hidden guts by the suspicion that business as usual can't go on forever.
Escalator hauled P'he 101st floor of the Jew World Trade Center, New York.
PAGE 4
THE STRAIGHT PATH OF THE ESCALATOR
It comes to prominence in the age of industrial optimism. After a quick ascent through a period of novelty, it breaks away from its cousin the moving walkway and settles into a course of quiet dominance, a necessity of urban space, with a singular form.
ihyentiori!
IT)
T—
<J)
1____________i
1914 FUTURISM
1911 LONDON UNDERGROUND ESCALATORS	I
1893 World's Colombian Exposition, Chicago: first moving walkway
ifa§hätioft
••t :nos20: 9nSflPe ç °( r-	>îr
PAGE 6
ESCALATOR * STAIR
Escalators enter public consciousness as "moving stairs" but are deliberately differentiated from stairs at exactly the point where they seem most similar: their steps, which are far taller and deeper than code-obeying stairs (especially those of the 21st century). Escalator steps are the closest we get to - while still falling a few centimeters shy of - the might of a Vitruvian stair for a temple, which has a rise and run considered intolerable in contemporary stairs and never attempted. But whereas Vitruvius wrote that his dimensions "will not be difficult" to negotiate, escalator steps have exactly the opposite intention: they are deliberately designed to be more challenging than contemporary stairs, in order to discourage passengers from walking on them, reducing the risk of accidents. Stairs are for walking on; an escalator is for standing still. The lesson: the present-day pedestrian would not make it up to Vitruvius's Roman temple (without an escalator, that is).
1st century BC "The rise of such steps [for a temple] should, I think, be limited to not more than ten nor less than nine inches [22.8-25.4 cm] for then the ascent will not be difficult. The treads of the step ought to be made not less than a foot and a half [45.7 cm], and not more than two feet deep [61 cm],
"The theorem [Pythagoras's] affords a useful means of measuring many things, and it is particularly serviceable in the building of staircases in buildings, so that the steps may be at the proper levels. Suppose the height of the story, from the flooring above to the ground below, to be divided into three parts. Five of these will give the right length for the stringers of the stairway. Let four parts, each equal to one of the three composing the height between the upper story and the ground, be set off from the perpendicular and there fix the lower ends of the stringers. In this manner the steps and the stairway itself will be properly placed."
VITRUVIUS
STAIR

[457-610 mm]
ESCALATOR
PAGE 7
[400 mm]
AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS
ESCALATOR
2010 ASME A17.1 (AMERICAN SOCIETY OF MECHANICAL ENGINEERS) "There shall be a minimum of two and a maximum of four flat steps at the entrance and exit of every escalator. The depth of any step tread in any direction of travel shall be not less than 16 in. (40 cm), and the rise between treads shall not be more than 9 in. (22 cm). The width of a step tread shall not be less than 22 in. (56 cm) nor more than 40 in. (100 cm).''
PAGE 8
HIDDEN WORLD
Much of what makes an escalator distinctive is invisible. The ratio of visible versus hidden components is about 1:1 - sometimes with even more hidden. This fact is decisive for understanding the escalator's architectural significance: the buried mechanisms make increased structural and spatial demands, resulting in a deepened floor slab where the escalator joins the floor.
164D
1000
1194
FL iff 4 steps = 334W
558
1090

148
PAGE 9
2013 KONE Transit Master 140 Escalator. Kone's diagram carefully marks out the amount of space needed at the top and bottom for entry and landing. This transition zone, allowing passengers to get into the rhythm of mechanized conveyance, is another key feature that distinguishes escalators from stairs, and Is common to all types of modern escalators.
Inclined Solid Balustrade

\imlo IIk'IWO
PAGE 10
ESCALATOR VS. STAIR
As a means of vertical conveyance, the escalator presents itself to architect and pedestrian alike as an alternative, with an allure all of its own.
On the one hand, the escalator allows for the conveyance of greater numbers of people, and is specifically suitable for connecting spaces too vast and daunting to be traversed by stairs alone. On the other hand, because of its buried mechanical elements, the escalator places new demands on the space that can have unsettling effects, as in the strange case of the escalators within Thomas Beeby's Harold Washington Library in Chicago.
1991 Thomas Beeby, Harold Washington Library, Chicago. In line with its self-conscious pastiche of Beaux-arts classicism, this library's escalators hearken back to an earlier era of ambulatory ascent. The result Is an illustrative incoherence, yielding a warren of stubby, winding escalators. With their concern for coilaging together historical styles, the postmodernists pay close attention to the elements of architecture and their relationships, if only to provoke deliberate contradiction.
ESCALATOR
PAGE 11
UP TO LEVEL 4
at least), post-modernism tried to corporate the fremdkorper of the calator into the traditional language architecture...
the uncoriv^S|Mal
a^in a conventional stair system
upon entry, a visitor ascends a mere nine steps before reaching the next level

PAGE 12

2012 Encased by a smooth white tub, the escalator ride becomes a minimalist-spiritual simulation at the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam.
A LOOK BACK
The Harvard Guide to Shopping (Taschen, 2002) featured a chapter on the escalator's historical role in transforming the landscape of commerce, looking at how a single, apparently unremarkable element can in fact produce an entirely new architecture...


revisited
by SRDJAN JOVANOVIC WEISS
Escalator.
by SRDJAN JOVANOVIC WEISS and SZE TSUNG LEONG
PAGE 13
No invention has had the importance for and impact on shopping as the escalator. As opposed to the elevator, which is limited in terms of the numbers it can transport between different floors and which through its very mechanism insists on division, the escalator accommo-dates and combines any flow, efficiently creates fluid transitions between one level and another, and even blurs the distinction between separate levels and individual spaces. The escalator profoundly modi-fies architecture—it denies the relevance of both compartments and floors. The success and rapid acceptance of the escalator, which effec-tively enabled the department store at the beginning of the twentieth century, is due to its effortless transformation of virtual space retail area. As an instrument of smoothness, the escalator trigg vast new domain of construction, which through the very smoothness of connection—we now inhabit almost without thought, and any sense of its true scale or radicality. Paradoxically, the most radical architecture has been the most popular and the least noticed.
2002 Introduction to "Escalator," The Harvard Guide to Shopping.
both the scale and the radicality of escalators have only grown since these words were written, which only makes it more worth revisiting this history
PAGE 14
THE RELENTLESS RISE OF THE ESCALATOR
The Harvard Guide tells the story of the escalator's explosion In tandem with the explosion of consumerism. The decade and a half since then represents not a change in course but the exponential extension of the same tendencies, with the rise of new markets, especially China, dramatically expanding the reach of escalator culture...

PAGE 15
2008 Geography of new escalator market: already just five years after the Harvard Guide, China is at the leading edge of escalator culture, a pattern that will continue...
■ China ■ Europe Japan and Korea Americas ■ Rest of the World
1980
ij 2000
ELEVATORS, ESCALATORS: BIG BUSINESS IN CHINA Install««! before 2011 World •China
Escalators
450,000
2011 Nation of escalators: according to the China Elevator Association, today the number of escalators in China alone surpasses the number in the entire world listed in the Harvard Guide. In 14 years, the number of escalators in China has quadrupled, and China now accounts for close to one half of global escalators.
escalators
PAGE 16
AGE OF INVENTION
The escalator is born in the eruption of industry of the mid-1800s. In its early phase, the novelty of mechanical conveyance is inseparable from its appeal, and its development is characterized by a diversity of forms and a blurring of typologies and names - it is mostly called an elevator- that will later be erased from memory. Two men preside over the turn-of-the century evolution of the escalator, Americans Charles Seeberger and Jesse Reno...
3esse Reno (1861-1947)
1859: Patent. The first conceptual articulation of the escalator is described with forceful simplicity by the patent solid*, Nathan Ames Titled "An Improvement in Stairs," the patent outlines a design for a staircase wound into an endless loop i The staircase, made pliable, evolves into a never-ending repetition of steps revolving around three mechanical wheels.
1892: Revision. The most radical and long-lasting change ever to affect the design of the escalator is the single mo» of making it a linear belt instead of a triangular one. Several variations soon follow: a pyramidal escalator, a spiral escalator, a seated escalator. These, however, will prove to be neither as ideologically nor as mechanically significant as the sim-pie, linear moving staircase.
1892
Inclined elevator
U.S. patent Jesse W. Reno
1892
Elevator
U.S. patent George A. Wheeler
1859
Ames "Improvement in Stairs"
U.S. patent Nathan Ames
1898
Conveyor belt
European patent M. Halle, engineer Sixteen conveyor belts are installed at the European Exhibition of Building Arts in Paris.
1900
Duplex spiral escalator
U.S. patent
Otis Elevator Company Charles Seeberger, engineer
1902
Inclined elevator
U.S. patent Jesse W. Reno
1906
Fahrtreppe
European patent M. Hocquardt
PAGE 17
■|902 Amusement: Inclined Elevator, Luna Park, Coney Island.
Ee precocious pioneer of the modern escalator is Desse Reno. jn 1891, he submits his patent for a "new and useful endless Lonveyor or elevator," featuring cleated palettes instead of steps, i-noved via a linear belt (distinct from the tri-corner Ames design of | quarter century earlier). Four years later, he brings his invention Jto Coney Island in Brooklyn as a ride, showing mechanical jonveyance's ability to delight the public. The trip from novelty to practical use is a short one: in 1900, New York installs Reno's ¡ontraption at the Third Avenue elevated subway line at the 59th Street station.
06-19°6: Device. Once actualized, the escalator is rapidly adopted by shopping. As a result, the traditional staircase I a losing battle with commerce. Seen as an impediment to the fluid upward movement of shoppers, the staircase I to be no match for the escalator's effortless transportation of consumers to goods. By adding a vertical dimension lurban experience, the escalator opens upper floors, previously off-limits to trade, to commercial colonization. The stairway" soon becomes the mechanism of choice for seamlessly integrating floors and for pulling traffic from Ereet into the depths of the department store. Masses of anonymous consumers are lifted, free of charge, to a verti-’ ition of spaces of consumerism. By opening its interior to unprecedented innovations in commercial technol-|K department store emerges as an architectural laboratory for inventions in vertical infrastructure, surrendering its | tectonics to the unpredictabilities of obsolescence and the continuous instability of the market. In 1896 Reno inclined elevators to the Siegel Cooper Department Store in New York. In 1898 Harrod's in London installs a Bration machine for transportation and for sale.2 In 1900 Bloomingdale's in New York exchanges its staircases for Inclined elevator. In 1902 Macy's installs a bank of four escalators. In 1906 the Bon Marché in Paris flanks its sides the European "Fahrtreppe.”
grnergence and success of the department store could not have been possible without the escalator. As it becomes syn-iwith commerce, the escalator, in alliance with air conditioning and artificial lighting, allows the interior to become Igly isolated from the exterior, with increasing depth and with increasing levels of control (<*-Air Conditioning).
n staircase Bps, London
lS first escalator
PAGE 18
1900 PARIS EXPO
After its development in the late 19th century, the escalator begins to come of age the 1900 Pahs Exposition. In total, 27 different models of proto-escalator make an appearance at the expo, identifying themselves as inclined elevators, movable ramps, travelators, and as the escalator, a word patented by Charles Seeberger that year in the US (scala meaning steps in Latin; Seeberger had a previous application rejected, in 1892). In Paris, Seeberger, working under the aegis of elevator giants Otis, introduces the flat-step escalator (compared with the small, inclined triangular steps of Reno's model) and wins the expo's Grand Prize for his device. Meanwhile Reno Inclined Elevators show five of their own models. The device's very success assures that this diversity of models will not last long.
1
Charles Seeberger (1857-1931)
1899-1900: Promise. In 1899 the American Charles Seeberger purchases several moving staircase patents, and invaJ and trademarks the name Escalator. He then partners with the Otis Elevator Company to manufacture a working prot0. type.3 Exhibited at the 1900 Paris World's Fair, Seeberger's escalator confidently announces Itself as a symbol of progress The two prototype escalators exhibited at the fair are later sold to department stores. The escalator becomes the catalyst for store expansion above the street, the key to which Is the escalator's appeal to the pleasurable leisure of shopping, being demanding neither on the shopper's physical strength nor on her patience. Upper floors become experientially indisti^ guishable from ground floors.
An early formula for the upward expansion of a store declares the economy introduced by the escalator: first-floor-rent + first-floor-rent = $20,000, first-floor-rent + second-floor-rent + escalator = $15,000.“ In other words, an escalator will make a first and second floor perform as well as two first floors, for a fraction of the rent.
1905: Work. Soon after the escalator is discovered by shopping to speed the transportation of consumers to goods, experiments are carried out to test its effect on the rapid transportation of workers to work. To reduce the time between workers' shifts, the Worsted Wood Mill of Lawrence, Massachusetts, eliminates the use of its staircases in favor of four escalators, which quickly grow to eight. These escalators are wider than usual, with a switch to control the conveying direction.
1906-11: Underground. In 1906 the first underground railway station escalator is installed in New York's Bowery Station on Delancey Street. The same year, London's Underground's Holloway Road Station installs a Reno spiral escalator, which is later removed for safety reasons. In 1911 a Seeberger escalator is installed In London’s Earl's Court Station. A parallel identity for the escalator begins. The distinction is simply this: above ground, the escalator unlocks speculative areas of consumerism: below ground, the escalator unlocks access to greater urban distances through the subway networks.'“!
1900
Seeberger Escalator, manufactured by Otis, at the Paris Exposition
1905
Seeberger Escalator, Worsted Wood Mill, Lawrence, Mass.
1914
Escalator,
Mitsukoshi Depato, Tokyo
Japan's first escalator
1918
Two-Story 5 & 10 Cent Stores: How They Can Be Made Possible and Profitable
TWO-STORY 5 & 10 CENT STORES
PAGE 19
1900 Horizontal conveyance gets equal attention at the Expo
as Max Schmidt's two-speed conveyor belts slide people around the city...
3
PAGE 20
PATH NOT TAKEN: THE SPIRAL
The quest for the spiral escalator, launched after the success of the straight model in Paris, is motivated by a desire for efficiency rather than formal extravagance. After pioneering the inclined elevator, Jesse Reno moves to London and establishes the Reno Electric Stairways and Conv«*«w®e«rwit*»nv, where he becomes obsessed with a new and more fanciful ty|
Moving Walkway," which he develops with William Henry Astc installs a prototype in London's Holloway Road Underground to catch on (perhaps due to safety concerns). With the spiral'! eventually compelled to return to the US, selling off his escala Otis Company. Half a century later, in 1956, a London Underg apparently written upon the rediscovery of the disused device Holloway Road one of lift shafts occupied by double spiral co track travelling at 100' per minute. (Wrought steel chains bride Moving flexible handrail.) Can take passengers up and down (i.e. there was a 'double threat'). Is experimental here but in u;
Where the "elsewhere" is remains a mystery, as the straight e hold around the world by this point...
1902 "I provide a suitable framework carrying spiral or approximately spiral guideways upon which the endless carrier will travel, that portion of the guideways which serves for supporting the descending portion of the traveling carrier being arranged at an opposite inclination to that of the guideways for the ascending portion." — W. H. Aston, "Passenger or Goods Elevator or Conveyor," patent application.
1988 Path not taken: engineers stumble upon the remains of Reno's spiral escalator at Holloway Road tube station.

PAGE 21
PAGE 22
THE SPIRAL, PART 2
Like Reno, Charles Seeberger, even after patenting the term escalator and developing the straight model in Paris, remains convinced of a future for the spiral, especially as a space-saving device in the confined world of the London Underground. And like Reno's experiment at Holloway Road, Seeberger's model also fails to catch on, and the straight path of the escalator is set...
February 14,1911 Seeberger
patents his model of the spiral escalator and imagines it in use in the London Underground.
"My present invention relates to conveyers," Seeberger writes in the application, "and is concerner especially with the spiral type of conveyer by which a single set of steps can be employed in a small space for both ascending and descending stairs."
PAGE 23
August 8, 1911 Six months after the curved "Conveyor" (left), Seeberger patents the intertwining double spiral "Elevator." The spiral forms "a single endless series of steps running in duplex spirals about a common well or center of curvature ... employed for conveying purposes on both the ascending and descending spiral runs or right and left threads."
ESCALATOR
CONVEYING PASSENGERS IN EITHER DIRECTION UNDERGROUND ROAD.
Designed and Patented by CHARLES D. SEEBERGER
1915 Otis designs the Gravity Triple Spiral Conveyor for merchandise, not people. This design promises to move packages quickly through a vertical space as a sort of industrial dumbwaiter.

PAGE 24
SCALATOR
THE GRAND SYNTHESIS
Over the next decade, Reno and Seeberger work with Otis, which offers both of their models: Reno's cleated conveyor, and Seeberger's steps. The escalator's typological fate is sealed in 1921 with the Otis L-type escalator, incorporating elements from both - Reno's cleats and Seeberger's steps -into an apparently final synthesis.
CLEATS: With multiple variations, Jesse Reno's inclined elevator is essentially a moving ramp. His major innovation is the system of metal cleating, which solves the key problem of safety at the entrance and exits of the device. In Otis's catalogue, the Reno escalator is referred to as the "cleat-type" escalator.
MOVING STAIRS: Seeberger's version, which wowed the crowds at the Paris Exposition in 1900, solves one of the most important problems of escalator design by introducing steps, plus a flat section at the top and bottom, allowing passengers to adjust to the escalator's motion. Its most outwardly attractive feature is that it resembles a familiar staircase, and Otis correspondingly called it a "step-type" escalator.
THE UNLOVED SHUNT: To avoid having feet or clothing sucked into the mechanism, "step-type escalators" often featured a shunt, also known as a "passenger diverter," at the exit. Aside from being an unlovely solution to the problem, the shunt prevents direct entry, holding the escalator back from maximum efficiency in processing crowds.
1921 Otis L-Type Escalator. The ultimate synthesis of Reno and Seeberger's innovations. (This wooden "L-type" is still in use at Macy's in New York.)
PAGE 26
MANIFESTO VS. REALITY
While its design is still being finalized, the escalator finds a place in the imagination of artists as a symbol of the future. In his 1914 manifesto, Antonio Sant'Elia deploys the escalator in his design as a weapon against the stagnant past. Yet the Futurist architect's prophecy for a city interlinked by mechanical conveyances is already becoming a reality in London. The escalator already moves faster than the artist can keep up.
"We must invent and rebuild the Futurist city: it must be like an immense, tumultuous, lively, noble work site, dynamic in all its parts; and the Futurist house must be like an enormous machine. The lifts must not hide like lonely worms in the stair wells; the stairs, become useless, must be done away with and the lifts must climb like serpents of iron and glass up to the housefronts. The house of concrete, glass, and iron, without painting and without sculpture enriched solely by the innate beauty of its lines and projections, extremely 'ugly in its mechanical simplicity, high and wide as prescribed by local government regulation, must rise on the edge of a tumultuous abyss: the street, which will no longer stretch like a foot-mat level with the porters' lodges, but will descend into the earth on several levels, will receive the metropolitan traffic and will be linked, for the necessary passage from one to the other, by metal walkways and immensely fast escalators."
— Antonio Sant'Elia, "Futurist Architecture" (1914).
1914 Antonio Sant'Elia's 'New City': a manifesto presented at the Futurist Exhibition in Milan showcasing the power of the escalator to seamlessly transition between layers of the modern metropolis.
PAGE 27
1911 First installation of escalators at Earl's Court tube in London, three years before "Futurist Architecture."
The Future Underground: Even as Sant'Elia was prognosticating in Italy, the kingdom he imagined is gestating in London's Underground, which pioneers the use of escalators, starting at Earl's Court in 1911. The new contraptions are the product of the Otis company, and known as "Type A" escalators, using the Seeberger/ Wheeler "step-type" design. The public, wary at first, is quickly won over. More than half a million people ride the Earl's Court escalators in the first month alone, averaging 18,000 a day.
"For the first day of operation, 4 October 1911, the LER [London Electric Railway] employed one of their staff, a man by the name of 'Bumper' Harris, to ride the escalators and demonstrate their safety. Harris had been clerk of works for the installation, and had an artificial leg. If he could cope, reasoned the company, then it would show nervous passengers that anyone could. Unfortunately some passengers speculated about how his leg had been lost and took the lifts. (It had been crushed some years earlier whilst working on the Underground tunnels). The LER made much of their new machines, erecting large signs directing passengers to their newest marvel. Along with Harris, other staff announced the presence of the escalators to all in the station, and apparently many people visited Earl's Court for the sole purpose of a ride. The report of the second inspection was issued on 4 November. It recorded that in the first week of operation, nine dresses had been torn, one finger had been pinched, and a lame passenger had fallen from his crutches. No accidents occurred in the following three weeks.
In part this was due to dress guards being installed along the length."
— Anthony Badsey-Ellis, "The First Escalators," a publication of the London Underground Railway Society (2007).
1914 Sant'Elia outflanked underground by London's tunnelling engineers: Charing Cross / Embankment Tube Station cutaway, rendered by C. Shand.
PAGE 28
THE WIDE-STEPPED ESCALATOR
In 1929, officials from the London Underground head to Le Havre, investigating an unknown type of escalator. With steps big enough to fit four passengers at a time (though only two are allowed), it is reported to be of greater use to cyclists...
1929 Drawings of L'Escalier Roulant, with measurements showing extra-wide steps, an alternative conception of the escalator as a series of moving platforms rather than moving stairs.

PAGE 29
1929 Letter on France's ,"Escalier Roulant." Ultimately, the British officials are more con-1,cerned with allowing i hurried passengers the lability to walk up the [ stairs than with pro-; viding a more capacious [platform for cyclists.
In effect, the French pcheme ventures too : far away from the profile of a normal stair.

at
Thls •■calator whlch oonnaetc the rlslng ground to tho north of Lo Havre olth tho Industrial qunrter lo 10o metros (17b yarde) Ion« ana has a vertical riso of 100 foot. It lo uood raoetly u. work people who cyole and wm talco thelr oyoloo on tho oooalator. fhoro aro fixed otalro on oacb «ido whlch aro malnly uood ln Uto uown* dlroetlon. íh* oooalator ohargoo aro ao folleosi-
Aoccndlna	Dooconfllng
Centimes	centimes
1 ojseengere	... fit Ti“) laaeongoro	. ..	15
Doga, bicycles,	.'logo, bioyoloo,
perambulators «to. 16	perambulators Ota. 10
Tho grado is Tory oaoy, while the stops are rauoh larger (37i«> front to v,aok and hi,her U&J") than oa the
Underground escalator», and they nro capable of standing four passengers, but to avoid overload on tho motor It lo forbidden tor mors than two to bo on a stop at a time. The capacity lo 6(000 passengers per hour, presumably ln «aoh dlrsetion. It
haa been ln strvica about a year.
The a asió serles of stops la uood for ooth uoceodlng and aseoeudlng paso enge re.
The sidas of tho eeestator aro ül¿* sport 1 naide tho haaorslls, narrowlng to acout «l* at tho stop, they oro oonotruotod of Bhe«t metal slightly oonoav# and bave a projection oí about 1* on o aoh sido over the stop to act ao a gusrd.
Tho opoedo «re so followes-
Ordinary opeed	88 ft. por sin. Journey timo 0 mino.
Fost	...	132	- J ■	•	-	4	‘
Tho oíate on tho atepe aro Ia oido, Ia deep and opacad apart. Tho oomb lo ¿a lang, ¿* croad and a llttlo over Ia doop at tho baso. It otando proud of tho elat a máximum of ¿a anaectondo n díatenos of 1- from the naso to ths «val of ths elat. fhe olato
are of wood and are fixed on 4 wooden erooo supports wtaloh take tho plaoa of o stop proper. Thors does not appear any reason why the stop Itself should not bo solid if required.
Tho front of tho stop lo a metal plats and la used for adTortialng.
The nonurolls were not working auo did not appear to hove boon working for a long tin*, They wore very muon frayed. With the wide stop and the gehtle blope they did not appoor necessary.
boms okstehee wo appended showing further details
and dimono lone.
AflOKHDIMO ISCALATOK.
ssSiar
The load-on at tho oottom of tho asoendlng oooalator lo level. The stop so soon ao It emerges fully from under tho load-on rloao 1* vertically and lo then practically levol with tho landing, in 6 foot It has risen 3" and la at full height of 16*« ln eoeut 80 foot.
UUt'
At the top. iv stops from the landing! tho roar ond of ths stop is tilted upwards und there lo a straight olopo of 7 to 8 foot to tee landing. The height of ths stop when tilted lo about 7« above tho landing, the tilting action throws tho passenger'» balance slightly forward and lo an aid to quicker discharge of passengers, oyoloo and poromoulatoro.
Ths landing Is level for 3 feet and then slopes down qulekly for .bout 12 yards to the ordlnaiy pavomont outside. This elope down from tho landing does not soem to bo for facilitating passengers getting off the eeoalator, but to bring them more quickly to tho level of tho pavement outside.
DMCkSMHC KVALATOK.
asoendlng oooalator and thoro Is o long approach from the pavement. The load-on lo level. Thoro lo s drop of £" to 3* from tho landing to tho stop aooordlng to tho rclatlvs position of ths atop and tno load-on, as tno nose of tho stop lo »lightly tilted up. There Is very llttlo break for about 16 foot and then the full stops arc formed very rapidly. At oboct IbC foot from lu bottom landing the angle of descent alters from 34° to 4«'’.
Botjoa
Twenty fost from ths landing the wteps gradually reduce, and tho last 2 stop* have a very slight slope towards tha landing! which is level.
In some points I think this typo of oooalator la superior to those on tho underground, namely, tho deeper and wider slats, tho narrow spacing between tho elate, and the oIko and shape of tho comb. I gather thoro has boon no trouble with tno ubo of these combo causing injury «i trier to passengers or to dogs. 1 sew 0 dog at the top landing tot off quite safely although ho put his paw ln a position where with our escalator he would h ve boo» Injured.
Ths cootour of tho stop dooo not differ from the Underground. Thoro seems to be no advantage! except lightness* in tho elate being open and rlxod to supports, «■ tho earns «Ido of tho step- is used for standing on whon asoendlng and descending. Tho disadvantage of buying tho elate open is that passengers drop matonae, »lo. through and these do not look as if thsy were evar cleaned out.
Tho long stop and tho high rlas presumably go together, i.o. th« steeper step with our prossnt length front to back would form too stoop an ougl» to be ears. If we had a longer stop and a higher rise tuors would bo no advantage.
as wo would be merely giving paeoengsrs more space to stand
on -end would make it mors diffloult for tnem to walk. They would thue loee the faollity which they have of aodlng their own speed to the speed of ths escalator. In the case of the eeoalator breaking down, pans angers would be unable to use it u an ordinary »talreaos, whloh would bo a decided handioop all round, ln a situation ao at he Havre tho wide stop to apparently n* ossa ary for tho aonveyenos of perambulators, bioyoloo, etc. The tilting action and ths olopo at tho top of the asoendlng ewoalator nro, 1 think, a nlight Improvement, os do not, however, loos time when getting paesongsrs off the escalator, the delay lo rathor with gsttlng them on, and It Is an advantage, particularly with deeosndlng passengers to have several feet travelling level before the steps are rormnd.
It baa to be remembered that our escalators require to be reversible, and the angles of the steps would be quite unsuitable if used ln the revere# dlreotion. Th# eeoelntor to be reversible must have ooabe at each end, end 1 should eoy it is nn improve »ant to hut# a shorter oome when stepping on to the asealator. Beet passengers hesitate and lengthen their etrlde to step over our long r comb end thereby aeueo a alight delay.
The figures oontain« those whloh 1 oould gather from
unofficial souross, and should ,
except
whloh are actual.
Ln ths report are only own observations or from f bo taken «a approximate, inte of the slate and steps,
PAGE 30
ESCALATOR
POWER PLAYS
The 1930s see escalator progress track industrial consolidation. In Japan, Mitsubishi enters the game in 1935; in Switzerland, Schindler joins in 1937.
But the high speed, luxurious Soviet escalator, exalted in communist propaganda, stands as the era's most powerfully symbolic development.
Escalators are the vehicle of Nikita Khrushchev's rise. The future Soviet leader makes his name as deputy to L.M. Kaganovich on the construction of the Moscow Metro, where he argues for the system's famous escalators instead of an elevator system, though Khrushchev himself remembers in his memoirs that he did not even know what the word "escalator" meant when an engineer brought him the idea. The plan is sealed by the need for the Metro to double as a bomb shelter.
1931-35: Moscow. The escalator embarks on an alternative history, separate from consumerism. While in the West the escalator ensures a public commitment to commerce, in the Soviet Union the escalator parallels and symbolizes the public ethos of proletarian efficiency.
Escalators are first installed in the new Moscow subway stations, which in themselves are symbols of the new nation's commitment to refashioning the city according to Soviet ideology. In a 1934 speech, L. M. Kaganovich, the Minister of Transport, Commisar of Railways, and First Party Secretary for the Moscow Region in charge of constructing the new subway system, explains how the Communist mind-set has contributed to unparalleled speeds of construction. Kaganovich states that by the time Berlin's first line was finished, the rate of construction was 1.8 kilometers of subway line per year. Rome's was 2.1 kilometers per year; Tokyo's 1 kilometer per year; New York's 2.9 kilometers per year. The first Moscow Metro line has surpassed all of them, having been built at the rate of 3.4 kilometers per year. According to Kaganovich,
I do not cite this data in order to boast that we have surpassed the tempo of many capitalist cities. If under much more difficult conditions we have, in spite of a lack of experience and skill, surpassed the tempo of capitalist states, it is due to our system of economy, to the correct leadership of the Party, of its Central Committee, and the enthusiasm of the wide masses of the workers.5
The escalators continue the statistical advantage the Soviet Union has over the West. Not only are they among the longest—some at 200 feet in length—but the speeds are phenomenal. With a rate of one meter per second, the Soviet escalators run at almost twice the speed of the average escalator.6 The escalator in the Soviet Union is especially effective, as it transports a constant stream of workers laboring on a two- or three-shift system, which eliminates the capitalist rush hour. Other advantages of the Soviet escalator have been enunciated by a Soviet historian of the Moscow Metro:
Escalators deserve special mention. All are of Soviet make and the long service they have given is proof of their high technical qualities. While in operation they have been further improved—greater smoothness and elimination of vibration having been attained. Today Soviet factories produce the newest type of lighter escalator, which consumes 8 to 10 p'-'cent less electric power.7
Widely accepted because of its technological simplicity, the escalator is also i’ imensely successful because of its ideological flexibility, serving consumers and proletariats with equal effectiveness.
1935
Smolenskaya station Moscow
Moscow Metro escalator
PAGE 31
1943 Design for Stalin Central Stadium Metro, escalator hall, by E. Vilensky. Among the designs for Moscow's Partizanskaya station is one by Dmitry Chechulin that envisions a special place for the escalator within Soviet iconography, imagining the station as a cathedral, with passengers delivered by escalators to the base of an immense Stalin statue. Because of the war, a more austere design is selected instead. Nevertheless, the scheme suggests the device might be as useful for delivering ideology as people...
With the end of the Soviet Union, its alternative escalator standards start to fade. In 2008, Prague begins slowing down its remaining ultra-fast Soviet-type escalators to meet European Union safety standards.

PAGE 32
ESCALATOR
GENERICIDE
The march of the escalator continues during the postwar shopping boom, conquering new cities and bringing a rush of novelty everywhere it goes. The period also signals the escalator's increasingly generic profile in the public's mind. With the term "escalator" falling out of copyright protection by 1950, Otis is the victim of 'genericide': the term now belongs to the public, and Otis's competitors.
1956 Escalator at Woolworth's Southdale Center, by Victor Gruen & Associates in Edina, Minnesota, inside the first indoor covered mall in the US. The transition from downtown shopping center to suburban mall offers new territories for the escalator to conquer on its path to global dominance.
1945-58: Marketing. Back in the West, the momentary lapse in consumerism caused by World War II gives way to an unprecedented and uninhibited inventiveness fueled by consumerism. Advertisers claim technology as the guarantee for economic success, and the Otis Company discovers marketing. Even though the basic idea of the escalator has remained virtually unchanged since its first application, it is heralded as a technology critical to the postwar prosperity.
A direct equation between a building's cash flow and number of visitors is formulated: maximum circulation = maximum sales volume. Store area is calculated in direct relationship to volume and flow of shoppers. Stores are now devised according to the equation, retail area above ground floor / capacity of the stairways < 1/20. That is, to carry one person an hour to every twenty square feet of merchandise area above the ground floor is to accomplish maximum dollar volume.* The escalator can move five to eight thousand potential shoppers an hour, yet the sixteen hundred escalators in operation in the United States in the late 1940s are hardly enough to sustain the postwar shopping euphoria.
In a promotional brochure, Otis articulates the difference between the elevator and the escalator as the difference between who is in control: *
The elevator is ideal for the 'man with a mission.' He knows what he wants. It’s a specific floor; he goes to that floor, makes his purchase and leaves. If he wants to go upstairs because he has business there, then give him an elevator. But if you want him upstairs, then you must reach down and pick him up. The Escalator does this job for you—and it does it better than any other vertical trans-portation equipment available today.
Because of its beauty, because of its continuous movement, and because it is comfortable to ride on, the Escalator beckons to the customer and assures him that he can travel upward quickly and without effort. No waiting, no crowding. This induces casual shoppers to visit the upper floors. And, because a properly located Escalator affords a wide, unobstructed view of surrounding areas, passengers often stray from the Escalator to look at merchandise they would otherwise never have noticed.
Escalators encourage impulse buying. They increase the value of upper floors,.. . they help to raise sales volume ... and they pay for themselves.9
1949
Pages from an Otis Elevator Co. brochure
1955
Otis advertisement

PAGE 33
1947 Inauguration of "Motorstairs" by the Harris Company, San Bernardino. Until the crucial Haughton Elevators v. Seeberger decision, competitors must call their products by inventive names like "electric stairways," "moving stairs," and "motorstairs." "Escalator" though, with its convenient parallel with "elevator," soon proves too tempting to resist, even for Otis itself, which starts to use the term uncapitalized in its advertising material.
TRADE-MARK REPORTER
HAUGHTON ELEVATOR COMPANY v. SEEBERGER, etc.
Commissioner of Patents—April 3,1950
Cancellations—Basis of Relief—Abandonment
"Escalator" held to have become recognized by the general public as the name for a moving stairway, as the result of registrant's course of conduct causing the mark to lose significance as an indication of origin, and registration thereof cancelled.
Abandonment—Evidence— General
On facts of record, registrant's course of conduct causing the word “Escalator" to lose its significance as an indication of origin held demonstrated by meaning of the word to the general public resulting from registrant’s own use of the word as a generic and descriptive i its advertising addressed to the trade, and in standard safety code prepared by committee upon which registrant had responsible representatives who made no protest.
Appeal from Examiner of Interferences.
Trade-mark cancellation proceeding by Haughton Elevator Company against Charles D. Seeberger (Otis Elevator Company, assignee, substitute). Registrant appeals from cancellation of registration. Affirmed.
Marshall, Marshall & Leonard, Toledo, Ohio, for Petitioner.
Watson, Bristol, Johnson & Leavenworth, of New York, N. Y., for Respondent.
Murphy, A. C.:
This is an appeal from the decision of the Examiner of Trade-Mark Interferences sustaining the petition of the Haughton Elevator Company to cancel the trade-mark "Escalator’' Registration No. 34,724, issued May 29, 1900, to Charles D. Seeberger, assigned to the Otis Elevator Company, and duly renewed May 29,
1930; and recommending its cancellation.
Both parties took testimony, filed briefs, and were represented at the oral healing.
The Examiner of Trade-Mark Interferences sustained the petition for cancel' lation and recommended that the registration be cancelled on the ground that the term “escalator” has become a descriptive name to both the general public and .to engineers and architects and that, to them, the term not only does not mean a moving stairway made by the respondent but rather means any moving stairway without reference to the maker thereof.
but, by its own use thereof as a generic term, has given assent to such use.”
On careful consideration of the record in this case, it appears, and it does not seem to be disputed, that the term "escalator” is recognized by the general public as the name for a moving stairway and not the source thereof. It further appears that respondent has used the term as a generic descriptive term instead of an indication of origin, in a number of patents which have been issued to them and has also so used the name in their advertising matter which has appeared in magazines addressed to the trade which would be likely prospective customers for such devices.
1950 Haughton Elevator Company v. Seeberger, etc. Despite its humiliating loss in court, Otis continues as one of the major manufacturers of escalators. As for Haughton, Switzerland's Schindler purchases the Toledo-based company in 1974, thereby entering the US market.
I
PAGE 34
CRAZY FOR NOVELTY
By now a fixture of the urban environment, the escalator struggles not to be taken for granted. Rekindling excitement in it, for manufacturers and architects alike, means dressing it up.
1963 Otis enters the swinging 60s with the Esca-Laire, introducing the glass balustrade (soon to be standard), and handrails "picked from the colors of the rainbow" (black remains the norm). "With their see-through balustrades, the Esca-Laire escalators mirrored their patrons' best conceptions of themselves: the machines had a quiet glamour without ostentation but could be 'boldly scintillating.'"
— Dulie Wost, "Perspectives on the Escalator in Photography and Art," Up, Down, and Across, 159.
1958-80: Expansion. The interior continues its horizontal expansion with the development of a new generic building typology of slab-and-base, where shopping occupies the horizontal realm in the form of a multilevel podium connected by escalators, and work occupies the vertical strata of elevator-punctured office towers sitting on top of the shopping bas7 This type is realized in Victor Gruen's 1959 Midtown Plaza in Chicago, the first in a succession of increasingly interiorized
shopping realms crowned by office towers.
Because it expands the ground level of the city as an inhabitable, interiorized, and continuous plane on a scale extending beyond the individual building, the escalator becomes synonymous with urban experience. The increasing urbanization of the interior—as in the slab-and-base model—as a result of new depths made accessible by the escalator and other mechanical systems is paralleled by a reconceptualization of the urban exterior in terms of the escalator. The escalator enables a paradigm shift in urban configuration, from the city of fragmentation to the city of seamlessness.
Emblematic of this shift is Alison and Peter Smithson's 1958 Haupstadt project for the reconstruction of Berlin, which proposes that a new scale of urban territory can be put within reach of the pedestrian through the aid of technology. ywi escalator figures prominently in making smooth transitions from the street level up to a raised public platform that h zontally extends indefinitely over the city. Reyner Banham pronounces the scheme "the escalator city."
1959
Victor Gruen
Midtown Plaza, Rochester
The escalator enables the base, while the elevator enables the slab.

PAGE 35
esents its own version of the utopian escalator city. Here, too, the escalator lifts the shopper/dtizen to an horizontal connectivity; yet this time the ease, efficiency, and high capacity of mechanical conveyance
5 to liberate the street from traffic.”
1976 World's longest freestanding escalator, Atlanta: now a part of CNN headquarters, the 62-meter escalator is built as part of the entrance to the world's first indoor amusement park,
The World of Sid and Marty Krofft (a television puppeteer duo). The attraction proves to be an insufficient draw, and the park closes after less than a year. The escalator remains.
1977 From public to private: the tubular exterior escalators at Richard Rogers and Renzo Piano's Pompidou Centre, Paris, eventually prove too popular. Some 20 percent of visitors come only for the free ride to the roof, that is, until the museum starts charging for the ride in 1997.
"The center had become a machine for looking out at Paris," Pompidou's president Dean-Uacques Aillagon tells the New York Times on its reopening, defending taking back his escalators from the public sphere.
PAGE 36
ASIA GETS ON THE ESCALATOR
Deng Xiaoping's reforms in China trigger a new period of growth for the escalator, repeating its by-now classic evolution on ever grander scales: the escalator as exalted symbol of modernization, and then of generic commercial convenience...
1999 Laifeng Pagoda, Hangzhou, China.
The original pagoda, constructed in 975 AD, collapses in 1924, The new structure, rebuilt in 1999, has four elevators within the structure itself, plus two escalators scaling the hill It sits on.
¿árrr	V	-Mâ
- ,r¡ m
J* Ml ■JIH ■ i *, 1 £	. - -**i" Trl
lOii^K s n jl*a
L-J-S- '.

PAGE 37
1985
1985 HSBC Tower, Foster & Partners - the world's most expensive building at $668 million. In addition to its distinctive twopronged entry escalators, it also uses the element in another novel way: instead of stopping at every floor, elevators service banks of floors, or "zones," which are then interconnected by more escalators, 62 in all.
PAGE 38
HONG KONG'S MEGA-ESCALATORS
The world's longest escalator system, the Hong Kong Central Mid-Levels Escalators, began as an attempt to alleviate traffic congestion on the roads. In this it failed, but its 20 covered escalators and three inclined travelators convey
55,000	commuters daily. It takes 25 minutes to traverse the entire network, which spans 800 meters in all. Responding to commuter flows, the system runs downhill from 6-10 am, and uphill from 10:30 am-midnight. The scale of the Central Mid-Levels Escalators earns it a place as a tourist attraction in itself, recovering a sense of wonder for the escalator...
1993 Hong Kong Central Mid-Levels Escalators.
PAGE 39
ENTER the dragon
A spectacular, Mitsubishi-designed, 72-meter escalator in Long Quing Xin Gorge, China: escalator as national symbol...
1997 Dragon Escalator, Long Quing Xin Gorge, China.
PAGE 40
ESCALATOR
CONTINUOUS RISE
In the years since the Harvard Guide, the conquest of "new scales, territories, and spaces" it predicted in its final pages has only accelerated...
3000 Proliferation With historical hindsight, an irony emerges Even though the escalator has remained virtu-1 h na’ed since its first pre-twenbeth-century patents, it has instigated some of the most profound transform*« f ,he configuration of built space and the oty. Its efficiency and success rests largely on the fact that it has, at least un esisted obsolescence. Its acceptance has even led to the elimination of classical mechanisms such as the staircase. n0Not' only has the escalator-along with other mechanical inventions such as air conditioning-enabled a vast expansion ,n the physical size of shopping environments, it has also introduced a new way of inhabiting the city. With the escalator, reviously disconnected realms can be smoothed into an uninterrupted experience, allowing different and even incompatible spaces to be taped onto each other almost ad infinitum and experienced as a single continuum. As an efficient transitional device the escalator has quickly generated coherence out of fragmentation, unifying greater portions of the city.
Now the smoothing effects of the escalator are being complemented by the expansion of shopping into program, lust as spaces are becoming increasingly undifferentiated, so are activities. As schools and airports become shopping centers, malls become museums, and downtowns become malls, the escalator remains a familiar, ubiquitous, and effective icon linking all activities and spaces in an easy, attractive manner. Not only has the escalator made new scales, territories, and spaces available to us it has also delivered us-in a way few can resist—to the new forces that so profoundly shape our cities.
•- 'Air Conditioning," "Mobility," "Scale"
1996
Waved escalator Japan
2000
Otis model 506NCE
1.	William Worthington, Jr., ’Early Risers,’ Invention & Technology (Winter 1989): 40.
2.	David A. Cooper. ’The History of the Escalator,’ Lilt Report (January February 2000): 63.
3.	Ibid., 64.
4.	Two-Story Si 10 Cent Stores: How They Can Be Made Possible and Profitable (1918), 1.
5.	L M Kaganovich, The Construction of the Subway and the Plan of the City of Moscow (Moscow: Co-operative Publishing Society o( Foreign Workers in the USSR. 1934), 16.
6 Otis escalators run at an average of half a meter per second.
7. Z. Troitskaya, The LM Kaganovich Metropolitan Railway of Moscow (Moscow: Foreign Languages Publishing House. 1955), n.p.
8	Otis Elevator Company. Escalators , OTIS, promotional brochure. 1949, 5.
9	Ibid., 4.
10	Otis Elevator Company, ’Otis Helps Purchaser or His Architect,’ in The Place of the, Escalator in the Modern Merchandising, promotional brochure, 1948, n.p.
11	H Pasdermadjian, The Department Store: Its Origms. Evolution and Economics j (London: Newman Books, 19S4), 44
12	Morris Ketchum. Shops and Stores (New York. Reinhold. 1948), 130.
13	Margareth Opsata, ’Escalators Used at Most Malls. Can Benefit Energy Bottom Line, ■ Shopping Center World (September 1980).
PAGE 41
2005 Afghanistan installs its first escalator, at Kabul City Center, a new shopping mall and hotel. The complex is powered by its own internal generators. As a symbol of foreign presence, the mall has become a target of attack for multiple bombings.
2011 An escalator in a North Korean shopping mall becomes international news when it is reported to be the site of Kim long M's final public appearance. Carpeted in blue, it becomes a pilgrimage site in 2011 upon the leader's death.
2013 Ahmedabad Ka-lupur station becomes home to the first escalator at any train station in Gujarat, a province of 60 million people. India trails a distant second to China in new escalator installations, with a demand of 1,500-1,600 in 2013, according to consultants Frost & Sullivan.
PAGE 42
INTERLUDE: THE TRAVELATOR
In its origins, the escalator is linked to another mechanical novelty: the moving walkway, or travelator. The latter fires the imagination of those envisioning the future city, though it ultimately plays second fiddle to the escalator, which dominates retail space and public transport to a much greater degree...
1912 Otis's Double-Flat Cleat Escalator
In the wild early days of escalators design the device is an inclined moving ramp.
Cleat type Escalator in Bamberger's. Newark. N. J. There are five such Escalators in this store.
1872 Alfred Speer, "Endless Traveling or Railway Sidewalk": early design to use moving sidewalks to ease congestion in New York. The scheme finds wide support but is vetoed by the state's governor.
1893 World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago: the first Installed moving walkway, using Speer's design. Operated as a ride, charging five cents per trip, it is consumed by fire in the year after the exposition, eliminating Chicago's pioneering attempt at a mechanical promenade from popular memory.
1900 Motorized walkways, Paris Exposition: consisting of three elevated platforms, the first stationary, the second moving at a moderate speed, and the third rolling along at about nine kilometers per hour, allowing a new breed of mechanical flaneur to choose their own adventure.
PAGE 43
2014 Standard track widths according to Schindler Escalators and Autowalks Planning Guide.
1954 "Imagine New York's famous Fifth Avenue devoid of all wheeled traffic... no swarms of nervous pedestrians scurrying back and forth at dangerous intersections ... Imagine, instead ... a continuous stream of comfortable public cars, flowing smoothly along on silent, rubber belts ... Does all this sound like a hashish smoker's dream of a shopper's paradise? Not to the hard-boiled engineers of Goodyear's Conveyor-Belt division."
— Popular Mechanics.
2002 Paris reintroduces the ultra-fast moving walkway, "The trottoir roulant raplde," at Montparnasse station. Returning to the concept from a century earlier, multiple speed levels allow commuters to adjust to the experience, reaching the same 9 kilometers per hour of 1900. Beset by technical problems, the trottoir is replaced by a conventional one-speed travelator in 2009.
PAGE 44
PROCEDURES OF THE ESCALATOR
The contemporary escalator has perfected the seamless experience. It is easy to forget that escalator behavior has to be learned, and comes with a battery of rituals, rules, and anxieties that govern the fluid space that it has created.
2011	Each diagonal line in Belinda Lawley's composite image Escalators shows riders on a different escalator captured during a single day. "They're such spaces for introspection," the artist tells the Evening Standard. "People get totally lost in thought." The escalator creates a space where a commuter can be both active and passive, in public but also lost in her own headspace.
PAGE 45
PAGE 46
TOR
ESCALATING LAZINESS
In its rivalry with the escalator, stairs acquire a new weapon: public health. Faced with an epidemic of obesity and heart disease, observers in the US worry that the culture of effortlessness enabled by the escalator is literally killing people, and look to turn back the clock.
July 2013 Mayor Michael Bloomberg at the launch of the Center for Active Design.
2009 "Burn Calories Not Electricity,"
New York.
Burn Calories, Not Electricity
Take the Stairs!
"Officials ... announced the creation of the 'Center for Active Design,' a nonprofit organization that will be tasked with finding ways to design healthier buildings, promote public transit and create more inviting outdoor spaces for activity. Mr. Bloomberg also announced a new executive order requiring all agencies to use these strategies when performing new construction or major renovations. Mr. Bloomberg, who said he personally almost always uses the stairs - and doesn't stand still when he's on an escalator - said that part of the challenge was to make being active hipper for young people across the city."
— Dill Colvin, The New York Observer (Duly 17, 2013).
PAGE 47

Figure 1
Patterns of Stair Use Among Commuters in Times of Low, Moderate, and High
Commuter Traffic*
DISCUSSION
■ Walk Stairs □ Ride Escalator	□ Walk up Escalator
"The Effects of Commuter Pedestrian Traffic on the Use of Stairs in an Urban Setting," American Journal of Health Promotions, September 2011,49-51.
One of the key findings of this study was that commuter congestion can have a dramatic effect on whether or not people chose to walk up stairs or ride the escalator. It was found that commuters were 67% more likely to choose to walk up the stairs in lieu of riding the escalators during periods of high traffic. This finding may have important public health implications as we seek strategies to increase energy expenditure on a population level. Hill et al.4 have argued that simply affecting energy balance by 100 kcal/d would be enough to prevent weight gain among most populations. This could be achieved by simply accumulating lifestyle activities, such as walking up stairs when possible throughout the day.5
There is little doubt that the environment in most developed countries is contributing to the global obesity epidemic. Most public areas are designed to allow pedestrians and commuters to efficiently move through public places without expending much energy. Most adults feel that they are constantly under time pressure and that they have not time for exercise. It may be that designing public areas with easy, unobstructed access to stairways and perhaps limiting access to escalators, moving walkways, and elevators could increase pedestrian congestion and increase the use of more active choices in public areas. Andersen et al.6 recently examined patterns of stair use at a national meeting of sports medicine professionals. Interestingly, it was reported that those who walked up two flights of stairs arrived at the upper landing faster than those who rode an escalator and only slightly slower than those who walked up the escalator. Furthermore, several studies have shown that motivational signs encouraging stair use can significantly in-
1989 The world's shortest escalator, at More's Department Store, Kawasaki,
Japan. Made up of five steps, the escalator only descends, then is immediately followed by an additional flight of stairs.
PAGE 48

STAND ON THE RIGHT
The eternal rivalry between the escalator's two competing camps - the Stander versus the Walker - represents a bipolar identity: the escalator is both a way to replace effort and to augment it, to maintain a minimum speed and to attain a maximum. It is doubtful whether one element can contain both, though no shortage of signage attempts to resolve the conflict...
1944 Cyril Kenneth Bird, "Please Stand on the Right of the Escalator," Fougasse, London Transport Museum.
1947 Escalator Booths: Popular Science publishes Doris Kenney's proposal (redrawn here) which would give each commuter her own partitioned "booth" on escalators, protecting them from encroachments.
2013 Yoni Alter, Proposal for Tube Escalators. I his Photoshopped picture shows one designer's attempt to bring harmony to the escalator, a system of decals: "A solution that transcends languages and cuts through the jumble of visual messages around."
Shanghai begins advocating a "stand on the right and walk on the left" policy in [ 2006 in preparation for the 2010 Expo. In 2012, [ the Shanghai metro pandons the official commendation, cit-: ¡ng concerns about Ttcidents and damage to the escalators. Of-| ficials said they would not criminalize those [who chose to walk. The I BBC reports that only 3 percent of Shanghai ■commuters walk on the (escalator, compared ■ith 25 percent in the pndon Underground.
Justralia is one of the few places to flip the stand on the right" Convention, standing ¡Stead on the left. As Sewhere, however, is hard to make the lasses obey the simple rule: "This convention ems to be generally followed in peak hour but rarely at other times - and almost fver outside of railway itions." ("Keep left: iscalator etiquette and 'estrian convention," ABC Melbourne, May 4,2011.)
PAGE 49
PAGE 50
CUSTOMS OF THE ESCALATOR
Near universal in its formal articulation, the escalator generates a cloud of micro-rituals based on local custom and anxiety...
2008 "Escalator Girls": revival of a mid-century practice at Odakyu department store In Shinjuku In 1964, Life describes the duties of the escalator girl: "The famed Takashimaya store employs 16 escalator attendants or E-girls, who stand like angelic sentinels by each escalator and bow every customer onto the moving stairway. Every gesture has to be just so. If a customer asks where something is located, the E-girl may point but never with her finger. Her hand, according to strict rules, must be turned palm upward, and then extended gracefully in the direction of the desired merchandise. And that isn't all. She must execute an additional bow, topped off with a modestly seductive smile. By this time, who cares for merchandise?"
PAGE 51
2010 Pyongyang's (metro, opened in the ’ 1970s, is 200 meters *|ep. Since it can take minutes to descend the ^calator, commuters linetimes sit on the nay down, a practice that is discouraged. Guards in booths are on hand to keep order.
@ Safe Sklretr
I • Sklretr been equipped with many safety devices in order to ensure the safety of passengers. Security protection at higher speeds, the I wrong move, etc. etc. detected.
• In addition, a special saree guard provides the loose - fitting I clothing (such as sari for women) caught in the Sklretr delivers.
2003 New escalators in East Delhi boast "sari guards." These turn out to be standard safety brushes. The escalators are a hit, with reports stressing that many area residents are more excited to ride the escalators than the trains they service.
2009 A glass booth on Moscow's famously fast and long subways where a dezhurnaya, or escalator watcher, keeps an eye out for trouble. In the event that something gets caught in the escalators, the watchers (usually women), stop the machine.

PAGE 52
ESCALATOR ANXIETY
Escalators are vastly safer than stairs. Injury Is most likely in the case of falls, and standing escalator riders are far less likely to take a dive than stairway climbers. Still, the many warnings that surround escalators illustrate the anxieties that come with mechanizing such a vast part of public life...
1972 An investigation into escalator-related injuries to children explains how a nasty gash came to be: "The gap at the side of the moving staircase is usually quite narrow, but, as has been described, it may vary considerably in places. Were It possible to eliminate this gap or at least to reduce it to negligible proportions, such accidents as in this third case could not occur. This may not be a technical or indeed an economic proposition, but it should be Investigated in the Interest of safety and the prevention of potentially serious injuries to young children." (D. A. Campbell Reid, "Escalator injuries of the hand," Injury, September 1973.)
1970s Public service announcement on escalator safety, UK.
Fig. 8.—Case 3. Illustration showing how the injury was sustained.
2012	"Distribution of accident-associated risk factors," from "Riding the Escalator: How Dangerous Is It Really?" in The Western Journal of Emergency Medicine (14:2). Despite its hazardous reputation, the true face of escalator injuries Is not an Innocent child but a falling-down-drunk man. A Swiss study reviewed 173 escalator-related accidents over a period of more than a decade, and found that the single greatest cause of falls was alcohol.

PAGE 53
2009 Brussels.
London
2005 Sapporo.
2007 Jakarta.
2009 Shenzhen.
2010 Seoul.
2012 Macau.
2012 Bangkok.
2013 Kyoto.

PAGE 54
MAINTENANCE
The archives of the London Transport Museum bear witness to the demands of high-volume transit: the escalator's smooth rhythms are frequently interrupted by the urgent frenzy of repair. Maintenance makes up by far the most lucrative section of the escalator industry.
1940s A railing undergoes testing.
1940s "Reconditioning of escalator chains,” which have just been immersed in oil for hours, according to the accompanying report.
1940s Like a stone step in a gothic cathedral, the escalator cleat Is worn down by Its users.
ESCALATOR
safety LINES
The system behind the yellow lines...

2013	Escalator Yellow Demarkation Spraying IStytes: ‘he strict limits of cautionary symbolism offer a small catalogue of options.
PAGE 55




2010 CIBSE Guide D, an inventory of the ■Safety features of a . standard escalator.
Overspeed	Operational
governor	brake
Handrail
Step
Handrail entry contact
Drive
unit
Skirt panel safety device
Emergency stop switch
Main circuit breaker
Auxiliary
brake
Step wheel upthrust track
Exterior
panel
Comb plate safety
Machine
space
chain contact
PAGE 56
END OF THE WOODEN ESCALATOR
The King's Cross Underground Fire of 1987 is a pivotal moment in the recent history of escalators, since an escalator is the origin of a fire that kills 31 people. Not only does the event spur modernization and an increased focus on safety, it guarantees the demise of the wooden escalator in favor of metal.
Kings Cross wooden escalator, before the fire.
FORWARD WITH BRITAIN
"London salesman Mark, 21, one of the last to step alive from the burning escalator leading to the King Cross ticket hall where many of the bodies were found, added: 'As it slowly ascended I could feel my legs burning..."'
— Daily Mirror, November 20, 1987.
1988 Three-step mock up of King's Cross escalator, from Investigation into the King's Cross Underground Fire.
It is believed that the King's Cross fire is triggered on the 48th step of Piccadilly Line's aged Escalator 4, by a smoker lighting up in anticipation of being carried from the station. The smouldering escalator then carries the fire to other parts of the station, ultimately bursting into the tube lines and ticket hall. The 250-page official report on the inferno, by Desmond Fennell OBE QC, blames a lack of fire training on the part of underground staff for the disaster. The design of the escalator is also accused. The 1939 wood-and-metal escalator had never been cleaned, due to a design that made removal of the stairs next to impossible: "The fire on the running track ignited the dry plywood skirting board, which was impregnated with oil and grease, thus providing a path for the fire beneath the escalator to spread to the top side. The flames passing between the treads and skirting board were the source of ignition of the rubber dressguard, the balustrades coated with yacht varnish and the treads and risers." Wood, once a key Part of the escalator's physiognomy, now becomes definitively associated with the nightmare of subterranean fire; meta becomes associated with modern safety.
ESCALATOR
PAGE 57
RULES & RE6ULPTI0N5 NOTICE No. 1166 LONDON UNDERGROUND LTD.
¿iLL LINES
25th August, 1966
INSPECTION OF WOODEN ESCALATORS AND SPECIFIED ESCALATORS WITH POLYMER TREROS
With immediate effect, Station Supervisors at stations where there are wooden escalators, and at specified stations where there are escalators with polymer treads Csee lists below! must personally inspect each escalator for any sign of fire every two hours. The
Station Supervisor must visit both the upper and lower machine chambers and use the station handlamp as necessary to look at the moving parts of the escalator. The Station Supervisor must also ride the escalator to make visual inspection of the skirtguards and to be alert for any sign of fire.
Unless already introduced, a special escalator inspection record book must be brought into use at each station affected which must record the date and time of the inspection, together with the Station Supervisor's signature and any comments. If fire or smoke is found, the appropriate action must be taken as specified in Section 0 of Appendix 8 to the Rule Book.
The following escalators must be inspected in accordance with these instructions
WOODEN TYPE
Location	Escalator No.
Sank	1,2,3,4	and	5
Bethnal Green	i,2 and	3
Bounds Green	1 and 3
Chancery Lane	1,3,4,5	and	6
Earl ' s Court	3 and 5
1988 Fire test on six steps of an escalator.
1988 Memo to [Underground Station Supervisors ordering Inspection of all wooden Escalators and escalators with polymer treads.
PAGE 58
ESCALATOR

RUNNING TO STAND STILL
The most significant characteristic of escalator development in the last 50 years is stagnation. Having achieved a maximum level of efficiency at mid-century, the typical escalator remains much the same as it was, except for penetrating more spectacular environs...
2012 Ningxia Shapotou, Ningxia, China.
2014	Tianmen Mountain National Forest Park Zhangjiajie City, China. Tourists can bypass the 999 scenic steps for the comfort of a 25-minute subterranean ride to the top of China's historic "Gateway to Fleaven." 72,000 people can be transported per day.
2006 Escalator at Christ the Redeemer, Rio de Janeiro.
PAGE 59
PAGE 60
CONSOLIDATION
A reduction in the number of major industry players has been the recent trend for escalator and elevator alike. With architects dependent on the product of fewer companies with little impetus to innovate, a certain sameness is assured.
THE STOK CARTEL
The 2007 judgment by the European Commission is the largest fine for anti-competitive activity in its history, totalling 992 million euros in fines. With stagnating growth rates in the EL) and no rapid demand in the foreseeable future, the STOK Cartel - so named for the first letters of its four major players - were divying up the limited supply of high-profile equipment and maintenance contracts, agreeing not to compete with one another for business in Luxembourg, Germany, Belgium, and the Netherlands. Collusion went to the level of individual escalator components, as participants agreed in advance on standard pricing for each, the scheme thereby depending on the high degree of substitutability among product lines.
2007 Chart showing the world escalator market at the time of the STOK Cartel ruling, by percentage market share
Escalators
Mitsubishi 3%
Otis
20%
Kone
12%
Thyssen Krupp
12%
Schindler
26%
Others
16%
Hitachi 6%
Record
Fines
The European Union's biggest fines against cartels since 1969, in billions of euros
DISPLAYS (2012)
AUTOMOBILE GLASS (2008)
ELEVATORS AND ESCALATORS (2007)
AIRFREIGHT (2010)	€0.8
VITAMINS (2001)	€0.7«
CANDLE WAX (2008)	€0.68
LCDs (2010)	€0.65
Source; European Commission
€0.83
1 billion euros = $1.31 billion The Wall Street Journal
2011 A brief history of fines in the EU shows the escalator's place with the best of them.
PAGE 61
I EN I	Official Journal of the European Union
Summary of Commission Decision of 21 February 2007
relating to a proceeding under Article 81 of the Treaty establishing the European Community (Case COMP/E-1/38.823 — Elevators and Escalators)
(notified under document number CJ2007) 512 final)
(Only the English version is authentic)
(2008/C 75/10)
Differential treatment
9.	The undertakings were divided into different categories according to their relative importance in the markets to account for the specific weight and therefore the real impact of each undertaking on the market
10.	As the basis for comparing the relative importance of an undertaking in the market concerned, the Commission considered it appropriate to take the undertakings' Belgium-wide. Germany-wide. Luxembourg-wide and the Netherlands-wide turnovers, respectively. The comparison was made on the basis of these national-wide product turnovers in the last full year of the infringements: 2003 for all the
.inH«*aVmnc rnnreme,t in r»cnm-t r>( «rK of th. fonr inirW.wl.tif« -vent for CrhinHW In G.mm.
I. SUMMARY OF THE INFRINGEMENTS Introduction
1.	The decision was addressed to KONE Belgium SA, KONE GmbH, KONE Luxembourg SARL, KONE BV Liften en Rollrappen, KONE Corporation (hereinafter 'KONE'), Mitsubishi Elevator Europe BV, NV OT1S SA, Otis GmbI 1 & Co. 01 IG, General Technic-Otis SARL. General Technic SARL. Otis BV. Otis Elevator Company, United Technologies Corporation (hereinafter 'Otis'), Schindler SA/NV, Schindler Deutschland Holding GmbH, Schindler SARI., Schindler Liften BV, Schindler Holding Ltd (hereinafter ‘Schindler’), ThyssenKrupp Liften Ascenseurs NV/SA, ThyssenKrupp Aufzüge GmbH, ThyssenKrupp Fahrtreppen GmbH, ThyssenKrupp Ascenseurs Luxembourg SARL, ThyssenKrupp Liften BV, ThyssenKrupp Elevator AG and ThyssenKrupp AG (hereinafter ThyssenKrupp’).
2.	The addressees participated in four separate but related single and continuous infringements of Article 81 of the Treaty in Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands regarding elevators and escalators. Each of the four infringements covered the whole territory of one of these Member States.
15. ThyssenKrupp was considered to have committed a repeated infringement, since two entities controlled by Krupp and/or Thyssen (before these two undertakings merged in 1999) had already been addressees of a previous Commission decision conceramg cartel activities in Alloy Surcharge ('). The fact that the undertakings have repeated the same type of conduct in the same or in different business fields shows that the initial penalties did not prompt them to change their conduct. This constitutes an aggravating circumstance justifying an increase in the basic amount of the fine to be imposed on ThyssenKrupp.
Application of the 2002 Leniency Notice
16 KONE. Otis. ThyssenKrupp and Schindler submitted applications under the Leniency Notice. They co-operated with the Commission at different stages of the investigation with a view to receiving favourable treatment under the Leniency Notice.
Point S'a) — Immunity
3. The Commission initiated the investigation on its own initiative (‘ex-officio’) in early 2004 using informa-f tion brought to its attention. Three rounds of inspections (Belgium, and Germany: January 2004; 1 Belgium, Germany and Luxembourg: March 2004 and the Netherlands: April 2004) and a large number if* of leniency applications under the 2002 Leniency Notice confirmed that cartels were run in Belgium, E Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands. The infringements covered both new installations and K services, except in Germany where the evidence would suggest that only new installations were covered.
17. Oik was grained full immunity under pohil 8(a) of the leniency Notice concerning a cartel in the Netherlands since it enabled the Commission to carry out inspections in the Netherlands.
III. DECISION
12. The following undertakings infringed Article 81 of the Treaty by allocating tenders and other contracts among them in Belgium, Germany, Luxembourg and the Netherlands, with a view to sharing markets and fixing prices, agreeing on a compensation mechanism in some cases, exchanging information on sales volumes and prices, and, participating in regular meetings and other contacts to agree and implement the above restrictions:
KONE, Otis, Schindler and ThyssenKrupp were all involved in the infringements in each of the four Member States,
the cartels covered the same products and services in each Member State at issue, with the exception of Germany where — to the knowledge of the Commission — services were not directly part of the cartel agreements,
In Belgium:
(a)	Kone Corporation and KONE Belgium SA, from 9 May 1996 to 29 January 2004;
(b)	United Technologies Corporation, Otis Elevator Company and NV OTIS SA, from 9 May 1996 to 29 January 2004;
—	the managers responsible for the subsidiaries involved (and participants in the cartels) were sometimes simultaneously or successively responsible for several Member States,
—	the time periods of infringement investigated by the Commission largely overlapped, even though they were not always of exactly the same overall duration,
—	the method for the allocation of projects concerning the sale and installation of elevators and escalators was very similar, sometimes identical, in at least some if not all Member States concerned (regarding, for example, the principles governing market and customer sharing, the maintenance of 'status quo’ in market shares, the structure of the meetings, compensation schemes, and use of project lists, etc.).
— the method for the allocation of projects concerning maintenance and modernization was very similar, sometimes identical, in Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands (for example, die principles governing customer sharing, establishment and maintenance of contacts, communication methods between the undertakings and compensation schemes).
5.	The Statement of Objections was notified to the parties in October 2005. The addressees of the Statement of Objections did not request an oral hearing.
(c)	Schindler Holding Ltd and Schindler SA/NV, from 9 May 1996 to 29 January 2004; and
(d)	ThyssenKrupp AG, ThyssenKrupp Elevator AG and ThyssenKrupp Liften Ascenseurs NV/SA, from 9 May 1996 to 29 January 2004.
In Germany:
(e)	Kone Corporation and KONE GmbH, from 1 August 1995 to 5 December 2003;
(f)	United Technologies Corporation, Otis Elevator Company and Otis GmbH & Co. OHG, from 1 August 1995 to 5 December 2003;
15.	ThyssenKrupp was considered to have committed a repeated infringement, since two entities controlled by Krupp and/or Thyssen (before these two undertakings merged in 1999) had already been addressees of a previous Commission decision concerning cartel activities in Alloy Surcharge ('). The fact that the undertakings have repeated the same type of conduct in the same or in different business fields shows that the initial penalties did not prompt them to change their conduct This constitutes an aggravating circumstance justifying an increase in the basic amount of the fine to be imposed on ThyssenKrupp.
Application of the 2002 Leniency Notice
Functioning of the cartels
6.	The periods of infringements retained in the decision are:
—	from 9 May 1996 to 29 January 2004 in Belgium,
—	from 1 August 1995 to 5 December 2003 in Germany,
—	from 7 December 1995 to 9 March 2004 in Luxembourg, and
—	from 15 April 1998 to 5 March 2004 in the Netherlands.
7.	In particular, the following infringements were committed in one, several or all of the Member States concerned:
—	agreeing to share elevator and escalator sales and installations,
—	agreeing on the allocation of public and private tenders, as well as of other contracts, for the sale and installation of elevators and escalators in accordance with each undertaking's pie-agreed shares of sales,
—	agreeing on the allocation of projects for the sale and installation of new elevators and/or escalators in accordance with the principle that existing customer relationships should be respected,
agreement not to compete with each other for maintenance contracts for elevators and escalators already in function and on how to bid for those contracts,
—	agreeing not to compete with each other for maintenance contracts for new elevators and escalators and agreeing on how to bid for those contracts, and
agreeing not to compete with each other for modernization contracts.
The infringements’ main features also included exchange of commercially important and confidential market and company (internal) information including bidding patterns and prices. The participants met regularly to agree to the above restrictions and they monitored their implementation within the national markets. There is evidence that the companies were aware that their behaviour was illegal and they took care to avoid detection; their employees usually met in bars and restaurants, they travelled to the countryside or even abroad, and they used pre-paid mobile phone cards to avoid tracking.
II. FINES Gravity
2007 The European Commission's judgment against the STOK escalator cartel, whose actions included agreeing on the sharing of tenders, agreeing to interefere with each other's customer relationships, and agreeing not to compete for modernization and maintenance contracts.
16.	KONE, Otis, ThyssenKrupp and Schindler submitted applications under the Leniency Notice. They co-operated with the Commission at different stages of the investigation with a view to receiving favourable treatment under the Leniency Notice.
Point 8(a) — Immunity
17.	Otis was granted full immunity under point 8(a) of the Leniency Notice concerning a cartel in the Netherlands since it enabled the Commission to carry out inspections in the Netherlands.
Point 8(b) — Immunity
18.	In respect of the infringements in Belgium and Luxembourg, KONE’s submission enabled the Commission to find an infringement of Article 81 of the Treaty. Hence, KONE qualified for a full immunity from the fine in respect of the infringements in Belgium and Luxembourg.
0 See Joined Cases T-45/98 and T-47/98, ThyssenKrupp Stainless and ThyssenKrupp Acdai spedati Terni v Commission ('Alloy Surcharge’), [2001] ECRI1 3757, and JoinedCases C-65/02P and C-73/02 P, ThyssenKrupp Stainless and ThyssenKrupp Acdai sperinli Terni v Commission, judgment of 14 July 2005.
In the Netherlands:
(m)	Kone Corporation Ltd and KONE BV Liften en Roltrappen. jointly and severally: EUR 79 750 000;
(n)	United Technologies Corporation, Otis Elevator Company and Otis BV, jointly and severally. EUR 0;
(o)	Schindler Holding Ltd and Schindler Liften BV, jointly and severally EUR 35 169 750;
(p)	ThyssenKrupp AG and ThyssenKrupp Liften BV, joindy and severally EUR 23 477 850; and
(q)	Mitsubishi Elevator Europe BV: EUR 1 841 400.
24. The undertakings listed in the previous recital shall immediately bring their infringement to an end, insofar as they have not already done so. They shall refrain from repeating any act or conduct as die infringement found in this case, and from any act or conduct havrng the same or similar object or effect
PAGE 62
THE EMPTY STEP PHENOMENON
Escalators have a major advantage not just over stairs but over elevators too: because they convey crowds continuously, rather than in pulses, they can facilitate vastly more traffic. Yet a massive gulf separates the theoretical capacity of an escalator and its capacity in practice. The so-called "empty step phenomenon" explains why escalators are never as full as they could be.
2010 Plenty of room between escalator riders to contemplate ads on the London Underground.
One reason for the "empty step phenomenon": fear. While you'd think a faster escalator would automatically move the masses more quickly, in practice this proves not to be the case. The faster the escalator, the more people hesitate before hopping on board. Escalator capacity tops out at about 75 percent of the achievable maximum ("Escalator Speed vs. Capacity," ThyssenKrup Planning Guide).
Persons/hour
at 40" (1000 mm) nominal step width.
PAGE 63
2010 "London Underground, Then and Now," Transport for London. Passengers' failure to fill in is constant across the ages.
Depth
18”
(457mm)
Breadth
24” (610mm)
ELLIPTICAL BEHAVIOR: The so-called "human ellipse," the amount of ambient free space a standing person needs to feel comfortable, explains the fact, irritating to engineers, that escalator riders tend to stand on every other stair, rather than filling in. "As passengers are waiting to board an escalator they no doubt wish that people would stand closer together. However, when a passenger actually comes to board an escalator, the time saving he can make by stepping on the step behind the person in front is so minimal as to not warrant consideration when compared against (he issues of personal comfort and space. This (s a classic case of user optimization not lead-lng to system optimization." (Paul Davis and Goutam Dutta, "Estimation of Capacity of Escalators in London Underground," Indian Institute of Management, 2002.)
ROAD HOGS: To avoid collision, walking passengers generally require more space between one another than standing ones: three steps instead of the two for the standers. In theory, forcing everyone to stand actually improves an escalator's efficiency.
Figure 7.2b: Down escalator DOWN SHIFT: The down escalator presents an enigma: passengers tend to follow different spatial patterns, often filling in where they wouldn't going up. This could be because, as the graph illustrates, the "Human Ellipse" theory applies to field of vision rather than actual physical space. But "filling in" on the way down soon becomes counter productive: "On reaching the bottom of the escalator passengers are not able to get away fast enough and as a result the passengers behind them have to stop walking to avoid bumping into them. This effect gradually works its way back up the escalator so that eventually the only time people can walk is when they first get on the escalator." (Davis and Dutta.)
PAGE 64 CODE
Today, most of the formal decisions have been made before an escalator installation has begun. All aspects of the escalator have been standardized to the point where there are only minor variations within a fixed grammar.
2013 Standard step widths, Schindler Escalators and Autowalks Planning Guide. The three standard step widths describe particular social relationships, accommodating a single adult, adult and child, or two side-by-side adults, respectively. The famous celestial escalator from the 1946 film A Matter of Life and Death, would violate terrestrial building code.
' 2 V tjjp t * ca : ça us© a n ©asy con s©n s ua i moi»
PAGE 65
Zigzag formation
2013 Standard escala-' tor arrangements, from ithyssenKrupp's, "Esca-1 lators & Moving Walk-I ways Planning Guide."
With the standard I elements firmly estab-Ifished, the architectural | possibilities follow, with arrangements determined by the demands of traffic flow.
Parallel Two-Way Traffic
Front cross-section from floor to floor.
-
configuration
PAGE 66
RETURN OF THE CURVE
Even as the escalator has become homogenous, the explosion of high-end retail and luxury spaces gives impetus to realize the long-buried dream of the spiral escalator. With it, the escalator returns to one of its original functions: as a ride.
0103489
1-15
FIG. I
1983 Patent for Curved Escalator, Mitsubishi Denki Kabushiki Kaisha. The Dapanese giant remains the leader in spiral escalators, yet this is still a niche market, with only about 100 installed worldwide.
2004 River Rock Casino, Richmond, British Columbia.
2001 Oeddah Hilton.
2004 Spiral escalator at the Forum Shops at Caesar's Palace,
Las Vegas, installed by Mitsubishi. At the time of its installation in 1988, it was only the second functional spiral escalator in the US.
PAGE 67
2015 Largest spiral escalator ever built, at New World Daimaru Department Store, anghai, built by Mit-Hibishi based on their Patent from the 1980s.
PAGE 68
SPACE-SAVING CURVES
The idea of curving the escalator, introduced by the escalator's inventors Jesse Reno and Charles Seeberger, recurs throughout the 20th century, with motivations that combine efficiency (a curve or spiral can take up less space in the building) and flamboyance. The circular belt is another efficiency drive (requiring half the amount of treat) with potentially spectacular results...
1954 Circular belt: US Patent 2,674,451 proposes a circular belt connecting the down and up tracks, an inspiration that would reduce the amount of tread needed almost by half. The design would require passengers to make a sharp 90 degree turn to get off, returning to the old shunt from early Otis escalators.
1975 Arcuate escalator system: US Patent 3,878,931 suggests how the escalator's step path can move "helically around a center column." The inventor suggests the "design's advantageous aesthetic aspects."
2012 Model tor the Levytator. Jack Levy, professor ememua — City University London, patents a scheme for a "multi-curving escalator" or "Levytator," which returns to the idea of a single belt that drives both up and down, though with a solution for egress and elegant curved steps for greater articulation. In an interview with the editors, Levy mentions the possibility of an imminent meeting with London Underground.
ESCALATOR
PAGE 69
vertical/horizontal speed converter segment
constant speed segment
accelerating segment
2010	Berlin-based engineering consultant Michel David offers another escalator innovation: the high-speed "Helixator," ^'esigned to break architecture of the hold of the linear staircase. "The big technical breakthrough is the monorail system, dch didn't exist before in the industry," David tells The Engineer. "Traditional curved escalator designs comprise multiple 3 from both sides of the steps and have to be supported by complex and heavy structures. The monorail solution " Hows us to concentrate all necessary rails in one central and light structure."
2010 Helixator's argument for the space-saving qualities of its escalator: 15m is required for a spiral, 80 meters for a standard in-line escalator, in the unlikely event that criss-crossing or horizontal transfer is not factored in.
2010 Helixator, poncept rendering of -Internal "monorail" Structure, "concentrating all necessary ffOmponents of an fpcalator system."
PAGE 70
VARIABLE SPEED ESCALATOR
While outwardly the form of the escalator stays the same, invention is focused on saving energy inside: the variable speed escalator, which responds to the presence of a rider, and rests when it is empty, is the single biggest development of the late 20th century. In the process, a device once known for its smooth and endless motion discovers the value of rest...
2010 Estimated energy use of variable-speed escalators. It is estimated that in the US, traditional, fixed-speed escalators burn enough energy to power 375,000 homes every year.
2014 Otis launches a new escalator that combines a variable-speed feature, sensing when users approach and accelerating accordingly, with regenerative braking, so that unused energy is put back into the system, a first for escalators (the technology is already in use in elevators). The new model also uses LED lighting as a further conservation technique. Other than that, it looks like an ordinary escalator surrounded by lush forest.
ESCALATOR
PAGE 71
Green Escalators Serve and Conserve
Dim Lik-diii m save eltemary & vwu as-nieinieiutt«.
Tbs isMifc?-AUKiis îtoI ïlléttns subway Skiern.
Wo lu^c Id instill escnbilms ivjÛi ''skep Jiuxle"fiuic1icmi st mibbaual suborn.
Èàyn<nïjHtl Ute ttvfàrllr, tfl'C IniM.'nY irrtvîrifdjM ¡witfoÿ:
2008 The US lags in adoption of variable-speed escalators, already widely used In Europe and Asia. New York City, however, has to get special permission from the code enforcement division of the New York Department of State to Install 35 of the Intelligent escalators for its subway system. Counterintuitively, the campaign to introduce variable-speed escalators is sold to the public with the slogan "NYC Transit never stops moving."
The Royal Academy of Engineering
The Mathematics of Escalators on the London Underground Transport for London
Mechanical Engineering
-= 0.00183 kW-hr
2010 The Royal Academy of Engineering does the math on London's escalators: every escalator rider is responsible for the emission of 1.65 grams of carbon dioxide per ride, compared with 68 grams of C02 produced per passenger per kilometer.
How Green are Escalators?
How much CO2 gets emitted for a single person on a 15 m escalator? 1 kW-hr of coal-fired electricity typically produces 0.9 kg of CO2. Thus, the kW-hr per person on a single trip is:
(10.21 + 2) 20
37	* 3600
0.00183 x 0.9 = 0.00165kg = 1.65g
Thus, 1.65 g of C02 is being emitted per person per trip.
How does this compare with the carbon emissions from travel on the underground trains themselves? This is commonly taken as 68 g of CO2 per passenger kilometre. The equivalent emissions on the escalator are:
everyone was super-fit, the number of people able to access, say Waterloo station in the morning rush, would drop from 51,000 to something like 34,000 assuming that a person can travel upstairs at a speed of 0.5 m/sec.
05_
0.75X
Replicated around the whole tube network, assuming that 3,000,000 people access the Tube network by escalator, this means a million less people a day could access the Tube network.
< 51,000 = 34,000
3,000,000 -
f 0.5 , 0.75
x 3,000,000 - 1,000,000
1000
15
x 1.65 * 110g
So, 110 g of CO2 is being emitted per passenger kilometre going uphill. Going downhill the figure drops to 18 g (the figure required to overcome friction and motor inefficiency alone). Both of these figures are better than the emissions from a standard family car that emits 200 g of C02 per passenger kilometre with only one vehicle occupant. But the escalator emissions are 162% of the train emissions. So why have escalators at all?
Firstly, only the very fittest people could walk up the 100 or so stairs found at the typical deep tube station on the Underground. Also, even if
If those million people drove only 5 km in a car, they would emit perhaps
1.000.	000 x 0.2 x 5= 1,000 tonnes C02. Whereas, 5 km by underground would emit
1.000.	000 x 0.068 x 5= 340 tonnes CO2.
This saves 640 tonnes of C02 for those 5 km. That's a good economics.
A 15 m up escalator, running for the typical 20 hours service each day on the London Underground, produces 220 kg of CO2.
(10.2 + 2)x 0.9 x 20. 220kg = 0.22 tonnes C02.
The one going down produces 36 kg of C02. With 418 escalators on the network, this means approximately 54 tonnes of CO2 being released everyday by the escalators each day.
(220 4 36)_
2
-x 418= 53.5tonnes C02.
PAGE 72
CAPTIVE AUDIENCE
Today, the escalator is less a beguiling experience of automatic, smooth motion than a vehicle for the efficient delivery of advertising. Every surface is up for grabs: from the glass siding to the handrails to the steps themselves. For advertisers, the major attraction is the presumed passivity of the passenger who has temporarily ceded agency to the escalator. One firm boasts that its rail-based ads guarantee "30 seconds exposure to a captive audience," "30 meters of advertising that surrounds the consumer," "76 percent unprompted advertising recall," and "Hands on advertising which is often unavoidable" - all of it close to the point of purchase for the perambulating shopper.
2011 AdRail system for applying material to escalator handrails.
2011 Hands-on: "Try our new salads plus," McDonalds ad on escalator handrail.

2011 Ad Rail, which specializes in escalator-based advertising, goes to work in Brazil.
PAGE 73
2008 Duice Hair Salon ad by Rediffusion DY&R - Mumbai.
2006 HopiHari Theme Park, Sao Paulo. Ad by QG Propaganda.
2008 Coke ad by DDB Stockholm: if you take the escalator, you better choose "Diet."
PAGE 74
ESCALATOR
LOST IN SPACE
In Hong Kong's underground escalators, a voice tells riders, "Please hold the handrail. Don't keep your eyes only on your mobile phone." If the center of escalator culture has shifted to Asia, this warning is also a diagnosis of the element's condition. As the component of architecture where we are dispatched smoothly through space, the escalator is an ideal place where we can be digitally disembodied...
...an end to futurism: from an active connector the escalator I has become more and more an occasion for rest, even meditation, a rare space \ where real and virtual domains can be embraced in a single experience... |
2013 Embarcadero Station, San Francisco.
PAGE 75
2012 Ad for ¡Tunes app store riffs on the association of the escalator's automatic movement with the frictionless swipe of digital space.
PAGE 76
BEYOND THE MALL
It is outside the confines of its traditional home in shopping malls, airports, and subways where the escalator finds itself at its most dramatic. It is at the urban scale that the escalator's radicality becomes apparent again. In the excitement over an escalator complex in Medellin or the debates over escalators in Hong Kong, the politics of the escalator at last rise to the surface...
PAGE 77
2013 Later stage, now with roof covering.
"Opened in 2011 (when the city authorities had to organise practice visits to shopping malls because so few of the area's 12,000 residents had ever used one), the £4m, six-section moving staircase has just been given a stylish orange roof, allowing people to ride up and down the hill, listening to piped music, in six minutes, rather than climb the equivalent of a 28-storey building, which took half an hour. Slicing boldly if incongruously through a shantytown that was once known as the most violent neighborhood in the world's most violent city, the escalator, which is free to use, has become the symbol of a rebirth that has encouraged employers such as Hewlett Packard, Kimberly Clark and Unisys to open new facilities in Medellin - and attracted politicians, planners and police officials from cities such as Rio de Janeiro, Johannesburg and Washington to see how it was done."
— Jon Henley, "Medellin: the fast track from the slums," The Guardian, July 31, 2013.
2013 Guards keep a watchful eye on the escalator system in Medellin's Comuna-13 to ensure unrestricted passage after a gang started charging people to use it.
2011	The Comuna-13 escalator in Medellin, Colombia.
Cheung Kong Garden
St John's Cathedral
Standard Chartered Bank
Building
The Landmark
Central Tower
Prince's Building
The Cenotaph
ICaté Causette|
Mandarin Oriental
; Wheelodt House
i China Bull'
Wdrld Wide I
Busnessrr
Free Domestic Worki Ballroom Lesson
Tsuen Wan Line' jo Admiralty £
Island Line »Admiralty
Island Line toSheungWar
PAGE 78
"CITIES WITHOUT GROUND"
The escalator receives its most radical articulation today in the admixture of public transport and private retail infrastructure in Hong Kong, creating a unified circulatory infrastructure for the megacity, mapped by Adam Frampton, Jonathan Solomon, and Clara Wong in the book Cities Without Ground (2012). Conventional escalators and space-spanning "Xpresscalators" form vital links in this "continuous space of variegated environments," while shopping malls take on a public use as pedestrian links. The escalator's ability to blur "the distinction between separate levels and individual spaces" identified in the Harvard Guide to Shopping has come together to create a dizzying new form of urban fabric.
2012	Hong Kong's three-dimensional circulation networks from Cities Without Ground by Adam Frampton, Jonathan Solomon, and Clara Wong. "Density obliterates figure-ground in the city, and in turn re-defines public-private spatial relationships. Perception of distance and time is distorted through compact networks of pedestrian infrastructure, public transport and natural topography in the urban landscape."
2005 Xpresscalator in the Langham Place mall, Mong Kok, Hong Kong: skipping some floors, this escalator system allows pedestrians to travel 76 meters directly to the top of the mall.
Ceri
tral
PAGE 79
.Originally designed with escalators that extended vertically past a maximum number of shops, both Times Square and New World Centre in Causeway Bay were subsequently retrofitted with "Xpresscalators" that provide direct connections along lines of efficient flow..

Xpresscalators
The Excelsior, Hong Kong
toWanChai
West Koi
Hong Kong's gateway to China is a series of islands set in a sea of traffic and const metion. ..
International Commerce Centre
PAGE 80
ESCALATOR VS. STAIRS, REDUX
In two decades, Hong Kong's Central Mid-Levels Escalators have radically transformed a hilly neighborhood into a slope of shopping and rowdy nightlife. This success has in turn inspired a new wave of escalator investment: an elaborate new HK$200-million system is proposed for the placid Pound Lane neighborhood. The eight flights of new escalators would form a corridor some 240 meters in length, rising 50 meters. But the project has also exposed some serious escalator anxiety in Hong Kong: local residents attack the plan for threatening the area's "stair culture," with its opportunities for a less frantic experience of the city, branding it as a potential scourge. 3ohn Batten, resident of Pound Lane for 20 years tells the South China Morning Post "The escalator would be the death of the area." (March 27, 2011.) After a public consultation in 2013, the lower part of the plan is deleted and other accommodations to existing conditions are made The project remains under review as of 2017.
2013 Hong Kong's Highways Department's renderings inadvertently make the case that the escalator is a gaudy Intruder.
PAGE 81
2013 Public consultation on Pound Lane [ Escalator Project, by the Highways Department.
Attacked for promoting a purely economic and utilitarian approach to urban space and for stripping the environment of its pedestrian rhythms - as well as for its association with the extravagant gentrification around the Mid-Levels - Hong Kong's urban escalators may be a victim of their own
amazing effectiveness. The rivalry between stair and escalator, for a century a hands-down victory
for mechanization, may have fresh impetus...

; 2014 Escalator fatigue in a poster made ! By the Pound Lane Concern Group.
PAGE 82
PAGE 83
bibliography
Andersen, Ross E., and Adrian E. Bauman. "The Effects of Commuter Pedestrian Traffic on the Use of Stairs in an Urban Setting." American Journal of Health promotion 26, no. 1 (2011): 49-51.
gadley-Ellis, Antony. "The First Escalators." Underground News (London), May 7, 2007. . vvvvw.lurs.org.uk/documents/pdf%2007/ may/the%20first%20esc%20May%2007. pdf (accessed November 5, 2013).
Bindasova, Barbara. "Fast, Soviet and dangerous." Prague Daily Monitor, Duly 7,
' 2009.
Bradley, Ryan. "FYI: Why Are Escalators So Dangerous?" Popular Science (Bonnier Corporation), Tune 2011.
Chan, Sewell. "New Subway Escalators Speed Up When You Get On." The New York Times, August 5, 2008.
Colvin, Till. "Bloomberg's Latest 'Nanny' Move: Pushing People to Take the Stairs." New York Observer (New York City), Tuly 17, 2013. http://observer.com/2013/07/ bloombergs-latest-nanny-move-pushing-people-to-take-the-stairs/ (accessed May 12, 2013).
Commission of the European Communities. "Commission Decision of 21 February 2007 relating to a proceeding under Article 81 of the EC Treaty Case COMP/E-1/38.823 -PO/Elevators and Escalators." Commission |Dec/s/on, Brussels, 2007.
David, Michel. "http://helixator.wordpress. com/." Helical Escalators and Moving Walkways. Helixator. Tuly 2013.
http://helixator.files.wordpress. com/2013/07/helical_escalators_and_ moving_walkways_3d.pdf (accessed January 2014).
—. "Introduction to Helixator technology." http://helixa tor. word press, com/. 2009. http://helixator. files, wordpress. com/2011/06/helixator-introduction.pdf.
Davis, Paul, and Goutam Dutta. "Estimation of Capacity of Escalators in London Underground." Indian Institute of Management, 2002: 1-31.
; Engineers, The American Society of Mechanical. ASME A17.1 Safety Code for '• Elevators and Escalators. Code, New York:
| The American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2007.
European Commission's Intelligent Energy Europe Programme. "E4 Energy Efficient Elevators and Escalators." Brochure, 2010.
"Feng Shui at Work," The New York Times, 2006
Fennell, Desmond. Investigation into the King's Cross Underground fire. London:
Her Majesty's Stationery Office, 1988.
Frampton, Adam. Solomon, Tonathan.
Wong, Clara. Cities Without Ground: A Hong Kong Guidebook. ORO Editions. 2012
Goetz, Alisa, ed. up down across: Elevators, Escalators and Moving Sidewalks. London & New York: Merrell Publishers Limited, 2003.
Henley, Ton. "Medellin: the fast track from the slums." The Guardian (London), Tuly 31,
2013.	http://www.theguardian.com/ world/2013/jul/31/medellin-colombia-fast-track-slums-escalators (accessed October 5, 2013).
Howland, Tonathan, Salma Bibi, Tames English, Sophia Dyer, and Elizabeth W Peterson. "Older Adult Falls at a Metropolitan Airport: 2009-2010." Journal of Safety Research, 2011.
Koncept Analytics. "Global Escalator & Elevator Market Report: 2010 Edition." Market Report, 2010.
KONE Corporation. "KONE TransitMaster 140 Environmental product declaration." Product Information, 2011.
Kristoff, Lena, ed. Moscow Metro: Travel Guide. English. Translated by Kate Cook. Moscow: Knigi WAM, 2008.
KONE Corporation. "Options and Planning Dimensions KONE TransitMaster 140 Escalators." Product Information Pamphlet,
2012.
KONE, Inc. "Planning Guide for KONE Escalators & Autowalks." Product Literature, 2010.
Koolhaas, Rem and Harvard GSD. The Harvard Guide to Shopping. Köln: Taschen, 2002. Print.
McLeod, Mary. "Architecture and Politics in the Reagan Era: From Postmodernism to Deconstructivism." Assemblage, no. 8 (Feb 1989): 22-59.
Official Tournal of the European Union. "Summary of Commission Decision of 21 February 2007 relating to a proceeding
under Article 81 of the Treaty establishing the European Community Case COMP/ E-1/38.823 — Elevators and Escalators notified under document number C(2007) 512 final." Summary of Commission Decision, Brussels, 2007.
Plotnik, Art. "Architecture: Chicago to Build Nation's Largest Municipal Library; Classical Design Triumphs in International Competition." American Libraries 19, no. 7 (Tul-Aug 1988): 565-566.
Reid, D.a. Campbell. "Escalator injuries of the hand." Injury 5, no. 1 (1973): 47-50.
Sant'Elia, Antonio. "Manifesto of Futurist Architecture, 1914." ABC. N.p., n.d. Web.
17 Tune 2013. <www.abc.net.au/radio national/linkableblob/4285602/data/mani-festo-of-futurist-architecture-data. pdf>.
Safety Assessment Federation. "Guidelines for the safe operation of escalators and moving walks." Guidelines, 2011.
Schindler Elevator Corporation. "Planning guide for escalators and moving walks." Product Literature, n.d.
Schminke, Louisa, Victor Teger, Dimitrios Evangelopoulos, Heinz Zimmerman, and Aristomenis Exadaktylos. "Riding the Escalator: How Dangerous is it Really?." Western Journal of Emergency Medicine 14, no. 2 (2013): 141-145.
Smulian, Mark. "Spiral pioneer." Journal of the Islington Archaeology & History Society 1, no. 3 (Autumn2011).
Strakosch, George R., ed. The Vertical Transportation Handbook. 3rd. New York: Wiley, 1998.
ThyssenKrupp Elevator Corporation. "Escalators & moving walks planning guide." Product Literature, Memphis, 2011.
Wost, Tulie. "Perspectives on the Escalator in Photography and Art," in Up, Down, and Across, ed. by Alisa Goetz. (Washington,
D.C.: National Building Museum/Merrell Pub. Co., 2003).
774 ABC Melbourne, "Keep left: Escalator etiquette and pedestrian convention,"
May 4, 2011. www.abc.net.au/local/ stories/2011/05/04/3207497.htm (accessed October 5, 2013).
PAGE 84
images sources and courtesy
P2 ThyssenKrupp Elevator Americas; Scott Lahmers.
P6 Courtesy Mielke Archive of Stairs Friedrich Mielke Institut für Scalalogie, Ostbayerische Technische Hochschule Regensburg, Germany.
P7 Hans-Dieter Riedel.
P8-9 © KONE Corporation.
P10 Lee W. Nelson.
P11 Fabienne Wassermann.
P12-13 (recurring) Rem Koolhaas, the Harvard Project on the City, Harvard Guide to Shopping, Taschen, 2002.
P15 Koncept Analytics Pvt. Ltd.;
China Daily.
P16 Special Collections, Lehigh University Libraries, Bethlehem, Pennsylvania; Eugene Wemlinger, Brooklyn Museum.
P17 Otis Historical Archives; Hesse W Reno.
P18 http://escalators.weebly.com/ the-inventors.html; Otis Historical Archives.
P19 Library of Congress, Washington, D.C.
P20 William Henry Aston; Benjamin Malek.
P21 London Transport Museum.
P22 Charles D. Seeberger.
P23 Charles D. Seeberger.
P23-24 Otis Historical Archives.
P26 Ulrich Conrads, Programs and Manifestos on 20th-Century Architecture, MIT Press: New edition, 1975.
P27 Ray McKenzie, Map-Tacs Photography.
P28-29 TFL Archive: © TfL from the London Transport Museum collection.
P30 Dunge, Heinz, German Federal Archives.
P31 Agey Tomesh/WAM 2008; photo by Stefan Elf.
P32 Norton & Peel, Minnesota Historical Society.
P33 Aimmee L. Rodriguez, Richard A. Hanks, Robin S. Hanks, The Harris Company, Arcadia Publishing, 2008; International Trademark Association.
P34 Otis Historical Archives; Minnesota Historical Society.
P35 Spapen Steven; CNN ImageSource.
P36 Ernst Boerschmann, Picturesque China, architecture and landscape a journey through twelve provinces, Brentano's, 1923; Evan Chakroff.
P37 Foster and Partners; Addison Godel.
P38 Simon Hampel.
P39 www.flickr.com/photos/ bibbit/2281979036/in/photolist-d6paqL-5jpw9U-5jpweo-328xFV-6XSmRe-329K4v-eie5be-4wbcT-bBYoh-4tDDS9.
P41 charisselouw "First Escalator Ride"
(27 Dul 2006): www.youtube.com/ watch?v=GtPCv4aTEec; Euronews; DeshGujaratHD "Ahmedabad's Kalupur railway station gets two-way escalator"
(19 Sep 2013) http://deshgujarat. com/2013/09/19/the-first-escalator-at-any-railway-station-in-gujarat/.
P42 C. D. Arnold (1844-1927); H. D. Higinbotham; Scientific American; Otis Historical Archives; New York, Richard S. Peale, c1900.
P43 Fawcett Publications; ©KONE Corporation; "Parisian high-speed walkway" by SPSmiler.
P44-45 Belinda Lawley.
P46 Center for Active Design; arnieoflovers www.flickr.com/photos/ arnieoflovers/3454812527/
P47 American Dournal of Health Promotion; Miha Tamura.
P48 © TfL from the London Transport Museum collection ; Helen Tseng; Redrawn from Popular Science, 1947; photo by Yoni Alter.
P49 Lutzwww.flickr.com/photos/ Iumi3005/3208579373/sizes/o/; Karen Riley.
P50 Dustin Murray.
P51 Shon Ellerton; Maks Masteroff;
Delhi Metro Rail.
P52 Dohn Wiley & Sons Ltd.; Western Dournal of Emergency Medicine.
P53 cowyeow www.flickr.com/photos/ cowyeow/8189770849; Satya Witoelar;
Bibi Tan; Gerard Escalante; Sarah O'Carroll; BuckyHermit www.flickr.com/photos/the-bh/4302928005/; http://jtingermany.
blogspot.nl/2009/03/belgian-escalator-
safety-with.html; Backgroundgeo www flickr.com/photos/backgroundgeo/
8233604593/; Andreas Peukert.
P54 © TfL from the London Transport
Museum collection.
P55 Elevator Services Direct Ltd; Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers; George Slatin.
P56 The National Archives; Daily Mirror.
P57 ©TfL from the London Transport
Museum collection.
P58 Robert Mooney aka Mondmann www.f lickr.com/photos/81533006@
N00/3127861878; Brian Glucroft; Shanghai Elevator Trade Association by Aizu Ren.
P60 Wall Street Journal; Dr. Diirgen Dispan IMU Institute Hasenbergstr.
P61 © Unione Europa, http://eur-lex. europa.eu/, 1998-2014.
P62 Annie Mole - London Underground Tube Diary http://london-underground. blogspot.com/; ThyssenKrupp Elevator.
P63 Ben Phaze; "Vikalpa" Dournal from the Indian Institute of Management Ahmedabad.
P64 © KONE Corporation; The Archers Production Company (Michael Powell and Emeric Pressburger).
P65 ThyssenKrupp Elevator; Little Boffin (PeterEdin) www.flickr.com/photos/ peteredin/6196327458/sizes/l/; Stephen Smith; Ben Burkland and Carolyn Cook.
P66 © All rights reserved. Mavens Vegas LLC; Yoshimi Otomo; Don-Paul Henry; Tamara Hinson.
P67 elevatorworld.com
P68 Louis Normandeau; Gilbert D Luna.
P69 Levytator Limited; Michel David.
P70 Anibal de Almeida, Carlos Patrao, Doao Fong, E4 European Project (Energy-Efficient Elevators and Escalators);
Otis Historical Archives
P71 © 2014 Metropolitan Transportation Authority; Royal Academy of Engineering
P72 © 2009-2014 Dony Lan; ADRail.
PAGE 85
p73 Créatives: Tchelo Nogueira/ Marcelo I p'elboux / Rodolfo Barreto, Creative pirector: Sérgio Lopes / Paulo André gj0ne http://adland.tv/ooh/hopa-hari-larnLisement-park-escalator-ad-ambient-S brazil; Rediffusion Y&R; DDB Stockholm
p74 Michael Vickery.
p75 Yongwook Seong
p76-77 Associated Press; Luis Benavides; Action Press / Rex Features.
p78 "Langham Place" by Alanmak CC-BY-SA-3.0-MIGRATED.
p78-79 Adam Frampton, Jonathan p. Solomon, and Clara Wong, Cities Without Ground (ORO Editions, 2012).
P80-81 Plighways Department,
The Government of the Flong Kong Special Administrative Region.
P81 Kit Yeung.
P82 Collage by Annie Wang.
ELEVATOR
2016 Latest attempt at creating a horizontally- and vertically-moving elevator, by ThyssenKrupp, 20 years after the Otis Odyssey. The MULTI employs a rotating disc, establishing either a vertical or horizontal continuity between tracks. It will be unveiled in 2020 in OVG's East Side Tower in Berlin.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 1
elevator
...the introduction of the elevator at the 1853 New York World's Fair abruptly ended an entire period of architectural history, and relegated another element, the stair, to a bit part role... originating in Roman theatre scenoaraphy, and later developed by the mining industry, the elevator enabled the skyscraper and the modern metropolis, disappearing into the core in the process, substituting visual drama with a surreal, disconnected experience shuttling blindly between floors... inside the elevator cab, passengers are voluntary captives in a random sampling of humankind - a freeze-frame of the city... the elevator as vehicle of the modern flaneur... until the introduction of automated systems (from the push button to the touch screen) gradually sacrificed adventure and agency in the name of comfort and efficiency... the essence of the elevator, dictated by the confines of the core, remained unchanged -with the exception of Portman's spectacular exposed elevators - until the mid-1990s, when Otis created a new system, the Odyssey... moving horizontally, vertically, and potentially diagonally, it solved the holy grail of elevatoring: to let two capsules pass each other in a single core going in opposite directions, potentially consuming a smaller percentage of each building's footprint...
PAGE 2
ELEVATOR
We Elevate Humanity
: with : :
SAFETY,
SPEED AND
ECONOMY.
Passenger and Freight Elevators of Every Description. Hydraulic, Steel Screw, Spur Geared and Hand Power.
2 gQQ GRAVES ELEVATORS in actual use, and never a fall or fatal accident has occured.
New York: 92 and 94 Liberty St. Boston : 53 State Street.
Detroit: Hodges Building. Atlanta, Ga.: Inman Building.
GRAVES ELEVATOR CO.
ROCHESTER, N. Y.
ca. 1893 Graves Elevators ad: spiritual elevation with mechanistic efficiency.
GOING DOWN, GOING UP, AND STUCK...
ELEVATOR
PAGE 3
The first 'elevators' did not go up into the skies, but down into the bowels of the earth, for the purposes of mining. When they came back up, it was only to grade. (There is no proper word for such a device... the de-elevator?) In Greek and Roman theatre, mechanical lifts were entertainment devices - machines that could simulate divine powers.
The modern elevator, established between 1850 and 1880, is the product of technological alchemy: a fusion of existing inventions (the rope, the spring, the coil) and a few new ones (the safety break, electric motor, core, traction). This synthesis has a dramatic impact on the shape of cities, ending an entire period of architectural history, and relegating another element - the stair - to a bit part role in buildings. As the enabler of the skyscraper and the modern metropolis, the elevator's origins in the mining industry and theater scenography are mostly forgotten as it's absorbed into the core, hidden from view. Thus the elevator's potential for visual drama disappears - except for the spectacular exposed lobby elevators of Portman's hotel lobbies - in favor of a disconnected experience shuttling between floors - a 'box on a rope' system that has remained fundamentally unchanged since 1853...
The 1,000-meter limit for buildings will soon be broken thanks to smoother and faster elevator rides. But the race for height - and depth, in mines - will face its own plateau: the increasing size of the core, necessary to reach ever-higher floors, becomes economically self-defeating; while in mines, the cooling requirements that increase with depth become unsustainable...
Confined by the tolerances of the human body, requirements of comfort and safety, and the strictures of the market economy, recent attempts to transform the traditional elevator have pressed in two directions: attempts to break out of the core, and increasing intelligence in controling the destination of the elevator...
Some 19th century utopias predicted elevators that would also travel horizontally and diagonally, but it would take until the 1990s for a breakthrough in the invention of multi-directional elevators.
Otis announced its Odyssey: a horizontally and vertically (and potentially also diagonally) moving elevator which promised to revolutionize the use of the core and thereby the shape of high rise buildings. Despite patenting, prototyping, and the enthusiasm of architects, the project is abandoned due to a perceived lack of interest from the market. Instead, Kone's Machine Room-Less (MR-L) elevator - a simplification, not an elaboration, of the traditional elevator developed at the same time - rises to the top. The MR-L triumphs by saving space and increasing energy efficiency. Ditching the possibilities of the multi-directional elevator, the market does not foster innovation but kills it...
The elevator has now been stuck for some time: its products are highly standardized, its generic parts interchangeable among the "big five" companies, its potential for drama largely ignored.
The realm of the digital promises a revolution. The elevator's attention to safety and control, refined over the last two centuries, is spreading beyond the cab to the rest of the building. Elevator companies are rebranding themselves as "access management" companies - reaching out of the core, controlling all the building's doors, gates, and circulatory systems. The post-button elevator will connect to your smartphone, know where you are and where you want to go before you do, summon the elevator at the perfect moment - no waiting - and open all doors that lie in your path. With the surrender of control, surprise, and randomness to algorithmic logic we may become the prisoner of our very own deus ex machina...
PAGE 4
ELEVATOR
GOING DOWN, GOING UP
Attracted by minerals and fuel, homo sapiens head for the depths of the earth much earlier than they start to reach for the stars. The Welsh descend to -70 meters in 2000 BC; it takes nearly 4,000 years for architecture to reach up a similar distance...
-2500 BC
Grime's Graves flint mines, Norfolk, UK.
15 meters
“I--------------------------------------------1
2000 BC
Great Orme copper mines, Wales.
70 meters
300 BC Laurlon silver mines, Athens.
92 meters

ELEVATOR
PAGE 5
r
1556
Mines observed by Georgius Agricola, Chemnitz, Germany.
200 meters
2010
1870
Equitable Life 1859	Building,
Cooper Union, New York. New York. 40 meters 20 meters
1887
Eiffel Tower, Paris.
324 meters
1929
Empire State Building,
New York. 381 meters
1972
World Trade Center,
New York. 417 meters
Burj Khalifa, Dubai.
828 meters
2010
1875 St. Adalbert Shaft, Pribram, Czech Republic. First mining shaft to reach 1000 meters
San Dosé Mine, Copiapô, Chile.
700 meters
On the afternoon of August 5, 2010, 33 miners are trapped in San Dosé coppe and gold mine. After drilling several new shafts, the "Fenix" rescue capsule is sent down 69 days after the accident.
1962 Mponeng Mine, South Africa.
3200 meters
1966
Kidd Creek copper / zinc mine, Ontario, Canada. Deepest base metal mine.
2927 meters
1992
Moab Khotsong gold mine, South Africa. Longest winding rope in the world.
3054 meters
1962 Tautona Mine, South Africa.
3900 meters
The journey from surface to rock face can take one hour from surface level, even though the descent is relatively fast: 16 metres per second (58 km/h)...
PAGE 6
ELEVATOR
ANATOMY OF THE ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR
PAGE 7
cab p.56
PAGE 8	ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR NEWSFEED
ANNOYING BEHAVIOR "CareerBuilder's latest study pinpoints the most unusual and annoying behaviors workers have witnessed in their office elevators. The study was conducted online by Harris Interactive from May 14 to Dune 4, 2012 and included more than 3,800 workers in the US. While most people follow standard elevator etiquette of facing forward and generally keeping to themselves, quite a few workers reported less-than-ordinary experiences while in transit. Workers shared the following real-life examples of weird behaviors they observed in work elevators: 'Pantsing' a co-worker; changing a baby's diaper; flossing teeth; clipping fingernails; fist fighting; showing someone a rash and asking for a diagnosis; moving the entire contents of a co-worker's office into the elevator, including the desk; a woman with her arms full of papers using her head to keep the doors from closing on her; dancing throughout the ride; when asked to identify the most annoying elevator habits they see more commonly at the office; workers most often cited people talking on cell phones; standing in close proximity for no apparent reason and deliberately letting the elevators doors close when someone is approaching. Top annoying habits include: Talking on a cell phone (35 percent); not holding the door open when others are running to get on the elevator (33 percent). (Incidentally, 16 percent of workers admitted to purposely closing the elevator door when they saw someone approaching); standing too close when there is plenty of room in the elevator (32 percent); squeezing into an already crowded elevator (32 percent); not stepping off the elevator to let other people out (27 percent); holding the elevator doors open for an extended period of time while waiting for someone else to get on (26 percent); cutting in line to get on the elevator when other people have been waiting longer (23 percent); taking the elevator to go up one or two floors instead of using the stairs (20 percent); pushing the wrong button, (17 percent); facing away from the elevator door, instead of toward the door like everyone else (7 percent). For some
workers, elevators rides are a source of anxiety. Sixteen percent of workers said they are afraid of getting stuck in an elevator due to a malfunction."
—	Careerbuilder.com, August 10, 2012.
MICROSOFT'S PROPHETIC ELEVATOR
"If your environment knows, for example, that it's lunch time, that you had spoken yesterday about having lunch with a colleague on the second floor, and it notices that you seem to be now leaving your office to go to the elevator, the elevator can be smart enough to take you, without your need to operate anything, to your colleague."
—	Peter Lee, head of research at Microsoft, TheNextWeb.com (Danuary 2014).
PLACEBO BUTTONS
"A question we get a lot is why don't the door-close buttons work in North American elevators? Are they placebos? They work in Europe and Asia, but don't seem to work in the US. The buttons are actually required to be there by code, but customers decide whether or not they work - they are worried about people being rude and closing the door on slow people, who could be disabled."
—	Daryl Marvin, Director (Innovation), Otis Engineering Center, Farmington (2013).
EN SUITE SKY GARAGE
The tallest elevator for cars will open in 2014 in Singapore. Engineered by Wöhr (based in Froilzheim, Germany), the elevator serves 29 floors (a 112-meter lifting distance) with private en-suite sky garages. Drivers park their car on a platform in the basement, where the car is automatically identified. The driver leaves the car and takes the passenger elevator to their apartment (passenger identification is done by fingerprint). In the meantime, the platform slides the car into the car elevator and brings it up at a speed of 2.8 m/sec, delivering your lambo into your apartment's glass box garage.
HOME ELEVATORS
New Home Elevators Series by Thys-senKrupp launch in 2013 to be installed in private houses.

SMOOTHNESS
"There is actually a variety of differences in what is expected and desired. First, there's the acceleration rate. North Americans tolerate higher acceleration rates than Asians - actually they demand it. Japanese elevators are very smooth, with lower acceleration rates. North Americans are speed oriented and want to feel like they're moving. The Japanese want it almost totally smooth."
— Daryl Marvin, Director (Innovation), Otis Engineering Center at Farmington (2013).
GOLDMAN SACHS ELEVATOR LEAKS
On March 8, 2014, John Lefevre revealed himself as the man behind @GSEIevator - a twitter account supposedly documenting sardonic elevator conversations at Goldman Sachs (e.g. "You can still take clients to strip clubs, you just can't expense it.") In a first-person post on Business Insider, Lefevre revealed that the feed wasn't factual, but an "embodiment or aggregation of 'every banker,' a concentrated reflection of a Wall Street culture and mentality." Lefevre's book of the tweets was subsequently cancelled by the publisher. Goldman responded: "Guess elevators go up and down."
— Business Insider (March 6, 2014).
ELEVATOR
PAGE 9
TOTAL
EXISTING ELEVATORS IN 2013
227k
THE BIG FIVE
The elevator market is dominated by five multinationals. Turnover for 2012— 2013, according to company reports:
NEW ELEVATORS IN 2013
—	Elevator Cab Market Study (Elevator World, Inc., 2013).
COST
"We have received estimates of the cost of labor exceeding the cost of material; for a standard design, the breakdown might be 80% for labor and 20% for the material. However, for custom-designed cabs comprised of high-value interior finish materials, this breakdown can shift from 40% for materials and 60% for labor to a 50/50 ratio. A general rule of thumb used in the industry is a breakdown of 40% for materials, 40% labor, and 20% overhead and profit."
—	Elevator Cab Market Study (2013).
MR-L, OR THE DEATH OF THE CONTROL ROOM
"One of the biggest changes that took place in recent years in the elevator industry was the introduction of the 'MACHINE ROOM - LESS' ELEVATOR (MR-L). The name speaks for itself: literally, no machine room - when the code will allow it. The initial thrust to sell the MR-Ls has been to the new construction market. Having said that, the MR-Ls are also planned for modernization projects, replacement of the 'old' ... The traditional elevator systems have the main electrical control and drive systems located in a separate machine room either at the top or at the bottom of the building. Generally referred to as 'overhead' or 'basement' location.
— "What's new in the elevator business," elevatornews.com (2014).
2012-2013: BIG FIVE STOCKS
UTC (of which OTIS is a subsidiary)
PAGE 10
ELEVATOR
MOTORS FROM MINING
The new 9/11 Memorial and Museum includes the motors of the World Trade Center elevators. Reporter Dulie Shapiro writes: "When Menville, now 65, helped install the massive 8-foot-by-5-foot motors, called 339 machines, they were the first in North America and the biggest in the world. The only place they had ever been used before was in South African diamond mines.
'It was such a powerful machine,' Menville said. 'Once we got a handle on it, it became one of the best machines ever.' After installing the elevators, Menville and his coworkers from Otis Elevator Company got to test-ride them, flying through the building at 1,600 feet per minute. 'They were so fast, and they were so large,' Menville said. 'Normal elevators at that speed had a capacity of 3,500 pounds, but this one had a capacity of 10,000 pounds.'... Nearly 40 years later, Menville saw the same motors burned and lying in pieces when he visited Hangar 17 at DFK airport, where artifacts from the collapse of the Twin Towers are stored. Seeing the broken motors was discouraging, he said, but he's glad that cleanup workers salvaged about 15 of them from the site, and that visitors to the museum will get to see one of them."
—-Dulie Shapiro, Downtown Express (April 4, 2009).
DONG
"In China and Southeast Asia, every elevator waiting area on every floor has a signal for where the elevator is and which direction its going in. It's required and expected by the market.
In Europe you never usually see a position indicator - only on the first floor maybe. But you do see a directional indicator. Hall lanterns - the arrows or symbols (they don't tell if the car is going up or down, but only which way it will go when it leaves) - are North American. There's the audible signal, the "dong," and then the arrow tells you if it's going up or down."
— Daryl Marvin, Director (Innovation), Otis Engineering Center at Farmington,
ELEVATOR TO THE HEAVENS
A construction elevator used during the restoration of the ceiling fresco of Fritz von Erlach's Karlskirche in Vienna has turned semi-permanent. Restoration is finished, but the elevator has been bringing revenue to the church. The elevator was built in 2002 and was supposed to be dismantled in 2005, but was kept in place. Visitors have mixed feelings: euphoria about the possibility of observing the fresco up close and frustration with the presence of the enormous steel construction inside the baroque building.
— Wiener Zeitung (Danuary 14, 2013).
SHABBAT ELEVATOR
"'Don't get in that one!' a woman cried, standing in front of an open elevator door, a quiet toddler in her arms. But why? Was this elevator dangerous? Well, no. But in a city where perhaps the dirtiest word of all is 'wait,' it was close enough. 'It'll stop on like every floor,' said the woman, Shira Stember, standing in the lobby of a Seward Park co-op building on the Lower East Side. That door, she explained, led into a "Shabbat" elevator. From sundown on Friday until the sun sets on Saturday, Orthodox Dews refrain from certain activities, including pushing elevator buttons, following a restriction that comes from a prohibition against igniting fires. So in some buildings, elevators are programmed to stop automatically on every floor during the Sabbath. That way, observant Dews can hop right in and, eventually, get where they are going. These systems, long a fixture in hospitals as well, can be lifesavers for older people and those with disabilities, and they allow the observant to live on floors that are too high to hoof it. But they also slow down elevator traffic. A lot."
— Elizabeth Harris, "For Dewish Sabbath, Elevators Do All the Work," New York Times (March 5, 2012).
FINISH
— "Materials Used for Cladding Car Enclosure," Elevator Cab Market Study (Elevator World, Inc., 2013).
MARCH FOR THE ELEVATOR
"Citizens in Valparaiso, Chile, convened a protest in defense of the city's shuttered urban elevators.... The aim of the gathering ... 'is to demand that this year, most of the lifts are restored and to ensure their functioning, with affordable rates for ordinary citizens of the hills.' The statement also points out that 'the elevators of Valparaiso must be declared a public means of transport ... and the State must contribute to financing. Elevators must continue fulfilling a social role and joining a coordinated system of public transport, along with the buses, trolleys, and the Metro.'"
— elmartutino.cl (Duly 9, 2012).
•n.S1
ELEVATOR
PAGE 11
TRADE FAIR INNOVATIONS INTERLIFT, held in Augsburg, Germany, welcomed more than 18,000 visitors in 2013. With 512 exhibitors from 40 countries it is the world's leading elevator fair. Highlights in 2013 include ECOdesign ISO 14006 cabs, telescopic sliding door with a package thickness of just 125 mm, user-defined piecework-style gates and hard-wood wrap-around-type gates for residential elevators, LULA (limited use, limited access) and lightweight utility lifts, iPad based control systems, enhanced elevator lubricants, innovative connector concept for circuit boards, shaft information and control systems, suspension cables for high-elevation applications, emergency-call systems services, and the Melody 2 spacesaving wheelchair platform lift.
— Interlift (15-18 October, 2013).
DISABILITY ACCESS FOR DESTINATION-DISPATCH
"It has been reported that due to the need for elevator controls to be usable by disabled persons, active displays may not be allowed in some European jurisdictions. However, with destination-dispatching systems on the increase throughout the world, touch panels are becoming more prevalent internationally. Code bodies are presently studying this issue, and cab designers must be very cautious when designing cabs with these systems."
— Elevator Cab Market Study (Elevator World, Inc., 2013).
CHILEAN MINERS HEROIC RESCUE
In the afternoon of 5 August, 2010, 33 miners are trapped in the 700 meters-deep, 121-year-old gold-copper mine in the Atacama Desert, in northern Chile. Following public demand, the Chilean government sends a rescue mission to drill deep into the ground to resuce the men; 17 days after the cave-in, a note is found attached to one of the drills: "Estamos bien en el refugio, los 33" ("We are well in the shelter, the 33 of us.")
The rescue becomes a global mission; international teams, including NASA, collaborate with the Chilean government to devise a plan to bring the men up. The result, a steel-caged capsule titled Fenix, is equipped with a reinforced roof, retractable wheels and an escape hatch, as well as oxygen supply, heart monitors and video-voice communication to assure the safety of the passengers. At a total of 29 round trips and 50 km travelled, the Fenix lifts all men back to the surface, where they are receive as heroes by the Chilean president, their families and the nation.
PAGE 12
ELEVATOR
250 MAGAZINES ON THE ELEVATOR
The elevator may be the most marketed and the most published element of architecture. No aspect of Its development and operation goes undocumented. The website and publisher elevatorworld.com produces no less than 250 titles dedicated to different aspects of elevators. The 2014 collection features the titles Elevator Electric Drives, Firefighting Operations, Sam & Samantha: The Mainteneers, and Elevator Man: Stories.
"The mission of ELEVATOR WORLD Is the intelligent collection, management and distribution of information of and for the benefit of the industry, while providing a global marketing platform that expands the reach of the Industry to all corners of the world."
— elevatorworld.com.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 13
Rope Dynamics DVD
by Phil Andrew and Dr. Stefan Kaczmarczyk This presentation discusses the purpose of analyzing the dynamic behavior of the roping system and how Hamilton's Principle and classical mechanics may be employed to derive the dynamic equations which describe the oscillatory motions of the ropes.
Length: 40 minutes
Available Page 4
Regular	I Subscriber Discount
$30.00	1 $25.50
Systems Engineering of Elevators
by Phil Andrew and Dr. Stefan Kaczmarczyk This book covers all the aspects of elevator systems engineering providing commentary on how individual components of an elevator are brought together to provide a vertical transportation system which will carry the required load at the required speed over the necessary travel, and to examine how this process is moderated and supported by the requirements of safety codes.
Hardback, Wt. 4 lbs.
Regular	I Subscriber Discount
$118.00	1 $100.30
CIBSE Guide D: Transportation Systems in Buildings (2010)
The Guide has been updated throughout and brought into line with the latest codes and standards. In particular, the 2010 edition contains an extensive revision to the guidance on traffic planning, significantly expanded information on energy efficiency and conservation, and updated guidance on the effective commissioning, maintenance and testing of lifts and escalators.
Wt. 3 lbs Softback.
Regular	I Subscriber Discount
$131.95	1 $112.20
Wire Ropes: Tension, Endurance, Reliability
By K. Feyrer
The main concern of this book is to present the methods used to calculate the most important rope quantities as well as to explain how they are applied by means of a large number of calculations as examples. This book deals with the different types of wire rope and their component parts, the effects of wire ropes under tensile forces (stationary ropes) and wire ropes under bending and tensile force (running ropes).
Hardback, Wt. 3 lbs.
Regular	1 Subscriber Discount
$382.00	1 $324.85
FREE 1 yr digital subscription to Elevator World with purchase.
ELEVATOR WORLD Technical Library
by ELEVATOR WORLD
This information-packed CD-ROM contains over 2,700 pages of technical articles published in ELEVATOR WORLD magazine categorized by subject with full search capabilities. Subjects include: Machines and Motors, Maintenance and Repair, Traffic Analysis and Testing, Hydraulic Elevators, Earthquakes, Fires and Natural Disasters, Escalators and Moving Walks, Modernization Update,
Accessibility, MRL Elevators.
CONSTRUCTION, DESIGN & ENGINEERING
Regular	I Subscriber Discount
$175.00	1 $148.75
The intimidating complexity of the everyday elevator, magnified in esoteric publications.
PAGE 14
ELEVATOR
MODERNIZATION TAKES COMMAND
The modern elevator was not invented. It Is an accumulation of evolved parts, five of which are critical for the elevator's final synthesis: the iron rope, the safety brake, the electric motor, the button, the cab. All of these appeared in the flurry of industrial inventions that started in the late Renaissance and peaked in the Enlightenment and the industrial revolution. The disparate inventions are unified thanks to the pressures of going up (the modern metropolis) and going down (the older mines of Germany and eleswhere).
CHRONOMETER 737 CARBONATED WATER 7,7 BRAILLE J STEAM ENGINE ,«* THERMOMETER,™ PISTON ENGINEœ ELECTRIC BATTERY AN TELESCOPE 1609 SLIDE RULE «„TUNING FORK ,7,, CAST IRON ,739 STATIC ELECTRICITY ,702 STETHOSCOPE TT
ELI
PORTLAND COMBUSTION El ELECTROMAGNET KALEIDOSCOPE, 7 BICYCI LITHOGRAPHY, 796 HOT AIR BALL!
STEAM BOAT,766 PHOTOGRAPHY,B26 PHONOGR CYLINDER ENGINE VACCINATION REFRIGI LIGHTNING ROD ,,2 ARGAND LAMP 7«, FAHRKUN
1800
ELEVATOR
PAGE 15
ULTRASONOGRAPHY** PRIVATE SPACEFLIGHT^ FLOPPY DISK 1952 ETHERNET 973 WIRELESS ENERGYoos AIR CONDITIONER 02 CREDIT CARD 50 ANTIBIOTICS 53 GPS 93 PHONE 007 VITASCOPEib95 RADIOCARBON DATING 1933 NEOPRENE«» PLASMAS METHAMPHETAMINE NUCLEAR POWER NUCLEAR OSCILATION IPOD2001
RADIO .os X-RAY 1895 LASER I960 COMPUTER MOUSE 1963 ARTIFICIAL EYE 2007
I ELEVATOR TRACTION BUTTON NUCLEAR WEAPONS LCD MICROPROCESSOR PETROLEUM REFINED PROCESS« TV , COMPUTER ,„3» SATELLITE ^ MOBILE PHONE ?.
■LEVATOR CORE „S3 DYNAMO,* HAND CAMERA , , SUPERSONIC JET« WWW „. ODYSSEY.......
GUT BULB »52 ELECTRIC MOTOR ,88, RADAR «22 CONTRACEPTIVE PILL »5 SYNTHETIC SKIN 2002 PICTURES,852 SAFETY BREAK »„MICROWAVES WALKMAN,,, SOCIAL NETWORKING,,
»TOR RIFLE AEROSOL SPRAY ANTIBIOTICS« SEQUENCING GENOME* LHC 20« t CONTACT LENSsa, ASPIRIN«® VITAMIN B ,»,« VIDEOTAPE,® AIRBORNE WIND TURBINEzoos .PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL,saaTANK,9,. BAZOOKA ROCKET,9„ DESTINATION DISPATCH,* WIFI,„IPADamo ¡ROPE,834 MAGNETIC TAPE RECORDER 399 TURING MACHINE ,* KEVLAR« SMARTPHONE *
IBLE CAR „ ESCALATOR,89, HELICOPTER * DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHY,* ARTIFICIAL HEART,* ¡LEVATOR DOOR LOCK «»a NEUTRON REACTOR ,* SPACE SHUTTLEGOOGLE ,*
TROLLEY CAR ,eS4 JET ENGINE ,* FIBER GLASS,* COMPACT DISK« NANOTUBES *
I PASTEURIZATION PYREX TRANSISTOR,»« KARAOKE SEA LAUNCH WOW • EVOLVER,* DIESEL,885 NEON LIGHT,* INTEGRATED CIRCUITS ,„, TETRIS«
IE, 4,OFFSET PRESS,«SIGNAL CONTROL,»»»POLAROID CAMERA«, COMPACT DISK«
!A GAS TURBINE a»» STORAGE PLANT MICROPROCESSOR, „SILDENAFIL *
L SEISMOGRAPH 880 XEROGRAPHY 938 HUMAN SPACEFLIGHT 961 WIKIPEDIA 001
1900
PAGE 16	ELEVATOR
GOING UP: DEUS EX MACHINA
In ancient Greek theatre, a demand for super-human scenography leads to the design of Increasingly complex cranes, hoists, and roping techniques that yield possibly the world's first elevator: a platform that elevates the actor onto an upper stage, and which makes him appear to hover above it. Typically, two devices, the mechane and the ekkyklema, are used simultaneously for special effects: the machena is placed behind the skene and is used to lift the actors in order to create a mystical appearance of flying or levitating; the ekkylema is a rolling wooden platform used to reveal interior scenes to the audience. Alongside these two commonly used elements, evidence is found of prototypical elevating platforms in various theaters: in 1921, archaeologist Armin von Gerkan discovers such a 'god' elevator in the Theater of Priene (340 BC), near Milet, consisting of a small shaft inside the playhouse. A similar platform is probably also in place at the theatre of Dionysus in Athens in the 4th century BC.
The Greeks use the technology to suggest the gods; the Romans use it later to mythologize the heroic human. In arenas and amphitheaters throughout their empire, elaborate systems of underground elevators, powered by slaves, create a mechanized scenography for the appearance of heroes, enemies, and animals from the ground. Apart from the safety break, all the basic ingredients for the modern elevator are present: propulsion, platform, ropes, and a pulley system. But there is no evidence of any other use by the Romans except for entertainment.
Other mythical prototypes for the elevator, like those said to have been made for Emperor Tiberius (42 BC-37 AD) and Nero (37-68 AD), remain legends since there is little archaeological proof and a lack of written records. One exception is the elevator installed in the throne of Constantine VII (905-959 AD), described by the Italian bishop Liudprand of Cremona in 949:
"Before the emperor's seat stood a tree made of bronze gilded over, whose branches were filled with birds also made of gilded bronze, which each uttered different cries, each according to its varying species. The throne itself was so marvelously fashioned that at one moment it seemed a low structure, and another it rose high into the air. It was of immense size and was guarded by lions, made either of bronze or of wood covered over with gold, who beat the ground with their tails and gave a dreadful roar with open mouths and quivering tongue ... At my approach the lions began to roar and the birds to cry out, each according to its kind: but I was neither terrified nor surprised, for I had previously made enquiry about all these things from people who were well acquainted with them. So after I had three times made obeisance to the emperor with my face upon the ground, I lifted my head and behold! The man whom just before I had seen sitting on a moderately elevated seatlTad no^chanflpd his raiment and was sitting on the level of the ceiling; how it was done, I could not imaginCTmless he was perhaps lifted up by some such sort of device as we use for raising the timbers of a wine press..."
— Antapadosis 6^(trans. F.A. Wright in The Works of Luiprand of Cremona (1930), 207-208).
4th century BC god elevator,' Dionysus theater, Athens.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 17
340 AD Theater of Priene, drawing by archaeologist Armin von Gerkan. The mechanism enables characters to smoothly ascend from the ground and appear to levitate above it.
PAGE 18	ELEVATOR
GOING UP: DEUS EX MACHINA
70-80 AD Man on far right listens for the cue to start the drama... depiction of Roman elevator by archaeologist Giacomo Boni, showing slave-powered system using pulleys to hoist gladiators into the arena.
9 Ptlritnani At.
70-80 AD Colosseum, Rome: thirty-two elevators connect to a two-story underground world. When the spectacle is due to begin, actors move into elevators to be hoisted up to the arena.
80 AD Elevators at amphitheatre of Pozzuoli - the third largest in the Roman empire, built by the architects of the Colosseum.
80 AD Hatches in stage level of the Pozzuoli am phitheater, where the elevators would emerge.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 19




1st century BC Beams on the ground indicate the base of the oldest remaining elevator shaft at the Roman forum, once equipped with at least 12 elevators used for entertainment purposes. As in the amphitheaters, they enable gladiators to ascend into the arena.
PAGE 20
ELEVATOR
GOING DOWN: 'ELEVATORS' IN MINING
Humans have been digging holes for millennia. In drawings produced during 19th- and 20th-century archaeological expeditions, ancient mines range from simple pits to complex networks. They appear misshapen, irregular and rugged, a result of hand digging and primitive tools. While many of the holes themselves remain - often yielding resources for hundreds if not thousands of years - the original means of getting into and out of these mines have long since been lost. Speculative renderings of the earliest (de)elevators put men on the available technology of the day: hemp ropes and wooden ladders; or, they leave the method a mystery....
3300 BC Valkenburg aan de Geul, Netherlands.
12 meters
Three-dimensional mapping of the Great Orme mines reveals the intricate network of shafts, tunnels, and galleries that have been dug out over centuries. Thought to have originated in the Bronze Age, the copper mines continued to be excavated late into the 19th century.
2000 BC Great Orme copper mines, Wales. 70 meters
ELEVATOR
PAGE 21
ca. 1200 BC Mitter-berg, Austria. Depth unknown.
"Mining started with inclined shafts, which were dug partly by firesetting and partly by bronze picks and hammer-stones. When workings over the decline became too high and fire could not attack the roof effectively, platforms had to be constructed, reached by trunks. Wooden buckets could have been used to pour water on the hot rock after firesetting or to bring the water out of the mine. The oldest winch with crossed bars ever found ... comes from the Mitterberg mines and might have been used to haul leather bags full of water to the surface, or sending logs into, or bringing ore out of the mine."
— Gerd Weisgerber and Lynn Willies, "The Use of Fire in Prehistoric and Ancient Mining: Firesetting" (2000),
Abandoned in the 1st century BC and rediscovered in the 19th century AD, the Laurion Mines in Athens were described by Edouard Ardaillon, as "a perfectly organized ensemble: shafts, tunnels, yards, everything is combined and measured to converge for a specific purpose. It is like a huge building, hidden under the earth, whose streets, wells, squares, crossroads and workshops are drawn and installed in a logical and rational plan."
— Édouard Ardaillon, Les mines du Laurion dans l'antiquité (1897).
ca. 300 BC Laurion silver mines, Athens. 92 meters
ca. 1000 BC
Leslie Mines, Missouri. 4 meters
PAGE 22
ELEVATOR
GEORGIUS AGRICOLA: ON THE NATURE OF METALS
Georgius Agricola (1494-1555), scientist and scholar, writes the first treatise on mining, De Re Metallica (On the Nature of Metals), while living in the mining town of Doachimstal and later in Chemnitz, in the foothills of Germany's Ore Mountains, the center of the mining industry. The detailed volumes of De Re Metallica, published a year after Agricola's death in 1556, contain a vast amount of information about every aspect of mining, including geology, smelting, and tools, each illustrated with fine woodcut prints. Books V and VI focus on the construction of mining shafts and methods for removing harvested material, an increasingly mechanized process. The steps required to travel into the earth prefigure what we know as the elevator - the shaft, rope, brake, hauling machine (motor), and wicker basket (cab).
Meticulous documentarían of mining's protoelevators: Georgius Agricola, 1495-1555.

SHAFT
"Now when a miner discovers a vena profunda he begins sinking a shaft and above it sets up a windlass, and builds a shed over the shaft to prevent the rain from falling in, lest the men who turn the windlass be numbed by the cold or troubled by the rain ... Now a shaft is dug, usually two fathoms long, two-thirds of a fathom wide, and thirteen fathoms deep; but for the purpose of connecting with a tunnel which has already been driven in a hill, a shaft may be sunk to a depth of only eight fathoms, at other times to fourteen, more or less. A shaft may be made vertical or inclined, according as the vein which the miners follow in the course of digging is vertical or inclined. A tunnel is a subterranean ditch driven lengthwise, and is nearly twice as high as it is broad, and wide enough that workmen and others may be able to pass and carry their loads. It is usually one and a quarter fathoms high, while its width is about three and three-quarters feet. ... Miners sink more inclined shafts than vertical, and some of each kind do not reach to tunnels, while some connect with them."
Three vertical shafts, of which the first, A, does .hot reach the tunnel , 1»
SECOND, B, REACHES THE TUNNEL; TO THE THIRD, C, THE TUNNEL HAS NOT VET BEL
driven. D—Tunnel.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 23
ROPE
"A winding-rope is wound around the barrel and fastened to it at the middle part. The loop at each end of the rope has an iron hook which is engaged in the bale of a bucket, and so when the windlass revolves by being turned by the cranks, a loaded bucket is always being drawn out of the shaft and an empty one is being sent down into it. Two robust men turn the windlass, each having a wheelbarrow near him, into which he unloads the bucket which is drawn up nearest to him; two buckets generally fill a wheelbarrow; therefore when four buckets have been drawn up, each man runs his own wheelbarrow out of the shed and empties it."
A—Toothed drum which is on the upright axle. B—Horizontal axlf..
WHICH 15 MADE OF RUNDLES. D—WHEEL NEAR IT. E-L>RU'I MADE
F-Brake. G-Oscillating beam. II—Short beam. I—Hook.
BRAKE
"One drum is made of hubs to which cleats are fixed, and the other is made of rundles; and near the latter is a wheel two feet deep, measured on all sides around the axle, and one foot wide; and against this impinges a brake, which holds the whim when occasion demands that it be stopped ...
By this also, timbers fastened on to its wind-ingchain are let down into a shaft. The brake is made of a piece of wood one foot thick and half a foot long, projecting from a timber that is suspended by a chain from one end of a beam which oscillates on an iron pin, this in turn being supported in the claws of an upright post; and from the other end of this oscillating beam a long timber is suspended by a chain, and from this long timber again a short beam is suspended."
A—Upright axle. B—Block. C—Roof beam. D—Whfel. E—Toothed-drum. i F— Horizontal axle. G—Drum composed of rundles. H—Drawing rope. I—Pole. K—Upright posts. L—Cleats on the wheel.
HAULING MACHINE (MOTOR)
"The third kind of machine is less fatiguing for the workman, while it raises larger loads even though It is slower, like all other machines which have drums, yet It reaches greater depths, even to a depth of 80 feet. It consists of an upright axle with iron journals at its extremities, which turn in two iron sockets, the lower of which is fixed in a block set in the ground and the upper one in the roof beam. This axle has at its lower end a wheel made of thick planks joined firmly together, and at its upper end a toothed drum; this toothed drum turns another drum made of rundles, which is on a horizontal axle. A winding-rope Is wound around this latter axle, which turns in iron bearings set in the beams."
BASKET (CAB)
"[Mjiners go down into mines not only by the steps of ladders, but they are also lowered Into them while sitting on a stick or a wicker basket, fastened to the rope of one of the three drawing machines which I described at first. Further, when the shafts are much inclined, miners and other workmen sit in the dirt which surrounds their loins and slide down in the same way that boys do in winter-time when the water on some hillside has congealed with the cold, and to prevent themselves from falling, one arm is wound about a rope, the upper end of which is fastened to a beam at the mouth of the shaft, and the lower end to a stake fixed in the bottom of the shaft. In these three ways miners descend into the shafts."
PAGE 24
ELEVATOR
í.lÍf:ÍXUífj?


¡Harz Region
Inventor: Georg Ludwig Doerell
Mannheim, 280 km away ¡Inventor: Werner von Siemens
HARZ, GERMANY: THE MANHATTAN OF GOING DOWN
A sectional map depicting the mines of the Upper Harz Region, 250 kilometers west of Agricola's Chemnitz, the European epicenter for the development of going down. Starting in the 1500s, the resource-rich mountains of Germany are plunged with deep shafts that miners have to travel up and down daily, creating the impetus for developing technology elsewhere for reaching ever deeper into the earth...
ELEVATOR
PAGE 25
1606 Engraved sectional map of the Harz region, Daniel Lindemeir.
1835 TWISTED STEEL CABLE ^Clausthal, Harz Region Inventor: Wilhelm Albert
1556 DE RE METALLICA Chemnitz, 170 km away Georaius Aqricola
PAGE 26
ELEVATOR
FAHRKUNST Clausthal, Harz Region Inventors: Georg Ludwig Dorell and Wilhelm Albert, 1833
A precursor to the more commercially viable elevator-llke paternoster, the fahrkunst originates as an alternative to hoisting and sinking with hemp rope and Iron chain, which are notoriously unreliable. The fahrkunst Instead is made of solid metal: two slde-by-slde vertical rods - with foot and hand holds at regular Intervals - each constantly move up then down In an alternating pattern. Miners step from one platform to another to chase the upward motion. Fahrkunsts are Initially powered by waterwheels, then steam engines, and later electricity.
Georg Ludwig Wilhelm Dorell (1793-1854). A
mining foreman at the time of the fahrkunst's Invention, Dorell grew up In Clausthal, a mining town In the Harz mountains, where he studied the technical aspects of the trade before embarking on practical experience. In the mines, Dorell was Inspired to come up with an efficient mechanical means of transport for the workers. With fellow mining expert Wilhelm Albert he Invents the farhkunst, which quickly spreads from the Harz Mountains, across Europe.
© © © ©
1.	Miner steps from rod on the right to rod on the left.
2.	He rides on the foot hold as rod rises.
3.	Once he is level with a foothold on the right, he crosses back over from left to right.
4.	He steps up from platform to platform until reaching the surface.
1901 A miner uses the fahrkunst In the Samson shaft, Harz, Germany.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 27
TWISTED IRON CABLE Clausthal, Harz Region Inventor: Wilhelm Albert, 1835
Engineer Wilhelm Albert writes a manual outlining a mechanized technique for producing twisted iron cable, establishing procedural standards that can be easily taught and understood. Wire rope is much safer for hauling than hemp or chain; it is also locally produced, making it economically appealing. In his text, Albert gives detailed advice on how to keep the wires from bending and kinking, which decreases their strength. Advances In manufacturing, particularly in the production of alloyed metals like steel, enable ever-stronger wire ropes, allowing for heavier and longer hauls.
Wilhelm Albert (1787-1846) Engineer from the Ruhr Valley, inventor of a new method of manufacturing iron rope.
Progress of Practical and Theoretical Mechanics and Chemistry*
On the Manufacture of Whim Ropes from Iron Wire.
(Being the Substance of a Communication from Mr. Albert, of Clasthal Royal Britannic Hanoverian Mining Councilor, to Dr. Karsten, Royal Prussian Privy and Mining Councillor, and Member of the Royal Academy of Sciences in Berlin, Editor of theArchives of Mineralogy, Mining, Metallurgyfyc.)
(From the “Archiv fur Mineralogie, Geognosie, Bergbau und Hüttenkunde,” conducted by Dr. C. J. B, Karsten. Berlin, 1835.)
The great annual expense of providing ropes for the shafts in the mining district of the Upper Harz, and the circumstance of the hemp being only procurable by importation from abroad, led me during several years to make a series of experiments for the sole application of iron to this purpose. These experiments terminated in new methods of manufacturing whim-ropes, and of obviating their weight, by the adoption of endless chains; but yet my object was not accomplished. However, it occurred to me subsequently, at the commencement of last year (1834,) that iron wire might be plaited or twisted together so as to form a whim-rope; and the results of my experiments were so completely satisfactory, that arrangements are now making in these mines for the general adoption of ropes of this description. The manufacture of them from iron wire is, in tact, a very simple, and not an expensive! operation; and vet there are a great many apparently insignificant circumstances which materially delay the work, and oeoa-um itnpedi ments, which can only be obviated by obtaining an accurate knowledge ol them. I have, therefore, resolved to describe the process and its peculiar! lies, and hope thus to render some service to jjiacticui Deiuuoe.
In the first place, the iron wire employed iscu ihe sort numbered 12, in the Royal Foundry of the Harz, of the diameter 0,144 inches; and ten feet of the wire weigh'13.91 Loth, Cologne weight, or seven and one-fifth ounces avoirdupois.
This wire is drawn by a machine, in lengths of 60 to 130 feet; and to facilitate the work on the straight-rope course, and to avoid weakening the wire by violent bending, in order to bring it into a straight direction, it is so
1835 Wilhelm Albert: "The adoption of the wire rope is a matter of essential importance for the mines of the Upper Harz, where more than 84,000 feet of rope (partly hemp and partly iron) are in constant work and where every year upwards of 38,500 feet of new rope are required."
1913 80 years later, wire rope manufacturing is a huge industry, used across trades from mining to bridge construction. Companies such as the American Steel and Wire Company illustrate the minutiae wire in their catalog: seven-wire strand used for haulage, 19-wire for hoisting rope, 37-wire for flexible hoisting... Each subsequent outer ring of wires creates a more flexible rope.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 28
1960 "Elevators," a manual by A.F Annett, describes the structure of various cable types and their advantages. Each rope is made up of strands, which are themselves bundles of Individual wires. The name of a type of rope Is derived from the number of strands and the number and type of wires within those strands.
Regular: varying composition of six or eight bundles of 19 wires; Warrington: three-size wire construction consisting of seven the individual strands all the same thickness In each bundle	Interior wires of uniform thickness surrounded by 12 wires that
(though there is variation between different ropes).	are alternately large and small, for a rope 10 percent stronger.
Seale construction: large center wire In each bundle,	Flattened strand: complex internal variation, with flat
encircled by nine small wires and outer layer of nine	surface that secures greater wearing resistance
large wires, producing a stiffer rope.	and flexibility.
1913 Three types of wire rope: 6x7 regular
-	tough but inflexible; 6x19 seale construction - flexible with hemp core; 8 x19 regular rope
-	extremely flexible and perfect for hoisting.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 29
ELECTRIC MOTOR
Mannheim (280 km south of Harz)
Inventor: Werner von Siemens, 1881
A master of perfecting existing inventions - including the telegraph, the dynamo, and the trolley - von Siemens is a consummate engineer and entrepreneur. When he sets out to perfect the "lift" he is reluctant to fully embrace the cable suspension system, and instead develops the worm drive - an electric motor that rotates a screw to hoist the platform up a central mast. Considered safer than most alternatives, the worm drive motor has built-in safety mechanisms which prevent the gears from reversing and lock the platform in place when the motor isn't engaged. The rackclimbing elevator is first presented at the industrial exposition in Mannheim, ushering in a new era of electrical conveyance that consumes less space and is far easier to maintain.
ENGINE EVOLUTION
1864 STEAM
I The Otis reversible steam engine generates
I1 torque by compressing pistons on either side of a massive crankshaft. Dependant on a continuous ■ supply of steam, these engines require boiler I rooms where attendants constantly monitor the system. The steam engine is far more economical than its predecessors at delivering drive power to the hoisting drum, but remains uncomfortable to ride as steam engines rarely produce quick or I smooth movement.
1880 HYDRAULICS
Werner von Siemens (1816-1892) Engineer and entrepreneur, in 1866 von Siemens discovers the dynamo-electric principle, which makes it possible to use electricity as a source of power. In 1881 he develops the first electric elevator.
500cm
/
A
1880 ELECTRIC MOTOR
In the various hydraulic systems, a pump is required if pressure from water mains is insufficient to operate the elevator directly. There must be either a gravity tank on the roof or a pressure tank in the basement.
Requiring far less space than its predecesors, the electric motor, hidden here in a wooden box, is easier to install and maintain.
PAGE 30	ELEVATOR
TRACTION Bochum, Ruhr Area,
230 km from Harz
Inventor: Carl Friedrich Koepe, 1876
Like other crucial components of the modern elevator, traction is tested in the mining industry before gaining wide acceptance above ground. In 1876, Carl Friedrich Koepe from the Ruhr valley in Germany invents a disk-based traction drive system for mining hoists. Contrary to the industrial standard of the time, which reeled the elevator up and down on a drum, his invention relies on a counterweight, plus a traction sheave - a grooved wheel that dramatically improves the life span and safety of the rope. The mining company Koepe works for drops his patent for the design; only after his death do they acknowledge that it actually worked. Millions are in use today.
Carl Friedrich Koepe (1835-1922), inventor of traction for elevators.
PRE-TRACTION: THE WINDING DRUM
Rope is wound around the angled threads of a cylindrical drum. In this roping system, prevalent before the introduction of traction, the maximum pull height is determined by the length of the drum, limiting the number of floors the elevator can service.
TRACTION SHEAVE
The introduction of the traction sheave enables elevator cabs to reach new heights. No longer wound around the hoist mechanism, the rope runs over the pulley, connecting the cab to the counterweight. The traction principle transmits the lifting force to the rope by friction between the grooves of the drive sheave and the strands of the rope. Apart from the advantages of unrestricted rope length, this system can be layered with safety features like multiple ropes - each supporting the weight of the elevator.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 31
SINGLE WRAP: LOW SPEED
Consisting of a large DC motor connected to the drive sheave, the low speed gearless traction elevator engages the friction between the rope and the slow-moving sheave to generate lift. The diameter of the sheave is determined by the bending radius of the steel rope - a limitation imposed by safety guidelines to prolong the life of the rope and prevent excessive wear.
DOUBLE-WRAP: HIGH SPEED
To overcome the higher rotational speeds of the drive sheave and prevent slippage, the double-wrap principle is applied to high-speed gearless traction elevators. Wrapping the rope around the drive sheave twice increases the pressure of the rope on the sheave and ensures adequate traction to complete the lift.
UNDERCUT SHEAVE GROOVE
Applied to geared and gearless machines, the undercut profile increases friction by pinching the rope in the tapered groove. Polyurethane liners may also be applied to decrease rope wear and ensure greater traction.
ROUNDED SHEAVE GROOVE
In high-speed applications, the rounded profile facilitates pressure on the full half of the rope, maximizing the surface area available for friction while minimizing rope wear. Although preferred fop rope life, this groove provides the least traqtiory
PAGE 32	ELEVATOR
MANHATTAN: THE HARZ REGION OF GOING UP
Within a 10 square kilometer region, all the ingredients, half imported and half invented, come together to form what we now know as the elevator. Fueled by European invention and then radicalized in the US, these newly recombined parts produce a modern machine that enables the skyscraper, and with it, the city...
ELEVATOR
PAGE 33
PAGE 34
ELEVATOR
SAFETY BRAKE Yonkers, New York Inventor: Elisha Otis, 1853
As Goergius Agricola recorded in De Re Metallica, the safety brake has existed for centuries, but until Elisha Otis, it had always depended on a human operator to activate it. Driven by a ubiquitous terror of the broken rope, Otis replaces a lever-based safety mechanism with an automatic rack and pinion system, eliminating the possibility of human error.
Elisha Otis (1811-1861), mechanic and entrepreneur from Yonkers, New York, transitions from manufacturing bedstands to freight lifts with his invention of a rack and pinion safety brake.
1857 Elisha Otis's patent sketch for the first elevator safety brake, installed in the Haughwout Building. Many components of this early version (highlighted here) reappear in the patent filed four year later.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 35
1861 Despite inventing the safety break system 10 years earlier, and dramatically unveiling it in 1854, the patent only appears In 1861 - three months before the death of the Inventor. An Otis leaflet from 1855 mentions a patent pending for the machine, but for unknown reasons the first patent application is withdrawn, only to be submitted again in August 1860. The solution for the safety break is most likely based on a system by Boston-based inventor George H. Fox, with a small Improvement. Otis describes: "Having the pawls f-f and the teeth of the racks C-C hook-formed ... so that the weight of the platform will, in case of the breaking of the rope G, cause the pawls and teeth to lock together and 'prevent' the contingency of a separation of the same..." The patent contains other inventions for control systems that enable more precise landing, including an ingeniously wired belt and counterweight system. Both are existing technologies, and the latter is so generic that it slows down the patenting process. Otis pursues other inventions that seem more promising, like an automatic grill, but around the time of this patent, his hoisting machines start to become widely known and more profitable.
FOURDRIN1ERS PATENT SAFETY APPARATUS
POR PREVENTING ACCIDENTS IN MINES AND COLLIERIES.
SAFETY APPARATUS
Inventor: Edward Fourdrinier, 1849
An early safety invention comparable to Otis's patent was conceived by Edward Fourdrinier in response to mining accidents in England. In his patent description Fourdrinier writes: "By reference to the prefixed sketch it will be seen that the apparatus is fastened upon the guides by the rope being represented as broken, but when the rope or chain is tight, and the cage in work, the levers are raised on their fulcra, and lower the wedges in the tapered shoes, which slackens them on the guides; and when the rope or chain becomes broken or detached, the levers drop and raise the wedges into the tapered shoes, and consequently grip the guides firmly on both sides, so that the greater the weight in the cage, the tighter the wedges hold." Fourdrinier's technology comes very close to what Elisha Otis presents in New York five years later.
PAGE 36
ELEVATOR
ICONOGRAPHY OF SAFETY
Crystal Palace Exhibition, New York, 1854
At New York's Crystal Palace - a spin-off of London's Great Exhibition - Elisha Otis unveils the "modern" elevator, enabled by the safety brake. An entrepreneurial showman, Otis' ingenuity lies more in his dramatic presentation than in the actual invention, which had been preceded by others. Otis didn't do it first, but he did it best - with a death-defying cut of the rope, in front of a stunned audience...
1854 Non-event: Otis' demonstration at the New York Exhibition of the Industry of All Nations, watched by a very small and indifferent-looking audience. But the event receives decent media coverage, seed for the legend that to come. Scientific American registers a "new and excellent platform elevator, by Mr. Otis of Yonkers, N.Y ... It has a plain platform, which runs up and down on guides ... it is self-acting, safe, and convenient." Pune 10, 1854). New York Daily Tribune reports that a daring inventor "rides up and down the platform ... [he] occasionally cuts the rope by which it is supported." The safety break itself is patented only in 1863, three months before Otis's death and the inheritence of the soon-to-be elevator emprie to his two ambitious sons, who make sure that the 1854 moment would be percieved as "the birth of the elevator," declaring ownership not only of the production, but of history as well
Otis introduces an invention in urban theatricality: the anticlimax as dénouement, the non-event as triumph. Like the elevator, each technological invention is pregnant with a double image: contained in its success is the spectre of its possible failure. The means of averting the phantom disaster are almost always as important as the original invention itself.
Otis has introduced a theme that will be a leitmotiv of the island's future development: Manhattan is an accumulation of possible disasters that never happen. —RK, Delirious New York, 1978.
1978 Mythologizing: "The most Important producer of the conveyance was now regarded as Its inventor as well, and in the course of the 20th century, one can trace how this narrative was cemented in place - especially, of course, by the Otis Company itself, whose publications in any case constitute a considerable part of the historical literature. On the 125th anniversary of the founding of the E.G. Otis Elevator Company, the firm even printed up a facsimile newspaper with imaginary historical articles, thereby creating out of whole cloth the contemporary interest in Otis's experiment which in truth did not exist. Under a masthead reading 'New York, 1854' and in a layout reminiscent of the New York Times, one can read about a 'young inventor' presenting his safety elevator 'in a daring exhibition before thousands of viewers.' 'This reporter noted that as the platform went up, without question, everyone in the hall stopped to see what would happen next.'... We are justified in assuming that the most famous and by now 'official' illustration of the experiment was in fact drawn in 1978. The teeming, astonished onlookers as well as the assistant who has just severed the suspension cable are inventions of the recent past." Andreas Bernard, Lifted, 2014.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 37
The 1854 depiction Otis's severing of the rope at the Crystal Palace, though less spectacular than its 1978 exaggeration, is powerful enough to start a genre of elevator iconography taken up by competitors as they demonstrate their systems decades later...
1868 Campbell, Whittier & Co.:
Miller Patent Screw Hoisting Machine.
1873 Lane & Bodley:
Hydraulic Elevator, Cincinnati.
1875 Lane & Bodley: Pull Hydraulic System.
1880 Crane Brothers Manufacturing Co.: hydraulic passenger elevator.
1882 L.S. Graves & Son: Horizontal Hydraulic Elevator.
GEARED ELEVATOR (ERECTED).
We disclaim any responsibility for this man s position behind the box and barrel. It is not his proper place. He should be in front with his band on the shifting cable.
1887 L.S. Graves & Son: "We disclaim any responsibility for this man's position behind the box and barrel. It is not his proper place.
He should be In front with his hand on the shifting cable."
1890 L.S. Graves & Son: Hydraulic Elevator System.
PAGE 38
ELEVATOR
CORE
Cooper Union Building, New York Inventor: Peter Cooper, 1853
The invention of the core ironically predates the invention of the passenger elevator. Industrialist Peter Cooper makes provision for one in his plans for a school he is building, the Cooper Union in New York: "At that time there were no passenger elevators. Mr. Cooper insisted on putting in the elevator shaft, saying that if there were no passenger elevators when the building was ready, he would build one," says Edward Ringwood Hewitt, Cooper's grandson. It takes eight years to complete the building; by the time it is done, the passenger elevator is indeed invented, and so the building comes to have the first closed and circular core for a passenger elevator. The only problem is that elevator cabs are designed square. The school makes do with an orthogonal cab until a 1974 renovation when university dean John Hejduk fulfills Cooper's vision and installs a round elevator in the round shaft.
Peter Cooper (1791-1883) American industrialist, inventor, philanthropist, and presidential candidate, pre-emptor of the passenger elevator.
Mid 1970s Renovation of Cooper Union's tubular elevator core.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 39
ELEVATOR BANK
New York Tribune Building,
Nassau Street, New York Inventor: Richard Morris Hunt, 1875
Taller buildings mean more floors to serve and more people to carry - one elevator quickly proves insufficient.
The New York Tribune building, designed by Richard Mossis Hunt, is the first to feature two elevators side by side. The proliferation of the elevator triggers adaptations of other circulation devices within architecture -the hallway, the lobby, the stair. Soon elevator banks multiply to four or five shafts, complete with express lines to upper floors.
Richard Morris Hunt (1827-1895) Architect responsible for the design and renovation of several New York syscrapers, Hunt also founds the American Institute of Architects and the Municipal Art Society.
1875 First elevator bank: New York Tribune building features two shafts and two cabs next to each other, wrapped by the main staircase.
i ooo-i oob william Le baron Jenneys home Insurance building, Chicago. A large space is opened up to serve the four-cab elevator bank, creating an elevator lobby, an Increasingly common sight In tall buildings.
1889 Typical plan [ for upper floors of f Burnham and Root's itlonadnock Building, Chicago, featuring two I elevator banks of four cabs/shafts. Located in | the center of the floor j plate, all circulation is organized around the I elevator bank.
PAGE 40
ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR BUTTON New York
Inventor: Charles Ongley, 1889
The introduction of the elevator button comes at a moment when buttons are proliferating everywhere.
The push button, invented between around 1885-1895 appears in various appliances from electric door bells, machines in factories, fire alarms and most prominently by Kodak cameras in 1889 with the slogan: "You press the button, we do the rest." The same year that Kodak incorporates a button into their camera, Charles Ongley patents the first in-cab elevator button, featuring an up and down button.
Charles E. Ongley (1852-1934)
ca. 1900 Elevator call button.
1B8S Patent tor tiectricany uontroiiea tievator, unaries t. ungiey:
"This invention relates to an organized apparatus for controlling electrically the movements of an elevator-car, and particularly to a system of electrical connections by which the circuit through which the valve or other controlling apparatus is operated is automatically broken at the proper time to prevent the slamming and violent action of said apparatus."
1888 "You press the button, we do the rest": Kodak's first camera is released just before the button has a similarly revolutionary effect on the elevator.
"[The] photographer's organ Is not his eye ... but his finger: what Is linked to the trigger of the lens, to the metallic shifting of the plates (when the camera still has such things). I love these mechanical sounds In an almost voluptuous way, as if,
In the Photograph, they were the very thing
-	and the only thing
-	to which my desire clings, their abrupt click breaking through the mortlferous layer of the Pose."
-	Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida (1980)
ELEVATOR
PAGE 41
SIGNAL CONTROL Standard Oil Building,
26 Broadway, New York Inventor: Otis, 1924
"In 1924 ... the Standard Oil Building at 26 Broadway had the first call-answering elevator system ... Its Invention was really mothered by zoning laws which no longer permitted a high building to be erected straight up. It had to be set back as it rose, if it covered its entire land area. But this cut down the amount of room for elevators on the upper floors. Otis had figured that Standard Oil needed eight cars, but there was room for only six, so to compensate they were speeded up to 800 feet a minute. But this meant they'd flash past a floor and never see the waiting passengers in time to stop. The solution was a signal control that automatically stopped the car. Obviously, this invention helped diminish the role of the operator. He needed no particular mechanical skill; he merely pushed the car buttons as requested by passengers and moved a lever to close the doors. All other functions, including stopping to answer the calls, were performed automatically by the control equipment."
— Stanley P Friedman, "The case of the vanishing elevator man," New York Herald Tribune (February 26, 1961).
ca. 1924 Signal control system: heavily automated but featuring a lever for the operator, making him still a necessary part of the elevator.
PAGE 42
ELEVATOR
1924 First signal control system, Standard Oil Building, New York. "Floor selectors are required on all automatic-type elevators. On the more modern Otis signal-control elevators the selector performs three important functions: it stops the car at floors for which buttons have been pressed, levels the car at floors, and operates signals necessary for efficient elevator service."
— F.A. Annet, Elevators (1960).
1925 Elevator cab transformed by the new automatic control panel.
1925 Components of the signal control elevator.
^^Stevator —Motor Secondary Sheave
Governor \-Hoiat ' ^Ropea Counterweight „ Guard Raila * "Governor Rope
Mo®	a
Generator— ~ —v»jj Set Chain for Driving Selector Tape Drive Sheaves Final Limit Switch — Terminal Stopping Switch
Compensating Ropes.
ii .Counterweight
i- ~r- p.,
Buffer
Compensating Rope Shelve, and Frame'
^ Governor Rope Sheave
Controller Brake Magnet. . Floor Selector \	^
Operating Box
Safety Plank
Terminal Stopping Switch Cam
Counterweight
Rails
Final Limit Switch
Steel Tape for Driving Floor Selec
and Frame
Courtesy OUi Elevator Co.
Signal Control Alone Regulates the Operating Mechanism.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 43
1960 Wiring diagram for a "Relay-type Pushbutton System without Automatic Reset." From the manual Elevators by A.F Annett. "All the down reset coils are connected to the same wire, so that when circuit G is closed, all the down reset coils are energized, and any of the down push buttons that are closed will be released."
PAGE 44
ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR
PAGE 45
¡1932 tlevator enabled: the mulitplied ¡ground of midtown, Manhattan, with Rockefeller Center under construction.
PAGE 46	ELEVATOR
AMERICAN ELEVATOR OPTIMISM...
1906 Globe Tower, planned for Coney Island, rendered with exploded interior. From the top: roof gardens; theater; ballroom, revolving restaurant; chambres séparée; Africa, one of the continents / circuses; lobby. Special gravity elevator connects interior with underground metropolitan arteries.
1909 Aeriel plots: in Life magazine, the potential of the elevator sets the popular imagination free... Enabled and serviced by the elevator shaft on the left, a series of identical platforms - levels 80-85 ilustrated here - could harbor unique, even rural, lifestyles on every level.
1931 Downtown Athletic Club, by architects Starred & Van Vleck and Duncan Hunter: 38 stories served by an eight-strong elevator bank, their doors opening onto radically different experiences on every floor. The lobotomized experience of the skyscraper - the appearance of stacked, uniform floors on the exterior masking unpredictability inside - is enabled by the elevator's unique qualities: its sudden ping followed by the disgorging of unprepared occupants into highly distinct, almost random worlds...
8-strong elevator bank. Floor plans contain just as much diversity horizontally as the building does vertically: boxing & wrestling nearby an oyster bar...
a/vi//vj/brr s/rccf
ELEVATOR
PAGE 47
TERMINATES WITH THE CORE...
The endless variety and adventure promised by the combination of elevator + skyscraper is throttled by the dominance of the typical plan: the elevator is buried inside the core, servicing a series of repeated identical floors deliberately stripped of identity. The elevator ride becomes a disembodied, de-spectacular-ized, stacato experience: ascent is registered in the gut but no longer confirmed by the eye.
1939 10 Rockefeller Plaza.
PAGE 48
ELEVATOR
OTIS AND THE EIFFEL TOWER
In the US, business is booming for the Otis Elevator Company - now in the hands Elisha's sons Charles and Norton. But the opportunity to demonstrate their engineering savvy to the Old World - by providing the elevators for the Eiffel Tower at the 1889 Paris Expo - is turning sour as the deadline approaches and the elevators haven't arrived. Following a letter of complaint by Gustave Eiffel, in which he threatens to withhold payment for Otis, the American defends himself in a measured five-page note, painting a picture of American diligence vis-à-vis European unreliability.
Otis contends that the main reason for the delay in delivery is the fundamental design change that would give the Eiffel Tower its most recognizable feature: "you changed [the] form, - making an abrupt bend in the legs, and thereby ... rendering much of our past study and labor useless." An elevator that travels across a curve is a whole new ball game...
This crisis intensifies when the French authorities ban foreign companies from working on the elevators altogether. After most French companies refrain from participating, the policy is reversed and the Americans are contacted again. Eventually, the commission for the elevators is shared between Otis and Roux-Combaluzier- each is responsible for two of the four legs.
Dear Sir*-
We are in receipt of your letter of the 1st inst., addressed to Mr Gibson at our London Office, and by him forwarded to us for perusal. We have read the same with much interest. I neod hardly say, however, that this letter was unnecessary in order that we might possess a full and comprehensive understanding of the situation here and in Paris. We fully appreciate the posi-
In the distress and pressure of the closing period of thi great undertaking, you havo doubtless lost sight of things occurring in its early history which bear weightily upon the present status. You forget that when the matter was first brought to our attention, the formation of the logs of the Tower was different from that finally adopted, and that we wrought out and sub-stantailly completed the engineering elements of the difficulty as then presented; subsequently
adding to the engineering difficulties to be overcome. . t .
I now come to the most trying part of what I have to say. \fter having done all that we havo done to meet your case, and ifter having done it for one-half what it cost — sacrificing from )ur own pockets 120,000 in order to furnish you with those machines and make them satisfactory to you,
^We so interpret your cablegram in reference to roser^n^a!u^rights.	After all else which we have borne and
suffered and achieved in your behalf, we regard this as a trifle too much; and we do not hesitate to declare,inthostronges^^ terms possible to the English language, thatjwe will not put up mmmm and have so cat^o^ou^represent^^vc^abroad^^^^^this iii"'¡TV v r. ,iif there, is to be. War, under the' exist-:
fought on American ground. If ?!r Eiffel shall, on the contrary, trea^j^a^w^TeJ^^v^wo are entitled to be treated, under the circumstances, and his confidence in our integrity to serve him well shall be restored in season to admit of the completion of this work at the time wanted, well and good; but it must be done at once, and in a manner which shall put it beyond all question; otherwise we shall ship no more work from this side, and Mr Eiffel must charge to himself the consequences of his own acts.
We will say no more.	We could say no less. And, with
the expression of our profound consideration, and the assurance of our great desire to please and satisfy our illustrious patron, we remain,
ELEVATOR
PAGE 49
1886 Initial scheme: Eiffel and his architect collaborator, Sauvestre, design a tower ensemble with vertical elevators only.
1889 Final ground floor plan: construction of elevators Is divided between two companies: Otis gets the North and South towers, Roux-Combaluzler gets East and West.
1889 Roux-Combaluzier: elevator carries 90 passengers,	1889 Otis: carrying 50 passengers, using pivoting floor sections leveled
pushed by pistons, capable of 1 meter per second.	by the operator to compensate for changing inclination, and travelling
at 2 meters per second.
PAGE 50
ELEVATOR
MISSED OPPORTUNITIES IN THE OLD WORLD
The invention of the elevator confronts architects with a new problem: how to incorporate the elevator bank into the floor plan. In Europe and Russia, architects synthesize a number of possibilities, but the Old World nevertheless misses its chance to influence the early history of the elevator.
Rudolf Eckmann and Ernst Eckmann.
Walter Fischer.
1921 The circular elevator bank: an architectural competition is announced in Berlin for the city's first skyscraper: an 80-meter office tower at the north end of Friedrichstrasse, located on a triangular plot stretching from the Spree to the S-bahn. 144 entries are submitted, many of which opt for a new approach to the integration of elevators in a multiple-core high-rise building: a circular elevator bank. The competition is dropped before any of them, including Mies's glass tower proposition, can be selected, let alone built.
Otto Schubert.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 51
MIES'S GLASS SKYSCRAPER
Mies van der Rohe's competition entry disregards the guidelines for specific programs, and opts for an entirely flexible floor plan. Mies neither wins nor receives special mention; nevertheless, his idea for a core-and-envelope-only structure - Mies claims that "everything else just dropped away" -will soon become the norm.
1921 Mies's initial competition entry for a glass tower on Friedrich-strasse, Berlin.
please note circular elevator lobby, driving mad...


1922 A second proposal, never submitted, by Mies: the original prismatic-shaped tower gains an amoeba-like form; one circular elevator lobby divides into two.
PAGE 52	ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR BANKS OFF-PLAN
1929-1930 Leonidov, in his competition entry for the House of Industry in Moscow, separates the elevators from the building’s main floor plan -a trick he repeats more dramatically in a drawing for a tower in Magnitogorsk.
1930 Ivan Leonidov, proposal for a section of Magnitogorsk.
ELEVATOR BANKS AT THE CENTER OF STALINIST SYMMETRIES
ELEVATOR
PAGE 53
1953 L.V. Rudnev locates the elevator banks at Moscow State University at the core of a more symmetrical composition rather than as functional appendage.
PAGE 54
ELEVATOR




ELEVATOR
PAGE 55
PAGE 56
ELEVATOR
MAN MEETS MACHINE: THE INSTITUTION OF THE ELEVATOR OPERATOR
By the late 19th century, the modern metropolis cannot function without skyscrapers, skyscrapers cannot function without elevators, and elevators cannot function without an operator. For a few decades before the introduction of the push button, machine still needs man, and a symbiotic relationship takes hold. Elevator operation is a highly skilled and strenuous job: a heavy lever must be pulled, with the right amount of force and at the right moment, to ensure the cab stops in precise alignment with the chosen floor. Elevator operators rival taxi drivers as sages of the city, but have a little extra sass (the young ones) and even more sullenness (the older ones). The job quickly becomes an institution, with its own uniforms, etiquette, licenses, and unions. Elevator operators typically only work office hours though, forcing late-workers to scale the stairs if they so much as run out of copying ink...
Elevator operator in St. Patrick's Day spirit.
"The aged conductor was of a melancholy disposition, and as his hand formed a passageway for the check-rope he was evidently in deep thought. His object in life was not to speak unless spoken to, and then he betrayed a lamentable ignorance of everything save the location of the various offices. If he was asked concerning the number of persons who daily travel on his elevator, he answered 'lots of them,' and if any one made inquiry concerning the fastest time made by the car, or suggested that it was slow or fast, he felt aggrieved. The youthful conductor, on the contrary, was angry when told that the elevator was slow, and related marvelous stories of quick passages. It did not occur to him, perhaps, that the majority of his passengers, although busy men, had no desire to risk their necks through flying trips on elevators. In no instance would a conductor admit that any one had ever been killed or injured through accident or design on his car, and notwithstanding the fact that in many of the buildings the door of the car was kept open during the round trip, and that there was frequent opportunity for a passenger to swing a leg so that it might be crushed between the floor of the car and the ceiling of one of the floors, the conductor always insisted that such accidents could not occur because of his vigilance."
— "Fast Times in Elevators: Ascending Nine Flights in Thirty Seconds," New York Times (September 3, 1882).
1941 Barr Building, Washington, D.C.	From memorabilia amassed by Patrick Carrajat
of the New York Elevator Museum, Long Island City, Queens. Small sign reads: "Do not spit in the elevator."
1936 610 Fifth Avenue, New York.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 57
J 1936 As the Elevator Operators and Starters union ■ Local 66 picket a building and the city shuts down with 1 another full-scale walk out, Mayor La Guardia declares | a state of emergency.
Neiv York Hit By Huge \ Elevator Operator Strike
Thousands Leavè Jobs During Rush Hour; Mid-Manhattan Buildings Affected
NEW YORK, Sept. 24 Business activities In at least 1.515 Manhattan olilce buildings were crippled today In New York's first general strike of elevator operators and maintenance workers Since 1936.
The long-threatened walkout came during the early morning rush hour when 11.000 workers dropped their chores m 995 buildings between 14th and 41st Streets, but before noon the strike was extended to 300 additional buildings In the financial district and another 300 uptown.
Great throngs of office workers - swarmed the lobbies of skyscrapers and the sidewalks outside. Thousands struggled up stairways that seemed endless, Including those of the. Empire State Building, tallest structure in the world,
which normally keps 72 elevators busy.
Locals 32-B and 164 of the AFL Building Service Employes International Union called the strike when David Sullivan, president of local 32-B. gave the signal at 8:30 a. m. IEWTI.
Union leaders lncldated that unless the Midtown Realty Owners Association and the Realty Advisory Board on labor relations met their demands the strike would “spread throughout Manhattan.'
The two locals have 23,000 members. and If all struck at once, service in at least 1,900 buildings would be tied up. Union officials claim a total strike also would bring out 6,000 non-union workers, tying up as many as 2,500 buildings all together. '
For several months the main' tenance workers and building own.
1945 Walk-out: 11,000 elevator operators strike in New York City, rendering 1,575 buildings virtually unusable. "Thousands struggled up stairways that seemed endless, including those of the Empire State Building, tallest structure in the world, which normally keeps_72 elevators bus^
(Tuscaloosa News, September 24.)a
February 18,1935 With elevator operators on strike, white collar workers can no longer use their buildings...
THEIR HANDS ON THE LEVERS OF THE CITY
The Elevator Operators Union numbers
17,000	members in 1925, when 4,000 of them declare a wildcat strike, refusing to negotiate with building owners and managers over pay. Operators exercise their unique power over metropolitan life again in 1936 and 1945, forcing the city to grind to a halt each time...
Union badge, New York City.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 58
MOVABLE ROOM: ELEVATOR INTERIORS
"In 1835 the English talked of 'rising cupboards'; 10 years later of an 'ascending room,' referring to a contraption that raised 10 or 12 people to the upper viewing gallery of the Coliseum in Regent's Park ... [T]he idea of the elevator car as a room in its own right did linger for a surprisingly long time. Tufts called his screw-mounted elevator a 'vertical railway' in 1859; the New York Times preferred the 'movable room.' It was not until the early 20th century that passenger elevators became recognizably themselves, designed to look like elevators in their own right, rather than like lobbies or antechambers connected to the design of the whole building. Perhaps the late Victorian taste for drapes and upholstery, for potted plants and heavy blinds, helped to obscure the fact that the elevator, having no windows, was unlike any other room in the house."
— Dason Goodwin, Otis: Giving Rise to the Modem City (Ivan R Dee, 2001).
1870 As if settling in for a long journey, shoppers sit, slouch, and gossip in the new elevator at Lord and Taylor's department store, New York City. Operator of the sullen variety.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 59
1881 Otis design for a hotel elevator, with padded bench and large mirror -only the latter becomes ubiquitous.
1900 The Birdcage: the elevator cab stripped of luxury trappings.
PAGE 60
ELEVATOR
1910 Elevator at 49 Wall Street: grated walls allow a veiled view of the vertical passage through the building.
1932 Elevator at 49 Wall Street, replaced: due to the increasing speed of elevators, safety regulations disctate that cabs may no longer have grated openings and must be fully enclosed, rendering the passage between floors a disconnected experience.
PAGE 61
1936 Lincoln Building at 60 West 42nd Street, New York. In Colson Whiteread's 1999 novel about a mid-century elevator inspector, The Intuitionist, the protagonist reports: "There's an old inspector Maxim: 'An elevator is a grave.' Such loss and devastation is there. That's why the inside walls of the car are never sheer; they're broken up into panels, equipped with a dorsal rail. Otherwise it would be a box, a coffin." (Colson Whitehead,
The Intuitionist, Doubleday, 1999.)
1950s The button-operated Otis Autotronic cab analyzes traffic patterns and adjusts its flow and location accordingly. Doors are now equipped with sensors to detect people blocking the entrance. Cab interiors shift from wood veneer to reflective stainless steel, as described by a contractor in the New York Times: "Walls and ceilings of stainless steel or mirrored bronze can make cars look larger," providing "a solution to the rush of claustrophobia felt by riders entering the tiny cabs." (Alisa Goetz, Up, Down, Across, Merrill, 2003, 71.)
PAGE 62
ELEVATOR
1967 John Portman introduces the glass elevator In his Atlanta Hyatt Regency hotel, declaring: "If you get In a closed-box elevator your spirit seems to be driven Inward ... In a glass elevator, the spirit goes out and people continue their conversations."
1981 The Elevonlc 401 Is the first "human-engineered" elevator with synthesized speech, information display and security system. It Is also the first elevator system equipped with weight sensors to put full cars In express mode.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 63
1994 Illuminated celling, mirrored and stainless steel walls of the | Thyssen Aufzuge car at the Landeszentralbank, Stuttgart.
2010s Traveling at 35 km/hour, the elevators of Dubai's Burj Khalifa, tallest building in the world, require a handrail.
PAGE 64	ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR MUSIC
Even though mood-music seeps from all types of public and private realms, because of its close association with the elevator cab, we call it elevator music. In 2003, Joseph Lanza's book Elevator Music defends music that is subdued, unassuming, and remote, which embellishes our lives "and that many ungratefully ignore, deride, or take for granted." Elevator music, according to Lanza, provides us with an illusion of distended time and is the musical equivalent of Esperanto: "The vast quantity of uncharitable jokes and condescending anecdotes directed against elevator music in general and Muzak in particular betrays a lack of understanding about music's augmented role in a media-dominated culture. Complain as we may about its blandness and ability to manipulate, mood music is intrinsically bound up in the social fabric of our times." Key moments in the history of elevator music from Lanza's book, summarized by the editors:
Pre-elevator Music
In 1917, composer Eric Satie dreams of a "furniture music," which "would be a part of the surrounding noises and that would take them into account. I see it as melodious, as masking the clatter of knives and forks without drowning it completely, without imposing itself. It would spare them the usual banalities. Moreover, it would neutralize the street noises that indiscreetly force themselves into the picture."
Elevator Music
It is another 15 years until Satie's ideas materialize, albeit in a different form. Mood music is invented in the 1930s by Major General George Owen Squier. Soon after its introduction, mood music starts to be called elevator music because, according to David Owens in The New Yorker, "soothing melodies were used in early skyscrapers to make people feel less nervous about stepping into a contrivance that looked like a death trap."
On July 28, 1945, a B-25 bomber crashes into the Empire State Building's 79th story. Flames shoot up the elevator shafts, damaging cables and threatening to engulf 50 trapped people. The New York Times writes, however, the "canned" music wired to continuously play the soothing sounds of a waltz helps the spectators there to control themselves.
Despite its name, elevators are never the largest market for elevator music. Malls, hotels, airports, stations - there is no end to public space that requires calming. Not long after its launch, the Muzak corporation - a copyrighted word that becomes generic - is bought by Warner Brothers, who installs 'Golden Boy' Waddill Catchings as president in 1936. Fie instructs his programmers to target sequences, timing and vocal impact: no vocals between 09.00 and 12:30; after 12:30, no waltzes or tangos (except for an occasional "hit" song); slow music is usually avoided, but if played, it has to appear either at the middle or end of a set.
The breakthrough for Muzak comes with a publication by the Medical Research Council's Industrial Flealth proving music could be used to combat fatigue. Additional research shows music contributes to a decline in on-the-job accidents. Part of the war program as a tool for stimulating production, the Muzak corporate building became a guarded facility. Over time, Muzak's cultural clout grows with respected musicians like Kenny G, Lionel Hampton and Lawrence Welk performing together with orchestras, producing exclusive recordings only to be heard by Muzak listeners...
2004 Joseph Lanza, Elevator Music: A Surreal History of Muzak©, Easy Listening, and Other Moodsong© (University of Michigan Press, 2003).
From mood enhancement to safety: after the successful backlash against mood music, elevator speakers in the 21st century are employed primarily for dialogue with the authorities in case of emergency.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 65
With 90 million people (passively) listening to Muzak every day after the war, its encroachment into public life becomes increasingly contested. At the US Supreme court in 1952, two passengers disgruntled by the presence of Muzak on a street car complain on the grounds of the 1st amendment for free speech, seeking to rid the streetcar of Muzak. The final ruling states that Muzak is to be present only without commercials. This ruling paves the way for a movement against Muzak.
Post-Elevator Music
One of the last advocates defending Muzak by the 1980s is Andy Warhol:
"I like anything on Muzak - it's so listenable. They should have it on MTV."
At the same time, the American Symphony League insists that personnel turn the Muzak off at every hotel where it holds its conventions, explaining: "we want to be sensitized to music, not desensitized to music." Lord Beaumont of the Green Party in the UK launches a bill to abolish noise pollution through Muzak - though not long after, Muzak files for bankruptcy and Lord Beaumont passes away. His legacy continues now with the Pipedown movement started by musician Nigel Rogers against "acoustic torture."
It now seems that the future of the elevator is silent, with many manufacturers acknowledging that globally there is little interest in featuring music in elevator cabs. Muzak itself has transformed into a new brand: Mood Media, an arguably more virulent and insidious mutation, assaulting not just the ears but the eyes, skin, even the nose...
1917 Eric Satie has the idea of "furniture music, ... masking the clatter of knives and forks without drowning it completely, without imposing itself."
1936 Major General George Owen Squier, Founder of the Muzak corporation.
2006 Lord Beaumont of the UK's Green Party launches a bill to abolish noise pollution, including Muzak.
PAGE 66
ELEVATOR
site of contingency: the elevator as organizer of city narratives by andreas bernard
Excerpt from Lifted: A Cultural History of the Elevator (NYU Press, 2014).
[I]n the first decades after the passenger elevator's arrival, its potential as the scene of crises was soon recognized. Elevator encounters between complete strangers in a space even more constricted than the railway compartment provoked discussions among architects, physicians, and psychologists of the apparatus's status and risks. If we seek to understand why the elevator is still such a popular location in novels, films, TV series, and advertisements with urban settings, we need to keep in mind the latent threat embodied in this unobservable intersection of individual lives. What is it about the cab that makes it such a significant element in the spatial structure of city narratives and thus in the poetics of modernism?1 An initial answer to this question emerges against the backdrop of the canonical works of modernist experience and aesthetics, works continuously referred to in academic analyses of literary portrayals of the big city.2 In Poe's Man of the Crowd, Baudelaire's The Painter of Modern Life, Georg Simmel's Die Großstadt und das Geistesleben (The Metropolis and Intellectual Life), and Walter Benjamin's Baudelaire studies, the most salient characteristic of urban life is the increasing contingency and multiplicity of its encounters. Baudelaire's declaration, "By 'modernity' I mean the ephemeral, the fugitive, the contingent''3 is widely recognized as the "incontrovertible definition of the modernist aesthetic."4 The elevator cab - in the days of Poe and Baudelaire just beginning to be installed in the grand hotels, by the time of Simmel and Benjamin a permanent part of urban architecture - is the contingent locale par excellence. Here the greatest possible anonymity is conjoined with the greatest possible intimacy of contact. The utter randomness of encounters there, reinforced by the absence of class differences and schedules, collides with the complete enclosure that inevitably produces proximity and togetherness. The writings of Georg Simmel in particular return again and again to the self-discipline demanded of city dwellers at the turn of the century in order to get used to the proximity of strangers. Urban traffic with its multiplicity of fleeting encounters required a kind of sensory shield - protective measures nowhere more urgently needed than in an elevator. Even before the conveyance had become firmly established in European metropolises, literary works were already drawing attention to the oppressive atmosphere of the cab, as in a 1906 prose miniature by the Viennese feuilletonist Peter Altenberg:
2014 Lifted, Andreas Bernard (New York University Press).
It is dreadful to ride up together with a stranger. You feel the duty to strike up a conversation and worry obsessively from floor to floor about what to say. There's the same embarrassed tension in the air as at high school final exams. At last you blurt out "Farewell" in the tone you would use if you'd just made a friend for life.5
The elevator's status as the paradigmatic site of precarious public encounters is clear from its frequent use as an example in the most important sociological theories about public interactions. In his examination of the "Territories of the Self," for example, Erving Goffman attempts to classify individual spatial needs in interpersonal relations. At the end of a discussion of "personal space" - that sphere "within which an entering Other causes the individual to feel encroached upon"6 - he summarizes, "All of this may be seen in miniature in elevator behavior. "Hjhe elevator cab proves to be a kind of laboratory for the ethnology of urban life, where the structuring of space between two human guinea pigs and the rules of maintaining their distance from each other can be observed under ideal conditions. In a long footnote, Goffman goes on to quote a colleagues empirical study of behavior in elevators that reveals the
ELEVATOR
PAGE 67
consistent spatial distribution of bodies in an elevator: the "first entrant takes up the corner near the controls or one of the rear corners; the next entrant is likely to take up the corner diagonally across from the taken one. The third and fourth passengers take up the remaining corners, the fifth the middle of the rear wall, the sixth the center of the car.''8 The passengers' predictable sociogram, their reflexive maintenance of the greatest possible distance from each other, is based on the fact that the anaesthetizing of attention is even more difficult to maintain in an elevator than in the means of horizontal transportation often mentioned by Simmel. Neither windows nor reading material offer the possibility of avoiding interaction. How persistently the apparatus challenges the maintenance of Goffman's "territories of the self" can be measured by how relatively ineffective the strategies for avoidance of contact are even today, after a hundred years of elevator use. Thus it is no surprise that literary and sociological observations of the atmosphere in the cab have hardly changed in the course of the twentieth century. In a prose sketch entitled In an Elevator and written thirty years after Peter Altenberg, Christian Bock describes the encounter of two neighbors in an elevator:
It so happens that two of you are standing close together in the ascending elevator and you suddenly feel embarrassed in each other's presence. Sort of like you had some cooked macaroni in your pocket and don't want the other guy to find out. But it's already seeping through to your skin and you still have a long, long way to go to the fifth floor.
What's the point of staring at the other guy's tie? Should you examine the elevator walls on which there's nothing to examine? And if you're forced to look your fellow human being in the face - what can you say?
It's just stupid to suddenly say what a beautiful day it is. He already knows that; he was just out there. And so I do what others have done before me and blurt out the senseless question, "Oh, you're going to the fifth floor too?" (When you've known for years that you both live on the fifth floor.)9
Bock's text anticipates the sociologic theory of "personal space" and proxemics by a quarter century when he concludes, "We feel overcrowded on our scant two square meters of elevator floor, because our condition in life is usually predicated on a distance of at least three meters from the next person."10 A recent study of the "minimizing of presence" in elevators by the Cologne sociologist Stefan Hirschauer reaffirms the continuity of this feeling of crowding and anxiety right up to the present day. His empirical observations of elevator passengers confirm the findings of Goffman as well as the impressions of Altenberg and Bock. Hirschauer sets out to show that preserving one's separateness and avoiding contact with other passengers is a complex social achievement. Precisely maintained physical positions and "corridors of vision" ensure the systematic avoidance of communication." "Space 'speaks' for proxemics," as Umberto Eco once wrote apropos Hall and Goffman's theory of adequate distance relationships.12 In the elevator cab, this "speaking" is a dense murmur which every passenger tries to ignore.
In order to identify the specific function of the elevator in big city stories, we must compare their narrative method with the way they configure the locations of their action. Beginning in the last third of the nineteenth century, a similar dynamic of dispersal became apparent in both urban life and urban novels: as social life in the metropolis became more heterogeneous, novels employed more simultaneous narrative strands. We must keep this connection in mind between a development in social history and its reflection in narrative technique; the diffusion of individual biography in the wake of urbanization which Georg Simmel so often writes about - the proliferating jnd instable locations and relationships - was recapitulated in the transitidPfrcyn the organic "niovel of <•■■■ education" to the panoramic novel of contemporarynife. By the late nineteenth century, the development of an individual life nq^nger stood so firmly in the
PAGE 68
ELEVATOR
narrative foreground, but rather (as Karl Gutzkow puts it in his early poetics of the "social novel") the portrayal of a "Nebeneinander,"13 a simultaneous "being together," an oscillation between various figures and plot strands.
While most scholars seldom mention the influence of urbanization on narrative theory, in his 1978 study of English and American novels, Gerhard Hoffmann writes that the "increase in the number of plot lines" and the "strengthening ... of plot simultaneity versus pure chronology"14 is one of the most conspicuous shifts in the poetics of nineteenth-century novels and goes hand-in-hand with the increasing complexity of their spatial organization. Thus heterogeneity and contingency are characteristic not only of the structure of perception and communication within the expanding cities, but also of the plot structures of big-city fiction. A decade before Hoffmann, Volker Klotz's study of the "narrated city" formulated the thesis that in the novel, "the city comes into its own as an object of literature."15
With these considerations as background, what literary role does the elevator play? We must examine the recurring tasks assigned to it in both literature and film. In stories set primarily in hotels, offices, or apartment buildings and as a result of this topography involving multiple contingent encounters, the elevator cab often serves as a kind of hinge. The cab, combining freedom of access while stopped and hermetically-sealed impenetrability while in motion, acts as a decisive intersection of biographies and plot lines. In the midst of the general fleetingness of personal exchanges, it introduces a brief moment of intimacy invisible from without. As a dramaturgic device, it makes almost inevitable what private, service, and express elevators were meant to forestall. Especially fiction and films set in hotels exemplify the fundamental significance of the elevator for plot structure. As a location of chance encounters with momentous consequences, it sets the story in motion or integrates a simultaneous plot strand.
An elevator scene stands at the very inception of Vladimir Nabokov's literary career. At the beginning of his first novel Mary, written in 1925-26, two Russian exiles get stuck together for twenty minutes in the elevator of a Berlin boarding house: the long-time resident Lev Ganin and the newly arrived Aleksey Alfyorov. Their chance meeting initiates a fateful connection, for shortly afterward Ganin recognizes in a photograph of Alfyorov's wife the love of his youth, left behind in Russia and now on her way to join her husband in Berlin. This discovery plunges Ganin in a frenzy of memories, causes "the entire kaleidoscope of his life to shift,"16 and only at the last minute does he abandon his plan to beat his fellow resident to the train station and start a new life with Mary. The opening scene in the elevator initiates the story and prepares for the revelation of the hidden connection between the two strangers. The curiously emphatic words uttered by Alfyorov in the cab - "Don't you think there's something symbolic in our meeting like this, Lev Glebovich? When we were on terra firma we didn't know each other. Then we happen to come home at the same time and get into this contraption together."17 - don't reveal their full significance until much later. In point of fact, one could very well call their meeting in the stuck elevator symbolic, since it is already a compressed image of what will be played out in the rest of the short novel: the random connection of two biographies. As the garrulous Alfyorov says in the cab, "We stepped in without a word, still not knowing each other, glided up in silence and then suddenly - stop.''18
An elevator lurches to a stop and a novel begins. In the same year that Nabokov's Mary appeared, the Berlin writer Paul Fechter published the bestseller Ruck im Fahrstuhl (Lurch in the Elevator), a novel which follows the same narrative pattern. Instead of a hotel or boarding house, the story is set in an upper-class apartment building during the economic crisis of the 1920s and narrates the downfall of the well-to-do Jordan family who live on the fashionable second floor. Little by little, they are forced to go to work for the ambitious radio store owner Alwin Hempel and also surrender their apartment to him. In the first chapter, entitled "The Symbol" (like an echo of "something symbolic" in Alfyorov'sjjand Ganin's meeting), Amélie Jordan and her two daughters
ELEVATOR
PAGE 69
Toni and Eva get stuck in the elevator. Hempel, who just then happens to be returning home to his sublet lodgings on an upper floor, is able to rescue them with the help of the janitor. This incident, the eponymous "lurch in the elevator," is referred to again and again in the course of the long-winded novel. The apparatus that lurches to a halt on a September evening in 1923 becomes the symbol for the historical dynamics of the country's economic troubles and the characters' lack of social orientation. An impoverished businessman, for instance, asks Toni Jordan's architect friend Gieseler,
"You've never experienced a lurch?"
"What kind of lurch do you mean?" asked Gieseler.
Traugott Lehmann looked at him. "What kind of lurch? Why - the kind that pulls you up by the roots and tosses you somewhere or other."19
There are similar exchanges at various points in the novel, always focused on the metaphor of the "lurch."20 When Alwin Hempel at last takes over the reception rooms in the Jordans' twelve-room apartment, hires Eva Jordan as his private secretary, and suggests to the rest of the family that from now on they enter the rooms they still occupy in the rear of the apartment via the servants' stairway, Eva muses on the course of events:
"I have the feeling that in such moments, our life got suddenly jarred the same way that - she gave a little laugh - the elevator did when Toni tore open the doors and we got stuck and you came and got us out."
She looked at him pensively. "How remarkable it is; you helped us out on that occasion and got the elevator going again, and now it's almost the same ... If you hadn't come and rented the apartment and hired me—I don't know how we would be surviving today. We were just as stuck as the elevator."21
Fechter's novel is just one - unusually emphatic - example of the elevator's use as an important narrative pivot-point in many urban stories. Although seldom or never again deployed as such an unrelenting metaphor, this device can be discovered in literature and film to the present day. One could call the dramaturgic use of the elevator a response to the difficulty of narrating the twentieth-century metropolis, an answer to the question of how and where both relationships can begin and narrative structures can be built in the anonymous web of passers-by. Of course there are other public places where strangers are brought together in a small space and chance encounters are transformed into fateful fellowships. Think of the train compartment and its narrative potential for such novels as Patricia Highsmith's Strangers on a Train or Agatha Christie's Murder on the Orient Express. But the elevator's specific advantages are the everyday frequency of its use and the incomparable speed with which it can reorder a group of people. In the elevator, fluctuation and hermetic isolation coexist in a unique relationship. Precisely its self-evident daily use and its herding together of strangers in a multistory building make it such a popular location in big-city stories. It would be impossible to list all the Hollywood films set in hotels, offices, and apartment buildings in which the elevator is a determining plot factor. (In Sofia Coppola's 2003 Lost in Translation, to cite a recent example, the encounters of the two main characters are staged in and around the elevator, from their first eye-contact in the crowded cab to their farewell in front of the bank of elevators in the hotel lobby.)
To analyze the cab's narrative function, however, we must return to its ability to bring together a fortuitous collection of people and their parallel plot lines. There is no other text that uses this double ability as transparently as does Arthur Hailey's best-seller Hotel (1965). One of the most successful hotel novels of the twentieth century, it was later made into a movie and expanded into a television series. The novel is set in the neglected grand Hotel St.
Gregory in New Orleans and Hailey narrates mopt.than a half dozen parallel
PAGE 70
ELEVATOR
stories of various guests and employees. For 540 of the novel's 580 pages, the characters have no direct contact with each other. The hotel magnate O'Keefe arrives with his girlfriend Dodo, intending to buy the St. Gregory. The crooked bell captain Herbie Chandler embezzles money from the hotel and brings it to the brink of financial ruin. The Duke and Duchess of Croydon have killed a woman and her daughter in a hit-and-run accident and solicit the help of the hotel detective to smuggle their damaged car out of town. The hotel thief "Keycase" Milne accidentally finds the wallet containing the pay-off money for the detective. All these plot lines are narrated in separate chapters until the moment when four of the protagonists - Dodo, Chandler, the Duke of Croydon, and Keycase - get into the same elevator cab, which malfunctions and plunges to the ground. Here the cab's narrative function is different than in the novels of Nabokov and Fechter. Instead of serving as the starting point that enables the story to be told, it ties the separate plotlines together at the end. It is revealing for the novel's structure, however, that the final catastrophe is foreshadowed by repeated mention of the dangerously neglected elevator number four, one of twenty in the 1,600-room hotel. In the very first chapter, the cab starts to move only after a long hesitation ("It's the connections I think, either here or up top ... Had quite a bit of trouble lately,"22 says the lift boy) and in the course of the novel the ramshackle elevators are often mentioned as a sign of the St. Gregory's general state of neglect. When the chief engineer tells Peter McDermott, the newly-promoted assistant general manager, about the elevator's problems and says the apparatus will eventually reach a "death point," McDermott heeds the warning. "Peter was still thinking about the chief's words when he entered his own office. What was the death point, he wondered, for an entire hotel?"23 The larger history of the neglected hotel is reflected in the smaller history of the elevator; again, the apparatus serves a symbolic function in the context of the narrative.
At the end of the novel, things come to a head in several regards. O'Keefe's takeover of the hotel is as good as decided, McDermott (with his colleague Christine Francis the last bastion of conscientiousness in the St. Gregory) is about to prove Chandler's embezzlement and the irregularities in the operation of the elevators can no longer be ignored: "Now, today, number four was starting and stopping jerkily at every floor."24 The composition of the story and its rhetoric of steadily increasing suspense culminates in the final catastrophe in the elevator. There are two reasons for this focus: in terms of narratology, the cab inside the building is the most appropriate place to bring the parallel life stories together; in terms of dramaturgy, the elevator's fall represents the collapse of the St. Gregory as a whole, but also its rebirth. The four passengers gathered randomly there are all in the midst of a crisis: Dodo has been abandoned by her lover O'Keefe, Croydon has decided to turn himself in to the police, Chandler is about to be fired, and Keycase needs to make a quick getaway after his surprise coup. Thus it is the representatives of the old St. Gregory cosmos who come together in elevator four. And since things have taken a turn for the better just before the accident (a guest has unexpectedly purchased the hotel and named Peter McDermott manager), the elevator's fall at the end of the novel appears to be an eerie purification, a final shock before the completely new beginning. McDermott's first official act on the very evening of the crash is the rehabilitation of the elevators: "On Monday, a team of consultants would fly from New York to begin planning for replacement of all passenger elevator machinery with new. It would be the first major expenditure of the Albert Wells-Dempster-McDermott regime."26The "death point" of both the elevator and the hotel itself has been overcome.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 71

1967 Elevator provides spectacle for riders and for observers: Dohn Portman's Hyatt Regency, Atlanta.
PAGE 72
ELEVATOR
JOHN PORTMAN AND THE EXPOSED ELEVATOR
From the 1960s onwards, John Portman, who combines the roles of architect and developer in one person, works to liberate the elevator from the closed core of skyscrapers. Starting in the US and spreading globally as Portman's empire and influence grows, glass elevator cabs now cling to the outside of exposed cores situated in the middle of enormous hotel and office atria, shuttling smoothly and silently up and down like diligent mechanical bugs, transforming the elevator into a viewing platform and a ride - finally, you can again see as well as feel the transitions between floors - and the atrium into a spectacle...
Dohn Portman, 1924-2017.
Statement by the office of John Portman, written at the request of the editors, 2014:
John Portman approached the design for the Hyatt Regency Atlanta as an opportunity to create the antithesis to the typical urban hotel in the 1960s. His design figuratively 'exploded' the hotel, creating a 20-storey atrium and redefining interior space on a grand scale.
Since his 'exploded' design had blown away the walls that would typically house elevators, Mr. Portman felt the best solution for the vertical transportation was to locate the elevators in a free-standing cluster in the atrium. These elevator cabs, free from enclosed shafts, were incased in glass. The cabs were elongated to be in scale with the large space and special focus was put into the lighting designed for them. The vision was that the elevators moving up and down would become a kinetic, functional sculpture and the glass cabs would provide a truly exciting view for the passengers as the elevators silently soared up and down within the atrium.
Mr. Portman understood that people are innately interested in movement, for movement means life, and human beings are kinetic creatures. He believed that if he incorporated kinetics within the building, it would strike a responsive human reaction. The atrium design allows people the opportunity to watch and be watched. To accompany the motion of the elevators, the movement of people along the hallways circling the atrium and across the atrium floor catches the eye. The design engages the senses and thrills the soul.
The aesthetics of the elevators were important. In addition to wanting the elevators to be proportionally correct, Mr. Portman also wanted them configured so that the equipment required to make them run was not in view. Mr. Portman worked out the design to establish how he wished the elevators to look and to operate. He then invited Otis in to work with him on the execution. Their collaborative effort resulted in an elevator system that accomplished the design goals as well as satisfied all the necessary engineering and mechanical requirements.
Many architects create a design, hand off the drawings, and are out of the equation from that point forward, but Mr. Portman has always preferred to bring people in versus sending drawings out. The exchange of ideas coming from different viewpoints can make a design better by marrying pragmatic choices with functional and aesthetic ones, and Otis was excited by the opportunity to contribute to the process. They developed the shop drawings and began constructing a prototype at their plant in Connecticut. Mr. Portman visited the plant during this period of development in order to collaborate with the engineers in refining the design and fine-tuning the details. Whenever Mr. Portman visited the plant, the workers all gathered around to witness what they recognized was a major development within their industry and to visit with its creator.
The design was unique. No one had ever seen elevators like these before. People came from miles around and lined up around the block just to take a ride. The elevators accomplished Mr. Portman's vision and became a major factor within the legend that developed around the hotel. The idea has since been much copied.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 73
1967 Exposed: elevator ascends the atrium of John Portman's Hyatt Regency, Atlanta.
'"I like to sit in anonymity,' [John Portman] confesses, 'and observe people when they are not aware of me.' From a seat in one of the casual groupings he has strewn about the lobby of Atlanta's space-age Hyatt-Regency Hotel,
Portman can spot the unsuspecting tourist moseying through the low-ceilinged vestibule that leads in from the street. With his first step into the lobby, the visitor seems to have been dealt a karate chop to the nape of the neck. The head pivots back, eyes climbing vertiginously to the hanging plants and chandeliers, past the mezzanines, up 22 stories to reach not the open sky but the ceiling of this colossal atrium."
— "Architect John Portman: 'I Violate Sacred Rules' to Create 'People Places,'" Joyce leviton, People (August 11, 1975).
PAGE 74
ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR
PAGE 75
PAGE 76
ELEVATOR
FROM ATTENDANT-LESS SELF SERVICE...
The Autotronic System by Otis, rolled out in 1952, makes the elevator attendant obsolete: the process of travelling from one floor to another is now completely user-initiated and user-executed. At the touch of the finger an electric current triggers the motor in the basement, and the preconfigured switch in the control mechanism makes sure the engine switches off at the desired height. The invisibility of the control rooms and the inscrutability of their schematics introduce, as with any escalation in technology, a disconnect between the user and the tool even as that tool becomes more efficient. Without a human operator to encourage passengers to exit the cab a little more quickly, the Autotronic system also brings the now familiar buzzer that lets you know when the door has been held open too long.
1952 First Autotronic elevator installed in the Atlantic Refining Company in Dallas.
1953 —The firs* troffic duphcotmg equipment was designed by Otis engineers to facilitate research ond to demonstrate elevator per. formance Tms electronic device is used to impose upon a group of moael elevators in ony desirable order oil of the traffic condi* tions that, under ony circumstances, could be created by the passengers in an intensive service office building If then demonstrates by octuai performance how such traffic is handled by Otis Autotronic—Without Attend* ant—Elevators with a fully automatic elec-
tromc group supervisory system
1953 Otis advertisement cataloguing the company's achievements on its 100th anniversary.
The most recent accomplishment is the "first traffic duplicating equipment," an early type of computer simulation used to test the mettle of the Autotronic system.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 77
1952 With Otis's Autotronic elevator - " without attendant" - vertical ascent becomes dramatically vertiginous - in the illustrated version - and increasingly abstract in the physical sense: elevators are firmly embedded in the core and cabs have become closed boxes, offering no glimpse of the miraculous journey through the building's section; passengers are disgorged abruptly - now without the possibility of passing pleasantries - on the floor of their choice; and the experience is now machine- rather than human-controlled. "Building management finds real advantages, too. Savings for each non-attended elevator average $5,500 every year."
PAGE 78
ELEVATOR
... TO DISPATCH CONTROLS...
Dispatch control is introduced in the 1960s, a supervisory system to allow elevators to be "attended" remotely. Whereas individual attendants working within elevator cars operated semi-autonomously, dispatchers - manning a control station at ground level - maintain an overview of the position of each car along with call quotas, and make interventions in the traffic flow where necessary, operating cars remotely to increase up-traffic service or down-traffic service. Dispatch control heralds the interest in analytical fine-tuning of elevator behavior and economic optimization, which will come to dominate elevator innovation...
1960s "Coffee hour" and "Coca-cola hour": elevator rushes and lulls are analysed by dispatchers...
1964 Intervention: dispatcher adjusts the control panel at 100 Park Avenue, New York.
tMm
All floors served by the six cars
ELEVATOR
PAGE 79
PAGE 80
ELEVATOR
... TO FUZZY LOGIC
As microchips come into use in the 1980s, the Programmable Logic Controller (PLC) supersedes dispatch control to becomes the brain of the elevator. PLC sends instructions to the various functioning parts to govern speed, position, and passenger pick-up pattern. To exploit the increasing calculation capacity of PLC, David 1 Sirag Jr. of Otis invents control software based on fuzzy logic - the embrace of a gradient of values between 0 and 1 - to analyze cab proximity and incoming requests. "The system combines pieces of evidence to get a rough estimate of how many people are waiting," Sirag explains. "Each piece of information suggests an answer or a range of answers. Fuzzy logic integrates the answers and arrives at some consensus of what the number of people waiting should be. This is critical at lunchtime, when everybody is coming and going from the building, and they're not all [going] in one direction. In the morning, everyone is coming into the building so the rule is to get the car back to the lobby as quickly as possible. But at noon, if the car is nearly full and you know you have room for five more people, you need to estimate how many people are waiting. If there's a half-full car and an empty car, but 10 people are waiting, the system will send the empty car."
1958	The Elevator Paradox: it is statically more likely when calling an elevator that the one which actually arrives will not be heading in the right direction - a phenomenon noted by physicist G. Gamow when he had an office on the second floor and physicist M. Stern had an office on the sixth floor of a seven-story building. Gamow noticed that about 5/6 of the time, the first elevator to stop on his floor was going down, and about the same amount of times, the first elevator to stop on the sixth floor was going up. This actually makes perfect sense, since 5 of the 6 floors in the range 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7 are above the second, and 5 of the 6 floors in the range 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 are below the sixth.
(Weisstein, EricW. "Elevator Paradox." Image:
A. Wuffle, "The Pure Theory of Elevators," Mathematical Magazine, vol. 55, 1982.)
ELEVATOR
PAGE 81
U.S. Patent seP. i, 1993
Sheet 2 of 12
5,243,155
1992 Fuzzy values determine elevator behavior: "The number of hall passengers waiting at a stop for service by an elevator car Is determined by first calculating instantaneous passenger rates whenever a hall call button is pressed or whenever passengers board an elevator car. The instantaneous passenger rates are scaled to compensate for the inherent differences in service rates of the stops. The scaled rates are averaged into one or more of an up, down, or off peak quantities depending upon the mode of the elevator system. The number of hall passengers waiting at a stop is then calculated by multiplying one or more of the up, down, or off peak quantities, depending upon the mode of the elevator system, by the elapsed time since the stop was last serviced." — David D. Sirag, Dr., "Estimating Number of People Waiting for an Elevator Car Based on Crop and Fuzzy Values," US Patent 5,243,155, filed May 4, 1992 and issued September 7, 1993.
PAGE 82
ELEVATOR
THE ODYSSEY: "REMOVING THE BARRIER BETWEEN BUILDING AND REALITY."
"We are making it possible. We're not endorsing it.
Society has to decide if it wants to go that way."
— Otis elevator strategist Joseph Bittar, 1996.
The dream of the elevator - evidenced in the early flexibility of its meaning, also applied to diagonal conveyance - is to move in multiple directions: not just as a means of vertical transport, but as a way of carving and burrowing through the complex angles, shafts, and planes of a building or urban system, like a mole. It would take until the 1990s for a breakthrough in multi-directional elevators to emerge.
Frustrated by the lack of progress in solving the "ultra-tall problem" - whereby building heights are restricted by the tolerances and efficiencies of a single elevator cab in a single shaft - in 1995 Otis president Jean-Pierre van Rooy calls in his elevator strategist Joseph Bittar. Bittar delivers a daring idea: a sketch for a multi-directional elevator. In the space of two days, Van Rooy and Bittar work with a team of eight engineers and develop the sketch into a proposal with a glimmering potential. Bittar reports: "I was certain we could put this in practice. We are removing the obstacles to free the architects to use their imaginations. There's no limit."
On July 25, 1996, in Farmington, Connecticut, Otis unveils plans for the Odyssey. The new device represents a simple but radical break from the traditional vertically of the elevator. Using horizontal bays and platforms, multiple elevator cars are for the first time able to share the same shaft, moving horizontally as well as vertically, and potentially also diagonally. After the launch, Otis invites architects to come up with proposals and starts building a prototype in its research center in Bristol, Connecticut.
EFFICIENCY TRUMPS INNOVATION
But a shadow looms over this revolutionary design. In the same year, Finnish rival Kone unveils a hyper-efficient new type of elevator: the MonoSpace, with the EcoDisc hoisting machine. Kone's design for a Machine Room-Less (MR-L) elevator drastically reduces both operating costs and spatial requirements in the building.
In 1997, Van Rooy resigns and is replaced by Stephen Page, the CFO of UPC, Otis's parent company. With Otis's sales going into a tailspin due to the Asian economic crisis, and pressured by Kone's success with the MonoSpace, Page cuts 7,000 jobs, closes 17 factories, and unites Otis's dozens of independent elevator companies into a single corporation. In March 1998 hundreds of Otis research projects around the world are cancelled - literally overnight. The carnage claims the Odyssey. "There were, after all, no buildings going up that would need it," says Page. Instead, he concentrates Otis's engineering efforts on a new elevator: the Gen2. Realized in 2000, it is, like the Kone, a Machine Room-Less elevator; its space-saving capacity further improved byTreing a belt instead of a rope.
1997 "The system was developed initially to service very tall buildings, where it can offer reduced core space and Improved circulation by reducing the number of cabs. However, the system, with its lateral transfer levels, Is perhaps equally suited for super-wide buildings and mega-complexes. The system has been tested In airports. This typology, a 'skyscraper on Its side,' could employ the same transistor cabs In a horizontal configuration that switches between car parks and terminals."
— Frederick H. Barker, A Technical Primer: The Otis Odyssey System, 1997.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 83
THREE CAB SHUFFLE:
"Multiple Transitor™ modules, precisely controlled by advanced Otis dispatching technologies, maximize hoistway efficiency. As one Transitor module arrives at a sky lobby, It moves horizontally Into a loading/unloadlng area, allowing another module In the same hoistway to pass and move to other areas ■ of the building, while a third moves vertically to its | next stop. Three modules are In motion In a single hoistway, greatly Increasing the efficiency of the system."
SINGLE CAB, DOUBLE DECK FRAME
"Double deck frame Increases the system's capabilities by allowing simultaneous transfer of two Transitor modules In an offset hoistway."
MULTICAB, SINGLE HOISTWAY
"Several Transitor modules, using conventional elevator machinery, share a single hoistway, 'Stepping aside' at sky lobbies for loading, unloading and to transfer to the next hoistway level. Choreographed by Otis dispatching technologies, the complexities of this application are transparent to the user."
ONE CAB, SINGLE HOISTWAY
I "An efficient solution for mid-rise to high-rise structures. The offset hoistways, connected by short horizontal movements, permit vertical travel in buildings of greater than 300 meters."
PAGE 84
ELEVATOR
"Otis is proud to announce the world's first, true solution to transportation into, within, and between vertical and horizontal buildings. Drawing from the vast Otis technology base, we have created Odyssey, the integrated Odyssey, the Integrated Building Transit System. You can forget every design limitation imposed by traditional people-moving technologies. You can build as high or as wide as you like. You can interconnect structures. You can dictate configuration, performance and dispatching characteristics. And you can count on lower construction costs and larger interior volumes; an Odyssey system eliminates hoistways and machine rooms that consume valuable, rentable space.
"With its remarkable ability to compress time and distance, an Odyssey system erases any reservations about large-scale buildings or complexes. Secure, glass-enclosed Transitor™ modules move people horizontally, vertically, effortlessly. Comfortably seated passengers never change cars to reach virtually any locations, indoors, or out.
"Imagine stepping into a Transitor Module and traveling from parking lot to 60th floor sky lobby in 90 seconds. Or moving from an airport arrival gate to the fifth floor of a
remote parking garage in less time than it takes to find your car keys and claim check. No delays at intermediate stops no shuffling from one vehicle to another. Dust a quick, comfortable ride.
"But the true beauty of the Odyssey system is that it doesn't necessarily have to work as a system. Individual Transitor modules adapt easily to an unlimited number of applications - metroplexes, industrial or distribution centers, office complexes, universities, urban housing, wherever you want to provide effortless, uniform access into structures of any size.
"Only Otis has the hardware flexibility, the breadth of experience, and the dispatching technologies necessary to create such a versatile, capable transportation solution.
It doesn't matter if your concept is a mile high or a mile wide. Five stories tall or one block square. Otis has removed the final barrier between your building and reality." — Odyssey corporate literature (1996).
1996 Showroom for the Odyssey: potential clients would have the chance to take a horizontal ride that suddenly goes up... then take the stairs down to finish with a snack in the "closure area."
ELEVATOR	PAGE 85
1996 More than a dream, the Odyssey prototype is subjected to tests at an Otis facility in Bristol, Connecticut.
PAGE 86
ELEVATOR
Passengers sit and hold on for the journey...
... hard-hatted dispatcher orchestrates departure...
ELEVATOR
PAGE 87
... cab slides horizontally on tracks Into hoistway structure...
... and elevates to first floor....
1997 OMA implements the Odyssey in Its competition proposal for the expanded Museum of Modern Art in New York: "Odyssey is a small train, platform, or large box that could move horizontally, vertically, and diagonally, literally opening up 'new' architectural potentials: to extend the urban condition itself from the ground floor to strategic points inside a building in a continuous trajectory. More a private infrastructure than a simple device, we have investigated the potential of vertical movement in the context of the new MoMA: a) the program of MoMA is so enormous, that it inevitably organizes the public on at least ten levels or more b) the Dorset site extends the length of MoMA to over 600 feet. The escalator cannot deal with those heights, the elevator cannot deal with the length: the Odyssey offers the kind of hybrid movement up to the challenge."
PAGE 88
ELEVATOR
JOURNEY OF THE ODYSSEY
According to the Otis patent: applied 1997, granted 1999.
U.S. Patent jan. 19, im sheet l of 19	5,861,586
1. Passengers enter shuttle cab in lobby and ascend shaft L3...
A simplified, stylized, perspective view of elevator shuttles in a hyper-tall building interconnecting with horizontal transports on a plurality of transport floors.... Switching between the elevators and the tracks X1, X2 is accomplished in part by moving of carriages on tracks Y1-Y 4, which are transverse to the tracks X1 and X2. The tracks Y1-Y4 provide the capability to move a cab from any one of the elevators L1-L4 to either of the tracks X1-X2 or to any of the elevators H1-H4, and vice versa. In accordance with one aspect of the present invention, the transport floor 26 may comprise an upper floor of a hyper building. On the other hand, the invention about to be described may also be practiced with horizontal transportation on tracks X3, X4 extending on or near a ground level, such as may occur in or under a downtown underground mall of a common variety.
U.S. Patent jan. 19,1999 shea 2 or 19
5,861,586
2.	Shuttle cab arrives at transit floor...
Partial, simplified perspective view, partially broken away, showing additional detail at a transport floor... a cab ... is shown being loaded onto an elevator H1 at, for instance, the 60th floor of a building, for transport, for instance, to the 120th floor of the building. Similarly, a cab B is being shown loaded onto an elevator shuttle L3 for vertical transportation to the ground level of the building.
U.S. Patent jan. 19,1999 She« 6 or 19	5,861,586
3.	Transit doors open, shuttle wheels unlock...
Partially sectioned, partially broken away front elevation view of an elevator cab locked onto a carriage which in turn is locked onto the transport floor.... a pair of cab/carriage locks 131, which may be the same as the locks 91, 92 are utilized to ensure the cab is rigidly secure to the carriage during motion of the carriage with the cab on it. The locks ... are maintained in the locked position by a spring, and electrical current in a solenoid causes them to be unlocked.
U.S. Patent jan. 19,1999 sh<«5ori9	5,861,586
4.	Shuttle transfers from shaft to wheeled platform...
Partial, stylized, partially broken away, partially sectioned side elevation view of an elevator cab in the process of being transferred from a car frame within a hoistway onto a carriage. ... First, an auxiliary motorized pinion 111 turns clockwise to drive the sliding auxiliary rack 103 out from under the cab into the position shown ... where it can engage an auxiliary motorized pinion 112 on the platform 106 ... which is the limit that the rack 103 can slide. Then, the auxiliary motorized pinion 112 will turn clockwise pulling the auxiliary rack 103 (which now is extended to its limit) and therefore the entire cab 101 to the right... Then, the main motorized pinion 114 will pull the entire cab 101 fully onto the platform 106 by means of the main rack 102, and as it does so, a spring causes the slidable auxiliary rack 103 to retract under the cab 101.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 89
U.S. Patent j»n. i». i<w sM3«ri9	5,861.586
5.	Powered by linear motors, platform drives onto horizontal grid...
Partial, stylized top plan view of transfer floor 26.... In the present invention, each of the paths on the transfer floor X1, X2, Y1-Y 4 includes segments of linear induction motor (LIM) primaries 60-67 and pairs of wheel track segments ... The dash lines 88 together with the dot dash lines 86 describe the outline of the carrier 107 when it has moved away from the local elevator L1 to a position centered on the path X1 so that it may travel in the X direction. ... In this embodiment, carriage/floor locks 91, 92 are disposed in diagonally opposite quadrants within the area where a carriage will come to rest.
7. ...and arrives at shaft H4...
U.S. Patent jan. 19,1999 sheet 4 of 19	5,861,586
FIG.4
6.	Cab zigzags using rotation points...
Detailed, partial, partially sectioned top plan view of the transport floor ... illustrating a caster of a cab carrier at a track intersection.... The
intersection is formed to assure motion: should the carriage first be moved along an X path, so that the caster 93 is in the position shown ... and next be required to move along a Y path, the combination of abutments 98 and open areas 99 in each intersection ensure that the caster can move in the Y direction ... It should be borne in mind that the distances involved on the transfer floor are small (tens of meters overall), and the carriage speed is most likely preferably quite slow so that horizontal movement will not jar the passengers unduly. Under these conditions, passive steering of a caster can be acceptable.
8.	...to continue its journey in the hyperbuilding...
PAGE 90
ELEVATOR
ODYSSEY REVISITED
In 2014, the robotics department at the Technical University of Eindhoven agrees to rescucitate the dream of the Odyssey in the form of a three-dimensionalization of the 1997 patent drawing of the horizontal transfer floor.
12 May, 2014 Working from the drawing of the transfer floor in Otis's Odyssey patent from 1997, AMO imagines a multi-cored building growing around it - one of the main points of the Odyssey is, after all, to unleash architectural design from the singular core. The drawing is sent to the TU Eindhoven Robotics department. The focus of their work will be the transfer floor and the mechanics that will allow the elevator cab to move horizontally. Their comment on Otis's futuristic patent: "pretty old-fashioned, even for the mid-90s."
ELEVATOR
PAGE 91
aEVATOR
Odyssey patent, three-dimensionalized.
Mock-up of the multidirectional elevator cab.
First model for the moving platform that will transport the Odyssey elevator horizontally across the transfer floor, using laser range finders able to navigate over the grid pattern on the floor.
Dune 2014 Installed In the elevator room of the exhibition "Elements of Architecture" at the Venice Architecture Biennale, a simluatlon of the working Odyssey: via an iPad, exhibition-goers can move the Odyssey cab between "cores" before it would theoretically begin the next phase of Its upward journey...
Teething problems: the wheels' drive motors initially aren't equipped to deal with the uneven floor of the Biennale's Central Pavilion, necessitating Improvisation during a press tour on opening day...
PAGE 92
ELEVATOR
THE MACHINE ROOM-LESS ELEVATOR
The machine room, hitherto required for all non-hydraulic elevators, takes up space and increases building costs (on the roof, it also impacts aesthetics). In 1997 Kone patents a new type of traction sheave elevator, the Machine Room-Less elevator, hauled by a belt rather than a steel rope, and featuring centrally located guide rails and a small drive machine on the side of the shaft. Otis soon follows suit with their own MR-L, and simultaneously shuts down the Odyssey program. The imperatives of the market economy - cost-savings, efficiency -trump the longing for new adventures in architecture...
Europäisches Patentamt European Patent Office Office européen des brevets
(11) EP 0 779 233 B1
(12)
EUROPEAN PATENT SPECIFICATION
Description
[0001]	The present invention relates to a traction sheave elevator as defined in the preamble of claim 1.
[0002]	One of the objectives in elevator development work has been an efficient and economic utilization of building space. In conventional traction-sheave driven elevators, the elevator machine room or other space reserved for the drive machinery takes up a considerable portion of the building space needed for the elevator. The problem is not only the volume of the building space needed for the drive machinery, but also its location in the building. There are numerous solutions to the placement of the machine room, but they generally significantly restrict the design of the building at least in respect of space utilization or appearance. For example, a machine room placed on the roof of a building can be felt to be a flaw of appearance. Being a special space, the machine room generally involves increased building costs.
[0003]	In prior art, hydraulic elevators are relatively advantageous with respect to utilization of space, and they often allow the entire drive machine to be placed in the elevator shaft. However, hydraulic elevators are only applicable in cases where the lifting height is one floor or at most a few floors. In practice, hydraulic elevators cannot be constructed for very large heights.
[0004]	JP utility model publication 4-50297 discloses a machineroom-less rucksack-type elevator (small type elevator) wherein the drive unit is mounted on the heads of the guide rails. However, as the base surface of the drive machine unit is rather large, a large distance has to be provided between the cabin path and the shaft wall. This necessitates a larger base surface of the elevator shaft and therefore higher investments with respect to the building costs.
[0005]	To meet the need to achieve a reliable elevator which is advantageous in respect of economy and space utilization and for which the space requirement in the building, irrespective of the hoisting height, is substantially limited to the space required by the elevator car and counterweight on their paths including the safety distances and the space needed for the hoisting ropes, and in which the above-mentioned drawbacks can be avoided, a new type of traction sheave elevator is presented as an invention. The traction sheave elevator of the invention is characterized by what is presented in the characterization part of claim 1. Other embodiments of the invention are characterized by the features presented in the other claims.
[0006]	The advantages which can be achieved by 'lying the present invention include the following:
The traction sheave elevator of the invention allows n obvious space saving to be achieved in the 55 ing because no separate machine room is needed.
elevator shaft.
Advantages in manufacture and installation because the system has fewer discrete components than conventional traction sheave elevators.
In elevators implemented using the invention, the ropes meet the traction sheave and diverting pulleys from a direction aligned with the rope grooves of the diverting pulleys, a circumstance which reduces rope wear.
In elevators implemented using the invention, it is not difficult to achieve a centric suspension of the elevator car and counterweight and therefore a substantial reduction of the supporting forces applied to the guide rails. This permits the use of lighter guide rails as well as lighter elevator and counterweight guides.
The design of the elevator allows the elevator to be implemented using other than rucksack-type suspension, permitting the area of application of the elevator solution to be more easily expanded to cover large loads and high speeds.
The elevator car and safety gear frame can be designed without problems using the solutions applied in conventional elevators with a machine room, which are lighter and simpler than those used in rucksack-type elevators.
In elevators implemented according to the invention, the supporting forces applied to the guide rails are of a moderate order.
80639 München (DE)
(56) References cited:
FR-A-1 451 792	US-A- 4 960 186
ELEVATOR
PAGE 93
EP 0 779 233 B1
1997 Kone's Machine Room-Less elevator patent: "The elevator car 1 and counterweight 2 are suspended on the hoisting ropes 3 of the elevator. The hoisting ropes 3 preferably support the elevator car 1 substantially centrically or symmetrically with respect to the vertical line passing via the centre of gravity of the elevator car 1.... the elevator car 1 is supported by the hoisting ropes 3 by means of diverting pulleys 4,5 provided with rope grooves, and the counterweight 2 is supported by a grooved diverting pulley 9. ... The drive machine unit 6 of the elevator with a traction sheave 7 engaging the hoisting ropes 3 is placed in the top part of the elevator shaft. ... The elevator car 1 and the counterweight 2 travel in the elevator shaft along elevator and counterweight guide rails 10,11 which guide them. ... One end of the hoisting ropes is fixed to an anchorage 13 above the path of the counterweight 2 at the top part of the shaft. From the anchorage 13, the ropes go downwards until they meet a diverting pulley 9, which is rotatably mounted on the counterweight 2. Having passed around the diverting pulley 9, the ropes 3 go again upwards to the traction sheave 7 of the drive machine 6, passing over it along rope grooves. From the traction sheave 7 the ropes go downwards to the elevator car 1, passing under it via the diverting pulleys 4,5 supporting the elevator car 1 on the ropes and continuing upwards to an anchorage 14 in the top part of the shaft, where the other end of the ropes is fixed. The positions of the rope anchorage point 13 in the top part of the shaft, the traction sheave 7 and the diverting pulley 9 supporting the counterweight on the ropes are preferably so aligned with respect to each other that the rope section between the anchorage point 13 and the counterweight 2 as well as the rope section between the counterweight 2 and the traction sheave 7 run substantially in the direction of the path of the counterweight 2.... All essential parts of the machine unit 6 and the associated equipment 8 are placed between the shaft space needed by the elevator car and/or its overhead extension and a wall of the shaft."
PAGE 94
ELEVATOR
GENERIC ELEVATOR
Kone's introduction of the Machine Room-Less Monospace elevator in 1997 triggers a new genre. All the major manufacturers quickly follow suit with their own, only marginally different, MR-L models. Increasingly, brands focus on compactness of machinery, smoothness of ride, and efficiency - in the form of brake systems that feed energy back into the elevator.
1997 KONE: MONOSPACE
"The secret behind the Kone EcoSpace elevator is the permanent-magnet, gearless Kone EcoDisc motor. Kone's Machineroom-Less technology eliminates the need for a machine or control room by attaching the hoisting machine to the guide rail, and placing all control and logic components within the confines of the hoistway."
— "Machine Room-Less Performance In a Hydraulic Elevator Hoistway: Kone EcoSpace," Kone.
Kone EcoDisc
"The optimized power factor of the KONE EcoDisc motor means it consumes less power and produces less heat than traditional traction elevators, with energy savings of up to 40 percent... An additional energy-saving feature is the regenerative drive system. Depending on the elevator cab loading and the direction of travel, the EcoDisc hoisting machine will act as a generator and produce braking energy. The regenerative drive system recaptures this elevator braking energy and feeds it back to the supply network as clean, safe energy - recovering up to 25 percent of the energy used."
— "The Complete Elevator Modernization Solution: Kone Revolution," Kone, 2012.
2000 OTIS Gen2
"The Gen2 Comfort system features a compact, machineroom-less design, resulting in greater freedom of design for architects and increased rentable space for building owners. And thanks to the Gen2 Comfort system's energy efficient machine, ReGen drive and LED Lighting, developers and owners can manage the building in a more sustainable and economical way. At the same time, residents enjoy the quiet, smooth ride and simple but elegant elevator aesthetics."
— "Gen2: The way to green," Otis.
ReGen drive
"ReGen drives reduce energy usage by capturing the energy normally dissipated as heat during braking. ReGen drives feed this energy back into the building's internal electrical grid for use by other building systems, such as adjacent elevators and lighting."
— "Leading to a green future," Otis, 2007.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 95
2010 SCHINDLER 3300-AP
"Schindler's innovative MR-L technology was made possible by the introduction of ACVF gearless machines, which are significantly smaller in size and more energy efficient. The reduced motor size can be mounted within the elevator shaft itself, avoiding the need for a separate machine room above the shaft."
— "Schindler 3300 AP," Schindler, 2010.
ACVF drive
"Schindler Power Factor One (PF1) converters ensure a high level of energy efficiency by allowing power generated by the lift back into the building's power grid ... The regenerated 'clean' energy can therefore be consumed by other electrical systems in the building, such as other lifts, lighting or air-conditioning."
— "Greening your Buildings with Schindler Modernisation," Schindler.
2011 MITSUBISHI NEXIEZ-MRL
"Architects, builders, and even interior designers will appreciate the new design freedom that comes with the machine room-less system ... The gearless traction machine with PM motor is Installed within the hoistway. This arrangement frees up space normally required for separate machine rooms or penthouses. Equipment is configured for easy maintenance from car top, and the entire compact system is optimally organized for performance and service."
— "Diamond Trac," Mitsubishi Electric, 2011.
PM motor
"The gearless traction machine with a PM (permanent magnet) motor Is packed with cutting-edge technology, such as our unique stator-core structure and built-in double brakes. This optimized motor design dramatically reduces the level of torque ripple, which positively affects the quality of the ride. So even though the machinery is compact, the ride is smooth, quiet and comfortable."
— "Diamond Trac," Mitsubishi Electric, 2013.
PAGE 96
ELEVATOR
BELT IS THE NEW ROPE
The enabler of the Machine Room-Less elevator is the new space-saving steel belt, which replaces a coated steel rope. Otis's Gen2 system, released in 2002 is 50 percent more energy efficient than conventional steel core rope systems, enabling developers to lower construction costs, increase rentable space, and reduce maintenance (the flat, polyurethane-coated steel belts and gearless machine do not require additional lubrication). The flat-belt drive technology also eliminates vibration, providing passengers and tenants a remarkably smooth, quiet ride.
OTIS
2002 Otis Gen2 flat belt system -uses less space and energy than a steel rope.
2002 Tension Member for an Elevator (US Patent 6,364,061 B2): "The coating layer separates the Individual ropes and defines a ... surface for engaging a traction sheave."
ELEVATOR
PAGE 97
CARBON IS THE NEW HEMP
For much of the 20th century, the height that single-shaft elevators - and therefore skyscrapers - could reach was limited by the weight and durability of an elevator's steel rope. Kone's follow-up to their industry changing Machine Room-Less elevator tackles this seemingly intractable problem of the super-tall building: the UltraRope, released in 2013, with a carbon fiber core and high friction coating weighs significantly less than steel ropes. According to Kone, the UltraRope will open up the possibility of a more than 1 km tall tower with a single non-stop elevator to the top, with a rope weight reduction by 90 percent, while at the same time saving up to 45 percent in energy consumption, doubling rope durability and significantly reducing maintenance work.
2002 Elevator Rope Arrangement (US Patent 6,364,063 B1): "The hoisting rope is a substantially thin rope made of synthetic fiber and having a sheath of plastic material."
2013 Kone UltraRope.
"In a building of 500 meters in height, the steel rope weight needed to lift a 2,000 kg car would total 29,000 kg, compared to 12,800 kg of UltraRope, a 55 percent reduction. This has enormous implications for the potential future height of buildings - a 1,000-meter single lift is now possible, effectively doubling the potential height of towers that now use multiple shafts and transfer lobbies to reach the top. That means a single-car ride to the top of a 1 kilometer building, or a two-car trip to the top of a 2 kilometer building, is now achievable."
— Council on Tall Buildings and Urban Habitat Innovation Award, 2013.
PAGE 98
ELEVATOR
ELEVATOR DETERMINES TOWER DESIGN
Optimized elevator cores guarantee the maximum possible rentable square meters in a tower. New software allows architects and developers to design towers through algorithms determined by building regulations in different countries by height of building, floor-to-floor height, number of occupants, and, critically, the client's preferences for the elevator' system: tolerable wait time, size of car, number of shafts, banks, and transfers. The outcome, determined largely by the elevator, is an inveitable shape and structure for a tower that will provide the maximum rentable space...
1. Enter building information: Tenant specs, number of floors, floor-to-floor height, floor population, then specify currency and capital value per square meter...
2. Specify elevator properties: Machine Room or Machine Room-Less, destination control or conventional traffic control system, single deck or double deck elevator. Specify the range of the elevators, acceptable transit time (I.e. time to travel non-stop to top floor) and cab capacity.
3. Elevator traffic criteria: Select scenarios for up peak, down peak, and lunch time performance...
4. Configurations based on impact on floor space: Results show the most space efficient solutions. Select preferred solution to export selected core option...
5.	Prediction: Charts are generated for selected configurations, simulating waiting time, passenger queue length, travel times, trip count, cab round trip time, lift activity expectancy.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 99
o. visualisation ot passengers: rtovisuo sonware creaies a ou visualisation of the traffic conditions in the selected elevator configuration at any given moment during the day, so that "hot spots'' can be identified: the color of the passengers turns redder the longer they have to wait for their elevator...
7.	Export to BIM: When the reports and configuration is selected, the software produces a 3D architectural model of the elevators,
(cores, pits, machine rooms, and lobbies, which can be plugged into any IFC compatible software such as Revit or Tekla BIMSight.
■

PAGE 100	ELEVATOR
ENDING THE TYRANNY OF THE CABLE
Every elevator in architectural history has been hoisted by some kind of cable, and as soon as there is a cable, there must be verticality. Father and son duo Adrian and Mike Godwin, of Lerch Bates elevator consultants, claim to liberate architectural journeys from the tyranny of 180 degrees by making - in their garage in the south of France - a prototype of an elevator that doesn't require a cable of any kind. The Godwins' design - the UNI-VATOR - instead runs on a track with small wheels, meaning the elevator can travel on a curve, in any direction - finally able to chart a meaningful course through the curves, twists, and turns of contemporary and future architecture. The Godwins unveil a working model of the Univator at the opening of the 2014 Venice Architecture Biennale, where they get to pitch their concept to perhaps their ideal client: Patrik Schumacher, paragon of the parametric. The Godwins estimate that a full-scale operating protoype could be built and installed within six months.
Curved elevators to match the curved lines of a building: "The major advantages of [the] traction drive are the lack of ropes and counterweight which mean that cabins can be driven along a curved track and multiple cabins can be driven along the same track independently of each other." (Mike and Adrian Godwin).
ELEVATOR
PAGE 101
2014 "For the first time in 125 years architects and building designers can now plan lifts in buildings that can travel on a curved trajectory and perform as reliably and as smoothly as regular vertical passenger lifts."
— Adrian and Mike Godwin with a working model of the Univator at the 2014 Venice Architecture Biennale.
PINCHED ROLLER & TRACTION DRIVE
Pinch rollers: "The pinched roller drive principle can be used to drive a passenger lift or cabin through various trajectories, unlike rope driven lifts ... Each set of pinch rollers is driven with a compact motor/gearbox assembly which also has an inverter drive mounted on the unit. The pinch rollers and their motors are installed at appropriate intervals along the track such that the rod element engages a number of pinched rollers simultaneously in order to transfer enough force to the rod."
"All the motors are fed from a common supply bus that extends the entire length of the track. The motors are serially activated as a cabin passes along the track to impart the necessary force to maintain, increase or decrease speed."
PAGE 102
ELEVATOR
PAGE 103
ELEVATOR
PAGE 104
ELEVATOR
the elevator's social script by stefan hirschauer
Excerpts from "On Doing Being a Stranger: The Practical Constitution of Civil Inattention,"
Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 2005.
Offering a Bruno Latour-esque reading of the social building blocks of using an elevator, this article is based on extensive observations by different subjects in different settings. Beside my own observations over six years of sociological elevator use, it profited from data collections of students of five lectures in qualitative methods at the University of Bielefeld (Germany). In addition many colleagues contributed to the study, e.g. by offering illustrative examples for cultural variation: Monika Salzbrunn (Paris), Veronika Tacke (Florence), Nina Degele (Minnesota), Boris Nieswand (Bombay).
1.	ELEVATOR OR STAIR
We start the choice-making process of the user: he has to choose between using the elevator or taking the stairs. Using a rational choice based theory we end up with a list of factors calculated in this decision: the length of the distance, one's physical constitution, the question of up or down, the reliability of the elevator and the fellow-passengers, the travel comfort, which depends on the number of fellows, and above all: the criterion of time investment. Waiting for an elevator means calculating indicators of arrival: optical or acoustical signs in the staircase, or - if missing or out of order - the time in the daily rhythms of a building (e.g. rush hours), the number of people already waiting, or just one's own time of waiting.
There are different folkloristic assumptions, uttered in front of a closed door without knowing its opening time. One is: "I have been waiting for so long, that now I will also wait until it comes." This maxim is still quite compatible with rational choice: the user tries to avoid breaking off his or her investment of time.
But in another maxim there is already an element of dubious interaction: "If it hasn't arrived until now, it will take even longer." Such an assumption attributes an individual peculiarity to the elevator, often leading to a renunciation of it.
Even more personalizing is the maxim: "If I leave now, it will certainly come." It is attributing a kind of malicious joy or an obstinate refusal to the elevator and it leads users either to a hesitating turn to the staircase or to a suspicious repetition of button pushing, vacillating between whether to attribute the delay to themselves ("human failure") or to the elevator ("technical failure").
Once the decision has been made, theories of rational choice let us down. They remain standing safely before the door whereas we inside are assailed by the impression that the closing door marks a radical reversal of the distribution of activity and passivity. Pushing the button we "delegate" (Latour, 1992) a part of our agency to an automaton which not only releases us from climbing the stairs but also deprives us of many aspects of "autonomous action."
2.	GETTING IN: POSITIONS AND ORDER
The elevator has arrived and we will get in. This practical problem has two aspects: first, it is a question of entering a vehicle with automatic doors, which requires a precise timing, an adjustment of the motoricity of the body to the motoricity of the automaton. In the terms of Marcel Mauss (1950), a certain technique of the body is required, but it is one in need of amalgamation with what he called instrumental technique. Secondly, the problem of coming in is a question of the "turns" (Goffman, 1971: 59) of people getting on.
If there is no risk of losing one's title, the priority of entrance is often transferred to others, preferably people who are discriminated as users by the very functioning of the artefact: children arulsmall people (by the installation of the buttons), people with full hands (by the demand to press buttons), seniors (by the speed of automatic doors), and parents with strollers (by the space calculated for one passenger). Thus social niceties can be regarded as interactive compensations of discriminating elements of the ideal user inscribed into the artefact.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 105
People in an elevator experience a quick reversal of roles: in a second they are turned from outsiders to inmates with equal rights. But in the moment of entering, their claims are somehow smaller than those of the first ascender: they are only "assistant drivers." The basic rules of entrance and the occasional priority conflicts revolve around an important good: saving time. Therefore the primary moral topic of elevating is how people deal with the time resources of others.
An example: a latecomer who is successful in opening the already closed door once more, steps into the cage as if expecting punishment: hasty and ducking her head between her shoulders. She knows she is guilty of stealing time. The topic of competing for time can also lead to stronger differentiations of the inmates: occasional typifications of elevator riders, separating e.g., short distance travellers into legitimate ("handicapped") and illegitimate ("slowpoke").
3. POSITION: STANDING ORDER
The first has free choice, but later passengers can only choose from the rest and will not try to ask for a change of place. So the patterns of distribution emerging depend on the selection of the first user, which is followed by others as moves in chess. All the proxemic moves are done within the limits of a cagelike architecture which defines from the beginning where is "front" and "back," how much space can be claimed, and which places are "out of question."
A single user can choose his/her place on the basis of simple egocentric criteria: a place near to the door makes ways shorter, to lean against a wall offers comfort, places in the back give a view of the floor indicator. But in most cases the single user has to anticipate what the others will do, which alters the meaning of criteria: places in the back allow for the best visual control of the entrance; walls offer backing, protect from some views, and mark at least one side of a territory; places at the door ensure the exit for short distance travellers, otherwise they are avoided, the same as places in the middle, since they are in the way of people going in and out, and of gazes directed towards the door. So an elevator fills up mostly from its back and the margins. When others enter they neglect the criteria of egocentric choice in favor of a rule of "keeping (maximal) distance." The consequence is that the most frequent position of first ascenders is at the back corners, the most probable position of a following person is diagonally opposed (i.e. often in the area of entrance). It is very unlikely that s(he) joins the first ascender at his/her wall or that s(he) faces him/ her directly "without necessity": elevator riders prefer a zigzag arrangement.
The rule of distance-keeping means for third and fourth ascenders a rule of equidistance: uneven distances are avoided as possible "tie signs" (Goffman, 1971: 251). This leads to a typical geometry of bodies: three passengers form a kind of triangle, four an approximate square etc. These basic proxemic patterns are modified by several factors: by the interior installations of the cage ("use-spaces" at the door and at the buttons are left free), by territorial marks of individual passengers (who claim more or less room by their posture), by presenting and acknowledging "togetherings." When a place is taken and the elevator starts, people "collect themselves" by focussing on the "take off": a "breath taking" event of now uncontrollable movement. This rigid standing order relaxes at every stop of the vehicle, giving way to a specific mode of locomotion: "moving over" - a minimalist form of mobility denying itself. One moves so inconspicuously as if one remained standing, or one only makes a gesture of making space as if one had moved away. There are two variants of moving over: the making way for entering and leaving people and the moving apart of passengers when the elevator empties. Both variants require both a skill of manoeuvring without touch and, again, a specific timing: proxemic claims of others are anticipated. As soon as the elevator puts on the brakes, the moving over starts. If it would only happen after the entering, it would make apparent a "lack of space." Put first, it maintains the fiction of "enough spqcefor all present'' which implies that people have nothing to do with each other because there is no need to react to others' physical presence
PAGE 106
ELEVATOR
4.	GLANCES: THE VISUAL ORDER
But the proxemics of bodies does not seem to be the biggest practical problem of elevator riding. Nothing needs so much space in elevators as looks. Dust where shall one deposit them? At the floor, the ceiling, the tip of one's toes, fingernails or bag? In the elevator looks become an object, something that needs place instead of placing other objects.
The first has to do with the organization of space: as we have seen, users avoid places facing each other, and they also collectively direct their eyes towards the door. Furthermore elevator riders set upflight paths for their looks, which allow them to pass each other. The course of these paths depends on persons' height above ground, but they are also mobile, vertically and horizontally: they can be raised and lowered and turned laterally. But this proxemic component is not sufficient, for it is largely looks which attract other looks - a visual magnetism. So one needs, secondly, techniques of avoiding simultaneous looking. Looks can be sequenced easily if they are inserted into the operations of using the elevator: everybody entering the uneventful space of an elevator is an eye-catcher for all inmates, and will mostly agree to arrest their eyes by "withdrawing" his/her own looks: s(he) grants them a "license to glance." It seems there is another rule of priority: inmates first. But while looking around for a place, entering persons can also try to catch a fleeting glimpse of the fellow passengers. In any case they offer an opportunity for glancing, when they push the buttons, but they can also be sure that the others will withdraw their looks from them, as soon as they leave the pedestrian precinct (the middle) and raise their looks at their place, eventually catching a glimpse of the others trying to catch a glimpse of them.
The functioning of this pilot system of narrow spatial paths and tiny time slots depends on a limited number of passengers. It breaks down if the elevator is overcrowded. Overcrowding essentially consists in the problem that latecomers, through lack of space, cannot turn their body and their looks after entering. This leads to an intense two-way traffic: directions and sequences of looks get out of order. Additionally, the floor as a potential eye-catcher disappears from sight. There are only these other bodies, centimeters before one's eyes. At the latest with this narrowing of the visual field looks in the elevator become desperate for a resting place. In this situation most elevators catch the wandering eyes with a special equipment: the floor indicator on top of the entrance. Here, the looks hang as if on the only coat-peg left. The gaze at the floor indicator is a complex phenomenon which runs through several stages when the elevator fills up. For the single traveller, the floor indicator offers a technical substitute for monitoring the locomotion by his/her own senses. If there is one fellow passenger, gazing at the floor indicator can demonstrate that one is "waiting" and not hanging around. On the one hand, looking at the floor indicator has fewer and fewer alternatives; on the other it gets caught in a paradox: gazes trying to avoid meeting each other, start to meet in a shared focus. Looking back to our short history of the artefact, the gaze at the floor indicator appears as an integral part of a specific locomotion technology.
Georg Simmel (1908/1992: 727) stated that city-dwellers at the beginning of the 20th century learned to stand looking at each other for long periods without talking only in trains and trams.
5.	THE TALK: OPPORTUNITY AND OBLIGATION
While disengagement from mutual sight might be successful with some effort, the ear has no chance of turning away: It is "damned to take everything coming
ELEVATOR
PAGE 107
close to it" (Simmel, 1908/1992: 730). One is unavoidably "within hearing."
For verbal exchanges in the elevator, this implies a far-reaching order of silence. At first, in the elevator both rules are in force, which Goffman (1971: 64) identified as basic components of "conversational preserves" in public spaces: the right not to be bothered by interference or listening to another person, and the right not to be involved in a conversation with anyone at any time.
Nevertheless, even in a setting which is so inimical to conversation, there are some well-defined opportunities for talking, which at the same time illustrate the structural restrictions elevators set for their unfolding. Let's begin with the case of a continued conversation which already started outside the elevator. The continuation depends on many factors: the privacy of the topic, the placement of speakers, or the "strength" of the parties (whether there is only one eavesdropper or a silent majority). More important is how the continuation of talk appears in the context of elevating: it can be obtrusive in enforcing an involuntary listening, but it can also save the passengers from a horror vacui tacendi which would be caused by a sudden breaking off of talking. Mostly it comes to compromises: the exchange of words is continued with lowered voices, then it dies without ending in concluding remarks, and flickers up again at the exit (cf. Goffman, 1963: 157).
The most frequent cases of such disturbances are the handicaps of elevator use, already mentioned: full hands, large cartons, trolleys with books, etc. The little aids stimulated by them are typically performed as minimalized forms of (a noncommittal) contact: one is lending a hand, but not an ear to someone. Thus the accompanying words can be of nearly impolite brevity: "Where?" - "4th floor, thanks." If instead of this utilitarian shortening a more polite formulation is chosen ("May I push the button for you?") this could be heard as a conversational offer compelling one to go on somehow. In this case, a hasty "third floor please" can counter this impression by denying that the questioner has taken any specific threshold of contact. (Or, having said this, does one have to say goodbye leaving this cage?) Another, regularly occurring case of disturbance is the overcrowding, which can suddenly relax the concentrated silence, giving way to a general readiness to engage in conversation. Typically, there is a reflexive reference to the tragicomedy of the situation: the elevator is nearly full. At another stop, somebody manages to squeeze himself in. When the cage goes on with an unusual jerk, he says in an apologetic tone: "Hmm. Heavy bones." General laughter, although the atmosphere is tensing again when the cage gradually empties. One can sense a latent panic whether the chat would go on until one's own exit. This hints at a conversational "functionalism." An exchange of words in an elevator is a mere "accompanying music" for a primarily proxemic interaction event. In fact, the words themselves are a kind of spacer: they are put between people. In addition, they have to fill the time of an encounter. This gives the elevator door an independent role in opening and closing conversations: talks are often opened and closed together with the door - an example of the "acting" of a material setting, independent from the sequential self-organisation of talk.
If the participants decide to open a conversation, they have to face a double problem of timing. For one thing, one can't wait for the opening as if one were talking only because it is unavoidable - one has to go over to the offensive as if one had chosen the opportunity. Secondly, the end of conversation should be reached not too far away from the exit of one of the participants, because the pause emerging would reveal once more that one has nothing to say to each other. The art of conversation in this case consists of holding talk in a balance (like the elevator!) and closing it only when the door opens.
PAGE 108	ELEVATOR
6.	EXIT: COLLECTIVE FICTIONS
Getting out of an elevator is accomplished in a concerted action of moving apart; one could also call it "standing easy." As soon as the elevator brakes, people are looking around for signals of setting-out, e.g., the gathering of personal belongings. Then they might again refer to a turn regulation: "first on, first off." Finally, lanes are formed, people can worm their way through, before they disappear from sight. Again, the timing of these practices is remarkable. On the one hand, elevator riders try not to be late, so that they get to the exit without calling the others' attention to themselves (by hurrying, requests, or jostling). On the other hand they also avoid going out "too early." There are a lot of reasons for this, which can explicate again what elevator riding is about. Generally in favor of a minimization of contact, participants seem to wait whether they can get out wordlessly in the wake of others. In addition they don't give up their backing without reason: getting out means standing in the limelight and that without a chance to control others' gazes. But there are also three other reasons, which have to do with the maintenance of collective fictions of elevating: First, pushing one's way out in a haste, a while before the door opens, is "too early," because this lacks an adjustment of inner and outer time (like honking in a traffic jam). The "impatience" thematizes - like the delayed making way - the cage-character of the elevator; it destroys the fiction of a comfortable offer of space.
Secondly, the untimely attempt to get out means turning away from the others sooner than needed. It reveals too much of the anticipated relief of "turning one's back on them" after all. To get out also means being a "drop-out," an unashamed happy renegade of a community of fate. By untimely getting out, people violate a latent expectation of "minimal solidarity": that one is not unbearable. Insofar the gazes in their neck carry resentment.
Thirdly, by pressing one's nose against the door, the collective illusion is shattered that one could be engaged in doing anything interesting in an elevator. It is a fiction which not only individualizes elevator riders (by dissociating them from one another), it also preserves them in their cognitive complexity as persons.
Waiting in front of the door, the elevator rider is exposed to be, here and now, nothing but a "mass," individualized by measuring kilograms, a load which -compared to other means of transportation - is conveyed gratis indeed, but also without any prestige. In an elevator one goes without image. This has a democratic side effect: the elevator is a class-less vehicle, letting all users participate in the same experience. Nevertheless, even under these conditions, some elevator riders try to gain prestige by hierarchic distinctions: a social structure of elevator riders can be displayed by the use of one's own time.
At the bottom there are those slowpokes who waste their time, at the top there are the "¡ostlers" who can show even here that their time is precious.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 109
POSTSCRIPT:
CULTURAL CAB EXPECTATIONS
Despite a "consensus" on a universal script for the elevator, they remain revealing devices for identifying local habits. Lacking an overview study, this is a collage of anecdotes collected mainly from the staff of AMO and OMA across offices in Rotterdam, Beijing, New York,
Hong Kong, and Doha.
GENDER
According to sociologist Erving Goffman, an unpublished paper from 1965 by John Guelaner suggests that "the general practice is for male riders to be somewhat at attention, with hand to the side and no side involvements, with an equivalent posture for women - as if all activity had halted while individuals were in transit."
A paper by Rebekah Rousi, a PhD in cognitive science, 2013, has a more detailed gender analysis: "More senior men in particular seemed to direct themselves towards the back of the elevator cabins. In front of them were younger men, and in front of them were women of all ages. Men watched the monitors, looked in the side mirrors (in one building) to see themselves, and in the door mirrors (of the other building) to also watch others. Women would watch the monitors and avoid eye contact with other users (unless in conversation) and the mirrors. It was only when the women traveled with other women, and just a few at that, that women elevator users would utilize the mirrors. One interviewee even mentioned that she only looked in the mirrors when there was no one else in the elevator."
SPACE
"One issue I encountered on a project in the Middle East: the 'personal space' of a person is much larger than in some other areas of the world, therefore their elevators are huge."— OMA architect
BUTTONS
"I saw in Russian residential buildings, elevators with a fixed amount of floor buttons. For example, if the building has only five floors, the elevator still has 10 buttons as a result of Soviet standardization." — OMA architect
PRIVACY
"In the Middle East, it's considered very bad form to enter an elevator if it's occupied by a woman. She should be allowed to travel alone." — AMO editor
DESELECT BUTTON
"I've noticed, in China, you can double tap the buttons in the elevator to deselect a floor where the elevator is cued to stop." — OMA architect
DESTINATION DISPATCH
"The new fashion in elevators in New York are destination dispatch elevators: you press the floor you are going to at the lobby, and the computer assigns you an elevator (among three that we have) supposedly based on
efficiency. Most people often complain about its inefficiency - assigning 20 people in the same car that is two minutes away while assigning only one person to a car that is on the floor. And sometimes, like today, it stops and goes out of service in the middle of a ride, the mechanic has to travel to site and restart it just like a computer." — OMA architect
PENTHOUSE BUTTON
"New York now has penthouse buttons: PH. There are mostly for private residences." — OMA architect
NUMEROLOGY
"In the US, floor 13 is often omitted from the elevator panel; in China, floors with the number four are often omitted. In China, I have seen some (but not all) US-branded hotels and expat-oriented serviced apartment buildings omit both the 13 and 14th floor as a result.
Las Vegas casinos that cater to Chinese tourists also sometimes omit both." — OMA architect
HIERARCHY
"In Japan, the sitting position of the person, for example in a restaurant, is tacitly fixed depending on the social standing or hierarchy. It exists for the space of the elevator as well. It is one of the first things fresh graduates are taught in companies. Young people in companies need to stand in front of a control panel and operate it. High position persons stand in the center." — OMA architect
GROUND FLOOR INDICATION
"I had a short obsession collecting ground floor indications in different countries: GF (UK), BG (Netherlands), 0, 1,
EG (Germany), PB (Spain), RC (France), P (Poland)."
—	OMA architect
DISPLAY
"In China and Southeast Asia, every elevator floor has a position and direction indicator. It's required and expected by the market. In Europe it's highly unusual. You usually never see a position indicator - only on the first floor maybe - but a directional one. Hall lanterns - these are the arrows or symbols (they don't tell if the car is going up or down, but only which way it will go when it leaves) - are North American. There's the audible signal, the 'dong,' and then the arrow tells you If it's going up or down."
—	Daryl Marvin, Director (Innovation), Otis Engineering Center, Farmington.
FEEDBACK
"A detailed feedback on the position of the elevator inside the cab is not necessary for Americans. Given the high velocity of the average American elevator, it would
probably work against it and it is considered sufficient to only indicate the direction." — Uwe Dreppet and Deannot Simmon, Otis France, "Research on Reasons," ca. 1980.
PAGE 110	ELEVATOR
SINGAPORE'S SKIP STOPS:
CORE MEMORIES
See lia Ho
Block 227, Yishun Street 21, Singapore 760227
That was the new postal code, which became six digits in 1995 when I was nine years old. It was a typical public housing block, which "75 percent of Singaporeans live in" - where the figure came from I didn't know but everyone quotes this.
If you had a friend who didn't live in a housing block, you looked at him strangely. If you had a classmate who came to school driven in a car, you ostracized him. I walked back home to my block, said bye to my friend who lived In the next one, 228. We were really good friends, went to the playground together and set things on fire.
We played ball with other kids in the void deck -that's what they called the ground floor that was empty except for old men sleeping in benches and occasional robbers. I said bye to my friend and pressed the elevator hall button. It was round, like candy, and lit up from behind a frosty plastic sheen. A lukewarm yellow light. It had no arrows, it was, of course, going up, even kids knew that,
I guess that's what the elevator people thought. Or perhaps it was a discount - no arrows on the ground floor = 0.5 percent off the elevator. What did the elevator look like? It was almost 20 years ago, I tried searching the internet, but it's not so good at documenting things from your 20th-century childhood in a non-US region. But in a property market page I found a picture of the lifts - there were two, side by side. But they were alien and as far from the images in my memory as could be - no warm feeling came back and not a stroke of nostalgia was evoked. The elevators had been upgraded.
2013 Elevators serving Block 227, Yishun Street 21, Singapore.
Lift Upgrading
Lift upgrading is such an established topic in Singapore that even in the Netherlands, one can type 'lift upgrading' in google.nl and the search box prompts 'lift upgrading hdb'. Singapore's Housing Development Board upgrades elevators in selected housing blocks that were built before 1990 - these are skip-stop elevators. The ones in Block 227 of my childhood (not the ones in the PropertyGuru picture) stopped only at 1, 6 and 10. I lived on the fourth floor, so I would take the elevator to the sixth, and walk down two floors. The lift landings were big, and every floor that did not have a lift landing had the lift landing space anyway, so it was a sort of curious empty space, somewhat colonized by the residents of that floor,
but I remember riding my little bicycle around it. Sometimes, I mispressed the buttons (or did I do it on purpose?) and ended up on the tenth storey. It was eerily similar to the sixth, where I was supposed to exit, so going down two flights and not ending up at familiar surroundings was disorienting. I have a vague memory of going to the wrong floor and reaching my front door just to realize it was not my front door, and I had stopped at the fifth floor in my run down the stairs and not the fourth. They had flowers sitting on the steps, we didn't.
Elevator and Politics
I would explain It, but Wikipedia has it succinctly written:
Lifts and politics
Also see: Singapore general election, 2006
The upgrading of public housing, including the Lift Upgrading Programme (LUP), was a major issue in the recent general elections. The People’s Action Party (PAP) had tied the scheduling of housing upgrades to the number of votes the party received in the election. The PAP argues that government Is successful in raising the standard of living in the country, and those who support its various policies, including the upgrading, should be given priority. In the hotly contested Aljunied GRC, George Yeo (PAP) has placed lift upgrading the "top of [his] priority list” so that the lift would stop on every floor in as many blocks as possible. Sylvia Lim of the Workers' Party (WP) accused the PAP of being selective in its upgrading programmes, arguing that this is a divisive policy.
2007 "Urinating In The Lift Is An Offence" Sign, Singapore.
Where was I? I was pressing the candy round button. It closely resembled one of these guys (in appearance and in state of maintenance):
The position indicators probably looked like this, stripped bare and completely utilitarian:
1990s Fuji Elevator Position Indicators, Singapore. The elevator stops only at floors 1, 6, 10, 14.
The lift arrived. That's right, I never called the lift an elevator when I was a kid. Why use extra syllables? In the lift, I pressed "6," the button lit up with a bulb behind. It was the sort of warm, incandescent glow that LEDs could not mimic and thereby preserved forever the feeling of an era. The smell of something putrid was often present. That, despite the good old "No Urinating in the Elevator" sign. It was public housing in the 1990s In Singapore, when kids still grew up tough.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 111
Typical public housing block, lived in by 75 percent of Singaporeans - "where the figure came from I didn't know but everyone quotes this."
PAGE 112
ELEVATOR
"WE ARE NOW GOING TO TRY OUTSIDE THE ELEVATOR"
Paul Friedli, head of development at Schindler, and Hubert Klumpner, dean of the department of architecture at ETH (Swiss Institute of Technology in Zurich) discuss with Rem Koolhaas smartphone-operated buildings, transit management, and why a door and an elevator are essentially the same thing...
2014 Inside the Schindler development center: home to one of the most advanced research centers for urban development, located in the village of Ebikon, Switzerland.
1992 Destination dispatch, invented by Schindler to optimize elevator efficiency by introducing the pre-selection of floors before you get in the cab; a cab is then assigned according to the best possible grouping of floors. Once inside, there are no buttons that would allow you to change your mind...________________
2014 Paul Friedli, head of development at Schindler, inventor of destination dispatch, welcomes the editors at Schindler's creative hub for elevators.
Rem Koolhaas I don't think the current moment for architecture is that exciting, and perhaps the elevator is part of the reason why. We are attempting to focus on the ingredients of architecture, where they come from, and how these ingredients are evolving.
We would like to talk to you about the elevator.
You have been a chief engineer for Schindler for 30 years. How do you see the elevator today?
Paul Friedli The elevator has become a generic commodity. We are really bored with this In my division of the company. Schindler believes we will not thrive if we focus only on the elevator. We are now trying to go outside of the elevator. The elevator is only one transport medium that we are interested in. I work in a separate group within Schindler and our range of interest is far wider and experimental. We created a totally new control system called destination control, which is now the standard in the industry. With destination control, you create a far higher efficiency and better user experience. In the lobby you simply enter the floor you want to go to or swipe your card and an elevator is assigned to you and brings you directly to where you want to be.
RK Was it your idea?
PF It was my original invention which I have tried hard to improve for 30 years. We are now in the third generation of destination control. We no longer focus on just a single transaction through a group of elevators but instead the total transit experience from building or campus entry until arrival at destination. This is what we call transit management. To improve the systems further, we now have one of the most advanced pedestrian simulations there is, because we realized people don't act as expected. For example, your height is important. If you are taller, you have an overview and develop a movement strategy based on this. If you are smaller your strategy involves exploiting visible gaps.
RK I never realized that mankind divided into overview and gap people...
PF What we want is to make people healthier and happier at the end. So we consider walking a transport medium too. Optimization concepts always try to allow people to get from their bed to their seat in the office with minimal effort. And that is totally wrong. We try to learn from the bad behavior the elevator brought to organizations.
RK What do you think the most important bad behavior is?
PF Vertical dead ends. And to fulfill every requirement as close as possible so you don't have to walk. People
ELEVATOR	PAGE 113
must use their natural mobility, this is a basic requirement. You live longer, you live better.
ELEVATOR AND THE DOOR RK What is the future for Schindler?
PF What we will be doing in the future, as well as classical elevators, is mostly connected to doors. What is the difference between a door and an elevator? A door separates two rooms, and an elevator separates a lot of rooms from a lot of rooms. So on an abstract level, a door and an elevator, for us, are exactly the same. We have developed a system called PORT technology which is about seamless transfer: you have received an invitation on a smartphone, you come in at the main entrance, the security gates open automatically, the elevator panel tells you to take car B.
You go to car B and then at the end you arrive at your apartment, for instance, which then opens automatically for you.
RK Seamless.
STUPIDITY OF THE SWING DOOR
PF This is a business model which really has a high value. People like this system because it's very personal. You know the building is reacting to you. The building can learn your day-to-day patterns and it will do exactly what you want. The main problem was the apartment door at the end. The normal swinging door is very stupid. You waste so much floor space and then volume - that is very expensive, and owners have to buy that space. On top of that, it is also not safe. Dust imagine a fire in someone's apartment - and a person panics and forgets the way the door is opening and gets trapped and dies. Worldwide, apartment doors open to the wrong side. In some hospitals you can even see a notice "Attention! Doors!" We are now developing an automatic sliding door with the following functionality: when closed it is perfectly flush with the wall. When the door opens, its depth is automatically reduced allowing the clearance for it to be retracted into the wall. When it closes it then reseals the entrance.
RK Can you show how it works?
PF It's a wall that has a pocket. The door can slide into the pocket and goes back flush in the wall so you don't even see it. And when it closes it retracts again and slides back into the open space. And with that, it also seals and locks so you don't need a lock anymore. You will only see the seam of the door in the wall, that's it - no frames, etc., very elegant. Normally the door opens only halfway, which is enough for a person to get through, but you can open it completely by means of a touch control. If you compare the cost of this door to the gain of the square meters it's really cost effective.
PAGE 114
ELEVATOR
2014 PORT Technology
1. Receive meeting invitation on smartphone.
2. Upon arrival at the building, smartphone's bluetooth signal opens entry gate, assigns an elevator, and sends a message to the host informing them of your arrival.
3. The elevator stops at required floor and also directs you to the room and automatically opens its door...
Swing door math
Swiss high end high rise = 18,000 euros / m2 40 swing doors (1.5 m2 each) = 60 m2 Revenue saving per floor = 1,080,000 euros
Schindler's flush door prototype: closed...	...retracts inwards slightly to allow sliding Into the ...to open fully, with none of the "wasted space
wall's "pocket"...	of the swing door in front ot it.
ELEVATOR
THE WASTE OF THE SWINGING DOOR
RK So basically your argument is that a swing door
wastes space and is dangerous.
PF Yes. It is dangerous and you lose about one square meter per door which can be very expensive in high end apartments. Our new sliding door has many other advantages including fire security and exceptional acoustic performance. Imagine a high end residential tower with 550 square meters per floor. Now if you have 40 doors per floor, there is waste a volume of 120 m3. This is far more space than what elevators take up, which we can now save for our clients. And we can comply with the building standards in case of fire or evacuation. Naturally, you must be able to open the door without power and other requirements, which we are used to dealing with in our core elevator business.
RK With the revelations of the last few months about illegal data collecting, are you afraid that this information will be misused?
PF Our wireless system is encrypted and very secure. The smartphone is the interface of the future. I think you will have these multi-button, multi-function devices always with you - they are so personal. The smartphone will also be key for the disabled; they will be able to use it, for example, with voice-over if they are blind. Today there are so many rules for disabled access. Every village has its own rule - the smartphone will be their interpreter and will give access for all. Everything will be controlled by your personal intentions.
RK So there will be no devices other than the smartphone required to control these new elevators?
PF None. It will not be necessary for these new elevators to have any displays or buttons. The system knows where you are going and you see that on your smartphone. You don't have to touch any other buttons anymore. Anyway in some cultures, it is considered unhygienic to touch a button that someone else touched before. Next year we will launch this elevator smartphone app worldwide, and we will call it myPORT.
RK So you have that all in house.
PF We have the experience, yes.
RK Can I ask you about your career background?
PF After studies in electrical engineering, I started my career in medical science. My main focus has always been health and promoting longevity and at one point I realized that a different way of doing that was by prevent-
PAGE 115
ing people having to waste their time. All wasted time is part of your lifetime that you don't get back so I started thinking about how to reduce the waiting times for the elevator. You spend perhaps months of your life waiting for an elevator! This is what I wanted to change. I have been working together with Schindler since 1977. And with Mr. Schindler we decided about eight years ago that we must break out of the decreasing value spiral of the elevator business. In a way, the elevator is a highly generic commodity. If you go to a customer, after five minutes you will be talking about price. The product is increasingly produced in China, and the brands have become to a high degree interchangeable. This only leads to a race to the bottom. We wanted to break out of that, so we developed this idea of focusing on transit management. That will become more important, and it's also far more interesting for us and healthier for the world. If we urbanize in chessboardlike street patterns - dominated by 55-floor skyscrapers, hundreds of them, all the same - your guidance system is very straight forward. You don't need transit management for that. But if you have a city, where you feel good and you are curious because each space can look different, then you need guidance. This is the basic idea. We would like to convert from a pure hardware manufacturer and maintenance provider into a company which additionally is a service provider for end-users.
SOCIAL ISOLATION
RK You have been working with Hubert Klumpner of ETH on projects in slums in South America. What is the relationship between these ideas and Schindler?
PF We wanted to find out what impact the elevator has on today's urbanization. Our starting point was to look at a tall building, like Torre David in Caracas, which, because of its evolution, contained many housing units but no elevators. We have concluded that the elevator has a very significant social and physical role to play in urban contexts. For example, social isolation is a real problem that we need to address. One of the most positive findings is the benefits of vertically in terms of the security of slum dwellers. If one takes the approach of a separation of functions, whereby the structural elements associated with a multi-floor building are undertaken using architects and the more basic dwelling creation is left to individuals, it is possible to envision a massive improvement in the lives of the world's poorest people. And there are many aspects to increased security. A very large percentage of the world's population live in dwellings with no architectural content with the result that a natural disaster like a tsunami or an earthquake can lead to massive numbers of casualties. Catastrophes like this are not caused by nature but by the decisions which allowed such dwellings to exist.
PAGE 116
ELEVATOR
TOWER WITHOUT ELEVATORS
"[T]he residents are constantly on the move - but their vertical mobility is severely curtailed by the absence of some form of mechanical transportation. Climbing the stairs is onerous even for the young and healthy; it is dangerous for small children and impossible for the very elderly and the infirm. Moreover, the residents' ability to continue building and modifying their living spaces is considerably slowed by the need to carry materials up many flights of stairs.
"The standard solution, a bank of elevators, is impractical, not only because of the up-front costs, but also considering two key objectives of any interventions. Elevators require considerable power - more than would be prudent given the goal of relying primarily on the on-site generation of electricity. And the complexity of the system would defeat the aim of enabling the residents to install, operate, and maintain their own facilities and amenities.
"If, instead of thinking of Torre David as a conventional high-rise, it is conceived as a vertical city, then vertical transportation becomes the equivalent of a bus line, whose operation, instead of being continually available and constantly functioning, is scheduled on an as-needed basis. The 'route' would be a proposed vertical extension of Edificio K, which would also serve to supply electricity and water, making it an infrastructure backbone - in effect, a traditional building core."
— Urban Think Tank; Chair of Architecture and Urban Design, ETH Zurich, Torre David: Informal Vertical Communities, (Lars Müller, 2013), 344.
Grocery 2nd stage Stores 2nd stage
Grocery
Stores
Sport
2013 Proposal for an integrated transport network at the Torre David in Caracas, resulting from the collaboration of ETH and Schindler.
2013 A vertical city among the old in Caracas.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 117
Hubert Klumpner Schindler is interested in going towards the business of urban development because they will only then be able to show what a transport system can do. The typical sequence of somebody buying an elevator system and handing it over to someone else, a developer for instance, who then sells it on the real estate market, creates a barrier to any progress with the elevator. The actual problem is innovating the vertical transportation. We see a chance by developing something around the technology. Building a building around different transport systems.
RK I think that there is a strong social dimension to the South American work, but I do not assume that this is your only interest.
PF No, no...
RK Let's say transportation management, or movement management, is also something that has implications for richer worlds.
PF Exactly.
RK Have you worked on that section as well?
PF Yes naturally. To be honest, this is a difficult subject. We really try to simply make people a little bit happier. A little bit happier means a little less crime, a higher fitness level, more convenience, etc. If we continue like we are doing now, in 2040 half of the urban population will be living in slums, and the others will have a poor quality environment because criminality will also evolve. Happier also means healthier and one idea is that maybe you can go to certain levels using elevators, with others only available by stairways or ramps. Our solutions must also be inexpensive so that poorer societies can build them.
HK Have you seen the elevator in Cantagalo Copacabana in Rio which connects the metro with a favela? What the Rio metro did was to create value. Where suddenly, along the way, the public became happier. These elevators are offered not as a private commodity but they became part of public transportation. I believe there is also a market for social engagement, which has a political dimension.
It is something that is not only doing good; it also has a measurable market potential, if you take it away from one clientele and put it in the hands of another one. There is obviously an enormous possibility, globally, to invent new markets for vertical transportation through distribution of access.
DENSIFICATION OF BRAINS
PF There is another aspect: naturally, we would like to talk to the decision makers and to the architects. Optimization as a means of making the fulfillment of a societal requirement less expensive is the strategy of most companies and, individually, it is good for their bottom line. But collectively when this happens a form of commodification occurs which, essentially, destroys the value of the requirement. If we go through this process of destroying values it is then incumbent on us to create new ones which add to the quality of society. This commodification has taken place with the elevator and, with transit management and its far reaching implications we are providing a whole new set of values in the urban landscape. One of the key benefits of the structures we foresee is that they bring about a densification of brains. After spending a lifetime in innovation I am convinced that this is one of its key enablers. Therefore our concept will hopefully enhance generally the level of innovation that can be deployed to solve urban problems going forward.
HK I think it is also interesting that for the last 50 years you bought an elevator by getting a catalogue from Schindler, or someone else, and you just chose from what is there that fits your needs. Today you actually have companies that have a broader vision because it enables them to get engaged in alternative possibilities and develop a palette of options that eventually might really also turn into new typologies and systems, into vertical cities that are accessible on several levels not only on the ground level. I think architects are assuming this is the only way because is it the only product on the market. They are underestimating the possibilities of the industry. I think in our collaboration lies a key to making the industry's potential visible and developing a laboratory of research and built examples.
PF To make it absolutely clear: it's a survival strategy.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 118
bibliography
Ardaillon, Édouard. Les mines du Lauríon dans l'antiquité. Paris, Thorin et fils, 1897.
Annet, F.A. Elevators. New York:
McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1960. 153.
Aspillaga, Oscar. "Comerciantes Protestan por Incertidumbre en Reapertura de Ascensor Artillería." El Martutino.cl,
Noticias de Valparaiso y Viña del Mar. www.elmartutino.cl/noticia/sociedad/ comerciantes-protestan-por-incertidumbre-en-reapertura-de-ascensor-artilleria (accessed May 20, 2014).
Barker, Frederick H. A Technical Primer:
The Otis Odyssey System. Sao Paulo:
2nd International Conference on High Technology Buildings, 1997.
Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida:
Reflections on Photography. Hill and Wan, 1992.
Bernard, Andreas. Lifted: A Cultural History of the Elevator. NYU Press, 2014.
Brown, Thomas E. "The American Passenger Elevator," Engineering Magazine Dune 1893. 340.
"Cautious Hiring to Continue in the New Year, According to CareerBuilder's Annual Dob Forecast - CareerBuilder." Careerbuilder.com (Web. 20 May 2014.) www.careerbuilder.com/share/aboutus/ pressreleasesdetail.
aspx?sd=8%2F8%2F2012&sc_cmp1=cb_
pr710_&
"Diamond Trac," Mitsubishi Electric, Product Brochure, (accessed April 27,
2014.) www.mitsubishielectric.com/ elevator/products/asme/elevators/ diamond_trac/index.html
"Elevator News." (accessed May 20, 2014). Global Elevator Voice. http://elevatornews. com/category/news/
"Elevator World Online Bookstore."
Elevator World Online Bookstore.
(accessed May 20, 2014). www.elevatorbooks.com/
"Elevator World Online Bookstore." (accessed May 20, 2014) www. elevatorbooks.com/
"Fast Time in Elevators: Ascending Nine Flights in Thirty Seconds" The New York Times, September 3, 1882.
Friedman, Stanley P. "The Case Of The Vanishing Elevator Man," New York Herald Tribune, Feb 26, 1961. F4.
"Gen2: The way to green," Otis Elevator Compan, 2010. www.otisworldwide.com/ pdf/Gen%202%20Brochure.pdf (accessed May 3, 2014).
Goodwin, Dason. Otis: Giving Rise to the Modern City. Ivan R. Dee, First edition,
2001.
"Greening your Buildings with Schindler Modernisation," Schindler, (accessed February 25, 2014) www.schindler.com/ content/id/internet/en/mobility-solutions/ products/green-mobility/Existing-Buildings/_ jcr_content/rightPar/downloadlist/ downloadList/1_1340596278765.download, asset. 1J 340596278765/Schindler%20 Modernization.pdf
"GSEIevator." (accessed May 20, 2014) Business Insider, www.businessinsider.com/ author/gselevator
Harris, Elizabeth. "For Dewish Sabbath, Elevators Do All the Work," The New York Times, March 5, 2012.
Koolhaas, Rem. Delirious New York:
A Retroactive Manifesto for Manhattan.
New York: Monacelli Press, 1994.
Lanza, Doseph. Elevator Music: A Surreal History of Muzak, Easy-Listening, and Other Moodsong. University of Michigan Press, 2004.
"Machine Room-Less Performance In A Hydraulic Elevator Hoistway: KONE EcoSpace," (accessed May 5, 2014) KONE Inc, 2014. http://cdn.kone.com/www.kone. us/lmages/kone-ecospace-elevator.pdf?v=3
"Microsoft Research Built a Smart Elevator with Al." TNW Network . (accessed May 20, 2014) http://thenextweb.com/ microsoft/2014/01/20/microsoft-research-built-smart-elevator-uses-ai-figure-floor-youre-going/
"On Doing Being a Stranger: The Practical Constitution of Civil Inattention." Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 35-1 2005. 41-67.
Owen, David. "The Soundtrack of Your Life," The New Yorker, April 10, 2006.
"The Complete Elevator Modernization Solution: KONE Revolution," KONE Inc, 2012. (accessed April 27, 2014) http://cdn. kone.com/www.kone.us/lmages/kone-revolution-elevator-modernization.pdf?v=2
Weisgerber, Gerd and Lynn Willies.
"The Use of Fire in Prehistoric and Ancient Mining: Firesetting," Paleorient, Number 26 200. 143-144.
Werfring, Dohann . "Das Stahlungetüm in der Wiener Karlskirche." Wiener Zeitung (Vienna), February 14, 2013. (accessed February 3, 2014) www.wienerzeitung.at/ nachrichten/kultur/museum/523726_Das-Stahlungetuem-in-der-Wiener-Karlskirche. html
Wright, F. A. (Translator) The Works of Liudprand of Cremona. London and New York, 1930.
lifted: a cultural history of the elevator andreas bernard
Alsleben, Kurt. Büro und Großraum. Quickborn: Schnelle, 1961.
Broikos, Chrysanthe and Donald Albrecht. On the Job, Design and the American Office. Princeton Architectural Press, 2010.
Buff, Albert. Bauordnung im Wandel. G.D.W.Callwey, 1971.
"Die Vorschriften im Einzelnen," Einführung in die Musterbauordnung, Part B. Recklinghausen: Kommunal-Verlag, 1960. 74.
"Europahaus und Wohlfahrtsminister," Zentralblatt der Bauverwaltung, No. 7, 1928. 111.
Fritz, Hans Doachim. Menschen in Büroarbeitsräumen. Über langfristige Strukturwandlungen büroräumlicher Arbeitsbedingungen mit einem Vergleich von Klein- und Grossraumbüros. München: Heinz Moos Verlag, 1982.
Goffman, Erving. Relations in Public. Transaction Publishers, 2009.
Hahn, Dittmar and Maritaa Radeisen. Bauordnung für Berlin. Hüthig Dehle Rehm, 2007.
Heiligenthal, Roman. Rasse und Wohnung in der großen Agglomeration. Heidelberg:
C. Winter, 1937. 88.
Hyde, Henry Baldwin. Equitable Life Assurance Society of the United States. New York: De Vinne Press, 1901.
Dahn, Max. Handwörterbuch des Baurechts. Leipzig: Dr. M. Dänecke, 1928. 129.
"Mitteilungen," Der Neubau. Baukunst No. 2, 1926. 24.
Münchner Baupolizeireicht und Münchner Staffeibauordnung. Munich, Berlin, Leipzig: Schweitzer, 1927.
Oelmann, Franz. "Haus am Rheinufer," Deutsche Bauzeitung, Supplement "Moderner Wohnbau," 1929. 13-18.
Schnelle, Eberhard and Alfons Wankum. Architekt und Organisator: Probleme und Methoden der Bürohausplanung. Quickborn: Schnelle, 1965.
Stommer, Rainer and Dieter Mayer-Gürr. Hochhaus: Der Beginn in Deutschland. Marburg: Donas Verlag, 1990. 244.
Sundstrom, Eric. Work Places: The Psychology of the Physical Environment in Offices and Factories. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1986.
Volkswohlfahrt, Amtsblatt und Halbmonatsschrift des Preußischen Ministeriums für Volkswohlfahrt, Vol. 2. Berlin, 1921.39.
"Wohnhaus in Düsseldorf," Baugilde,
No. 4, 1927. 179.
PAGE 119
PAGE 120	ELEVATOR
image sources and courtesy
P3 OTIS.
P4 ThyssenKrupp Elevator.
P6 UALboy / www.flyertalk.com/forum/ members/ualboy.html.
P7 AFAD Messen und Ausstellungen GmbH; Shargaljut / Dreamstime.com.
P8-9 Elevator Work Inc.
P14 Dyer, Dames. Ancient Britain. Routledge, 2002. 42.
P15 Andrew Lewis / The Network Of Bronze Age; Orejas, Almudena and Christian Rico. Mineria Y Metalurgia Antiguas Visiones Y Revisiones. Casa de Velazquez, 2011.
P16-7 Simmen, Deannot and Uwe Drepper. Der Fahrstuhl: die Geschichte der vertikalen Eroberung. München: Prestel, 1984. 204.
P18-9 OTIS.
P 20-1 Agrocola, George. De Re Metallica, trans. Herbert Clark Hoover and Lou Henry Hoover. Dover Publications, Inc. 1950.
P26 Wagenbreth.
P28 Annett, F.A. Elevators: Electric And Electrohydraulic Elevators, Escalators, Moving Sidewalks, And Ramps. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960. 295.
P29 OTIS; Siemens.
P30 Annett, F.A. Elevators: Electric And Electrohydraulic Elevators, Escalators, Moving Sidewalks, And Ramps. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960. 65.73.
P31 Strakosch, George, ed. The Verticcal Transportation Handbook. Third Edition. Dohn Wiley & Sons, Inc. 1998.
P36 OTIS.
P37 Elevator World / Gray, Lee E. A History Of The Passenger Elevator In The 19Th Century. Elevator World, Inc. 2002.
P38 The Cooper Union Archives /
The Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art.
P39 Elevator World / Gray, Lee E. A History Of The Passenger Elevator In The 19Th Century. Elevator World, Inc. 2002.
P40-1 Annett, F.A. Elevators: Electric And Electrohydraulic Elevators, Escalators, Moving Sidewalks, And Ramps. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960. 230. 35; Ancestry.com
P42 OTIS; W.K. "Speeding up the Elevators for our Taller Skyscrapers".The New York Times. April 5 1931. 126.
P43 Annett, F.A. Elevators: Electric And Electrohydraulic Elevators, Escalators, Moving Sidewalks, And Ramps. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1960. 232.
P 46-9 OTIS.
P50 © 2014 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York / MoMA, VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn.
P52-3 The State Dournal-Register.
P54 ©Bettmann/CORBIS; Patrick Carr; Tuscaloosa News.
P55 Patrick Carr; Dack Delano.
P56 New York Public Library Collection.
P 57-61 OTIS.
P63 University of Michigan Press.
P70 Dohn Portman & Associates, Inc.
P71 Alexandre Georges / Dohn Portman & Assiciates, Inc.
P72-3 Arundel Elevator Inspection Services.
P74-5 OTIS.
P76-7 Annett, F.A. Elevators: Electric And Electrohydraulic Elevators, Escalators, Moving Sidewalks, And Ramps. New York-McGraw-Hill, 1960. 194. 190.
P80-7 OTIS.
P94 OTIS; KONE Corporation.
P95 Schindler Elevator Corporation; Mitsubishi
P96 OTIS.
P97 ©KONE Corporation; Schindler Elevator Corporation.
P98 Lerch Bates Inc.
P99 Lerch Bates Inc.
P101 Alphonsus Chern.
P108 PropertyGuru / www.propertyguru. com.sg; Commonwealth-HitachiElevator by Singapore Buses is licensed under CC by 3.0; Blk94-Redhill-FujiElevator-lndicator by Singapore Buses is licensed under CC by 3.0; Image 1333588709 by Oso is licensed under CC by 2.0
P112 Schindler Elevator Corporation /
© Schindler 2014
P114 Schindler Elevator Corporation /
© Schindler 2014
P116 Schindler Elevator Corporation.
ELEVATOR
PAGE 121
2018 Maurizio Cattelan (1960), Untitled, 2001, collection Museum Voorlinden, Wassenaar, the Netherlands.
RAMP
Quintessential mid-20th century expressive ramp, inside Oscar Niemeyer's 1957 Sao Paulo biennale pavilion, employing dramatic gradient likely prohibited today...
RAMP
PAGE
ramp
...ramps change political systems, trigger revolution... ramps announce a new age, a new art, a new lifestyle, even a new relationship between humans and animals... ramps liberate architecture and people... two men, both born in 1923, defined the two extremes of tne ramp - risk and security - in the last century... Tim Nugent declared the universal necessity of adapting the ramp to facilitate every type of human body... Nugent saw the ramp as a bridge to a society with equal opportunities for all... he worked for more than 40 years on Project 117.1 for the establishment of architectural design guidelines dedicated to the physically disabled, which has impacted architecture everywhere... for Nugent, the shallower the ramp, the better... he suggested a maximum inclination of 1:10, a grade scientifically determined as viable for more than 90 percent of wheelchair users and often lowered further to allow even easier access... Claude Parent declared the possibility of adapting the human body to live on ever-more extreme ramps... he worked for more than 60 years on the Oblique Function: for the establishment of a new architecture and urbanism dedicated to living at grade, which has had little impact on architecture... for Parent, the steeper the ramp, the better... he suggested a maximum inclination of 50 percent, the limit of "human adhesion" that would create conscious bodies accepting resistance, therefore existence - living as a permanent struggle of overcoming gravity... leading parallel lives dedicated to the theory and practice of the ramp,
Nugent and Parent both died in 2016...
PAGE 2
RAMP
Possible inclinations of the ramp, from Claude Parent's "maximum human adhesion'' to the Guggenheim museum. ‘Counter to mathematical practice, Parent in 1966 proposes the 45 degree angle to be only a 50% incline, leaving the next 50% for future humans to conquer (p. 2302).
RAMP
FUNCTIONALITY AND FANTASY
A ramp can be an architectural element that changes political systems, triggers revolution.
Ramps can announce a new age, a new man (the flâneur), a new art, a new lifestyle without furniture, even a new relationship between humans and animals. The ramp would enable the Tower of Babel, provoking God's wrath. The ramp is an instant creator of scenography. It strives towards architectural infinity. It generates mythical proportion. It leads to the epicenter of triumph.
It directs the gaze skywards, leaving unknown what is at the end of the road. It is an unsung hero of industrialization, a mundane tool for getting stuff to where it's needed. It serves the market economy. It served communism. It is hard to find a museum without one. It is an effective device for confronting exclusion, an agent of democratic access for all - though the access ramp was initially considered not cost-effective enough, resisted by public administrators, the academic world, medical doctors, and by architects. The ramp reminds us of gravity and friction. It can be a device to overcome limitations. It creates a need for innovative solutions to compensate for its difficult prerequisites (it needs a lot of horizontal space in which to elevate us). Increasing requirements for comfort, health, and safety exponentially reduce its steepness, increase its footprint, and make it less popular among architects and developers. It "wastes" space. As an architectural tool, it lost out to the compact stair and the comfortable elevator. The ramp's principals are so self-evident that it was hardly ever mentioned by historians or writers. It cannot be ignored anymore. It has successfully conquered Babel: its language and demands are now globally aligned, with a recurrent code everywhere (minimum ratio of height to length: 1:12; preferred: 1:20). In the 50 years of its legally mandated existence in public places, its steepness halved. (1:30 in 2030?) It is checked every five years by lawmakers. But the ramp is still often an architectural afterthought. You can get a prefabricated one online for 60 euros...
Two men, both born in early 1923, define the two extremes of the ramp - as dreamscape and as universal access - in the last century, though both are equally idealistic in their dogged pursuit.
Claude Parent saw in it the self-evident next step in the evolution of mankind. With a suggested maximum inclination of 1:1, his ramps create conscious bodies accepting resistance, and therefore existence: living as a permanent process of dealing with gravity - the stress of going up, the relief of going down. Parent's ramps for living on would attempt to create hierarchy, destabilize relationships, change how we make love, read, eat. With only blissful memories of a life on ramps remaining, confronted with an incline limit of 1:12 in new plans, and with his projects under preservation orders - Parent was a ramp heretic now tamed by legislation.
Tim Nugent toiled for more than 40 years on Project 117.1: the establishment of architectural design guidelines for the physically disabled. He was at one time considered the enemy of the architect.
But he marched for the wheelchair ramp in protests; he built ramps because no one else would.
In a world highly doubtful of the capacities of the disabled, Nugent persevered through conferences and lectures, pleading his case to corporations and publications in his fight for wheelchair ramps.
As a researcher and rehabilitator, he demanded the utmost of his students, testing them on their endurance and agility to discover the dimensions of the ideal ramp (1:8.6). Then he relaxed these same standards for his public recommendations (1:10), triggering the elongation of the ramp in order to serve greater and greater numbers. Now he is a retiree, living comfortably in the legislation that he initiated.
PAGE 4	RAMP
1872-1885 Eadweard Muybridge employs the ramp as a means of documenting the human gait in motion.
RAMP
PAGES
PAGE 6	RAMP
RAMP AS ENABLER OF THE PYRAMIDS: COMPETING THEORIES
2560 BC Tool for pyramidal construction
While Greek historian Herodotus (ca. 484-425 BC) suggests the Egyptian pyramids were made using an unknown lifting device, a later Greek historian, Diodorus Siculus (90-30 BC), proposes another solution, arguing that the pyramids were built using ramps:
"And 'tis said the stone was transported a great distance from Arabia, and that the edifices were raised by means of earthen ramps, since machines for lifting had not yet been invented in those days; and most surprising it is, that although such large structures were raised in an area surrounded by sand, no trace remains of either ramps or the dressing of the stones, so that it seems not the result of the patient labour of men, but rather as if the whole complex were set down entire upon the surrounding sand by some god." (Bibliotheca Histórica, Book 1, 60 and 30 BC.)
Since Siculus's writings, the remains of ramps have indeed been found at pyramid sites, though historians have yet to agree on any exact method of construction. The supposed construction ramps would have demanded vast amounts of material and space by themselves, and must have required constant adaptation during construction, even before confronting the vast difficulties of ascending them with large blocks of limestone and teams of laborers.
Speculation about the type of ramps used to build the pyramids is based on limited historical accounts and sparse archaeological evidence. But many hypotheses have been put forward, offering unresolved problems like having to turn blocks around the corners of twisting ramps. The best-supported theory, proposed by Ludwig Borchardt and Louis Croon (1928-30) and studied in detail by HJ. de Haan (2010), is the use of a single straight ramp
RAMP
PAGE 7
Length of ramps that would have been needed to build the Pyramids of Giza, according to historical and current building codes: ramps require less and less steepness, and therefore much more space through the ages in order to elevate to the same heights...
with an inclination of 1:6.5 - three times steeper than current code recommendations of 1:20 - which would have become even steeper as the pyramid increased in height. It is the only theory confirmed to some extent by archeological finds. Such massive construction ramps would have rivalled the majesty and the complexity of the pyramids themselves - as they would have required more material than the actual pyramids...
The fact that these ramps were so completely and effectively disposed of, and their designs not disclosed, suggests the limited esteem in which this construction device was held - a disdain for its brute functionality that would endure through the millennia...
PAGE 8	RAMP
ACADEMIC HAIRSPLITTING
1900 BC Knossos: first residential ramp
The Knossos Palace of King Minos, on Crete, dates to 1900 BC, and was designed, according to legend, by the mythical architect Daedalus. The palace was excavated and partly rebuilt by Arthur! Evans between 1899 and 193! Not much remains of the original structure which, according to Herodotus, had more than 100 rooms. Yet archaeologist 1 Walter Graham in 1979 presents a hypothesis which, if true, would make Knossos Palace the site of the oldest practical residential ramp. Based on archeological evidence, he suggests that a reconstructed grand staircase, located close to the palace's main access route, was in fact an early service ramp:
"Regarding the arrangement of the West Magazines I should like to make a suggestion which may have a rather important bearing on the plan of the Piano Nobile at Knossos. I have long been puzzled how porters carried heavy burdens into and out of these magazines. To have done so via the North Entrance Passage or via the winding and, in places, narrow route through the Northwest Portico and thence along the passage north of the Throne Room complex to the north end of the Corridor of the Magazines, or from the Central Court via the Lobby of the Stone Seat into the same corridor near Magazine 4, would all have been unnecessarily circuitous. By contrast, at Mallia, there is, as we have seen, a two-meter wide passage leading directly from the West Court in the Corridor of the Magazines, and, considering the close similarity between the twQ.fMraces in genera|§nd in the plan of the area between their Cental CouKand tHr Wst Courts in particular,
we should expect them to exhibit some resemblance in the mode of access to their West Magazines. Using this as a clue, instead of Evans' restoration of a stairway with elaborately decorated entrance leading up to the Piano Nobile (already provided with broad stairways from the east and, less certainly, from the south) I would propose a ramp in the same position, i.e. outside the northwest corner of Magazine 16, supported along its west side by the above mentioned massive platform or retaining-wall, and leading to a doorway opening on the area at the west ends of Magazines 15 and 16. The levels marked on Shaw's detailed plan of this area make it quite clear that the 2.5 m. wide stone platform and the row of blocks set vertically along its east edge would have constituted a suitable retaining-wall for a ramp (now partly removed by excavation) of sufficient steepness to reach the floor-level of Magazines 15 and 16, i.e. to ca. 100.40 to 100.70 m. above datum. On the other hand if, following Evans, we restore an entrance here at the level of the Piano Nobile,i.e. one storey higher, we would be compelled to assume a very massive clay fill as a support for a stone stairway rising some three meters higher still in order to attain an elevation of some 103-104 m. above datum, accompanied by a corresponding increase in the height of the retaining-wall on its west side. Such a stairway seems quite impossibly steep by Minoan standards."
—1 Walter Graham, "Further Notes on Minoan Palace Architecture," American Journal of Archaeology, Vol. 83,
No. 1 (Dan., 1979), 62.
♦»o
RAMP
PAGE 9
PALACE OF KNOSSOS
NORTHWEST CORNER WITH SOUNDINGS (1973)
ramp
magazine 16
Esounoins * o XX s
magazine 15
MAGAZINE 14

1975 D.W. Shaw's survey of the north-west corner of Knossos, showing no traces of a stair...
PAGE 10	RAMP
BABEL: UTOPIA / DYSTOPIA
1490 The Tower of Babel, Gerard Horenbout: with ramp.
1867 Ziggurat of Dur-Sharrukin, by F. Thomas: with steps.
ca. 450 BC the ramp meets God's wrath
"Now the whole world had one language and a common speech. As people moved eastward, they found a plain in Shinar and settled there. They said to each other, 'Come, let's make bricks and bake them thoroughly.' They used brick instead of stone, and tar for mortar. Then they said, 'Come, let us build ourselves a city, with a tower that reaches to the heavens, so that we may make a name for ourselves; otherwise we will be scattered over the face of the whole earth.' But the Lord came down to see the city and the tower the people were building. The Lord said, 'If as one people speaking the same language they have begun to do this, then nothing they plan to do will be impossible for them. Come, let us go down and confuse their language so they will not understand each other.' So the Lord scattered them from there over all the earth, and they stopped building the city. That is why it was called Babel - because there the Lord confused the language of the whole world. From there the Lord scattered them over the face of the whole earth."
— Genesis 11:1-9 (NIV).
In 420-440 BC, Herodotus describes the tower of Babel with further architectural detail: "In the middle of the precinct there was a tower of solid masonry, a furlong [201 meters] in length and breadth, upon which was raised a second tower, and on that a third, and so on up to eight. The ascent to the top is on the outside, by a path which winds round all the towers. When one is about half-way up, one finds a resting-place and seats, where persons can sit for some time on their way to the summit. On the topmost tower there is a spacious temple, and inside the temple stands a couch of unusual size, richly adorned, with a golden table by its side. There is no statue of any kind set up in the place, nor is the chamber occupied of nights by anyone but a single native woman, who, as the Chaldeans, the priests of this god, affirm, is chosen for himself by the deity out of all the women of the land." (Histories, 1.181.)
The Greek historian's description of a tower with a spiraling ramp would later inspire the most iconic depictions by Brueghel and others. Remains of actual towers exist. But the tower built by King Nimrod around 610 BC in Babylon, close to contemporary Hillah in Iraq, has more in common with a stepped ziggurat, with a central staircase reaching to the top. The only known ramped tower is the Assyrian Ziggurat of Dur-Sharrukin (707 BC), excavated in 1853 by French archeologist Victor Place, near contemporary Khorsabad, Iraq, a structure which somewhat matches the description by Herodotus...
RAMP
PAGE 11
ca. 1563 Dystopian 'Viennese version':
Pieter Breughel the Elder, The Tower of Babel.
1563-1568 Imminent destruction / utopian ramp
The two versions of the Tower of Babel by Pieter Bruegel the Elder (1525-1569) show the duality embedded in the allegory of the ramp.
The earliest of his two depictions, known as the Viennese one (after its current location) is interpreted by Steven Mansbach in 1982 as a "pictorial metaphor of the political and religious state of affairs in contemporary Flanders as seen by the humanist circles," reflecting "not just the conflict between Catholics and Protestants but between conservative Spanish overlord [King Phillip II] and more progressive Flemish subject." The ships in the background echo Breughel's place of residence, Antwerp, which during the late 1550s and 60s is under increasingly harsh Spanish domination.
The tower itself is in a chaotic state, with unfinished parts already in ruins, other parts under eternal construction, and still other parts under determined reconstruction. In the foreground, King Phillip II models as King Nimrod or Alexander the Great looking at a structure that, due to a variety of obstructions and tumultuous events on the ramp, is impossible to finish - a suggestion by Breughel of the King's fate.
ca. 1564-1568 Utopian 'Rotterdam version':
Pieter Bruegel the Elder, The Tower of Babel.
The second, smaller painting, known as the Rotterdam version, is most likely painted shortly after completion of the Viennese version. It shows a completely different Tower of Babel. In the absence of the King, Breughel shows a single tower under construction, but progressing well and apparently completable. Each level is finished before the next one is started, and the lower levels are already in use. Mansbach speculates that Brueghel is showing us a utopian version of Babel - his change of heart possibly the result of his immersion in a circle of writers and publishers. The utopian aspect is emphasized by the fact that the tower in this version could not be concluded within the constraints of the picture frame - emphasizing the boundless virtue of the project of humanist enlightenment. For Mansbach, Breughel's second work signals "less the disintegration of the original universal language and society than it might imply its opposite: a future Christian world in which the hubris of Nimrod and Philip might be remedied."
PAGE 12	RAMP
CAPTIOLINE SWITCH: FROM FORUM...
1st century BC Reconstruction of the Roman Forum and Capitoline Hill:	1st century BC Approaches to the Capitoline Hill,
the ramped route crosses the two temples, turns further up the hill,	Dashed line indicates edge of hill,
along the tabularium, to end at the Temple of Dupiter Maximus.
1692 Turning the triumphant ramp
"'Tribunes of the plebs and fellow citizens of Rome,' Scipio said [in 187 BC], 'today is the anniversary of the day on which I fought a pitched battle in Africa against Hannibal and the Carthaginians at Zama [in 202 BC], emerging victorious. This is no time to engage in trials and legal wrangling. And so without delay I will leave the Rostra and climb the Capitolium to pay my respects to Dupiter Optimus Maximus, Duno, Minerva, and all the other gods who watch over the Capitolium and the Citadel, and I will give them thanks that on this date and on many others the gods have granted me the will and ability to carry out our nation's business with distinction."
— Livy, History 38.51.7-10.
The Clivus Capitolinus is the principal approach to the Capitoline Hill, the most sacred place in ancient Rome.
The ramped road could be negotiated by vehicles from the forum romanum towards the end point of the triumphal route: the temple of Dupiter Optimus Maximus, the most important temple of Rome. It begins at the Area Volcani, climbs steeply to the southwest along the Temple of Saturn, and bends sharply back at the corner of the Porticus Deorum Consentium, part of the back wall which
serves as terracing for the clivus. Its upper course is uncertain and probably changes and extends in different branches several times of the years. After the construction of the Capitoline temple, the Clivus Capitolinus is made a processional route suitable for vehicles and is probably the site of several triumphal arches along the way. Another ramped route possibly leads through the Tiberian triumphal arch.
With the fall of the Roman Empire, the Capitoline Hill and the Forum become a forlorn place. Overgrown with grass, the Forum is host to grazing cattle and a market. In 1431, Roman and Florentine scholar Poggio Bracciolini records in De varietate fortunae the status of the hill in his day:
"It is a terrible thing, and hardly to be related without amazement that this Capitoline Hill, once the center of the Roman Empire, and the citadel of the whole world, feared by all Kings and Princes, climbed in triumph by so many Emperors and adorned with the gifts or the spoils of so many peoples, which, in its great days, was the center of the world's attention, is now so desolated and ruinous, so changed from its former golden age that vines now grow in the Senate and it has become a rubbish-heap and a tip for dung."
RAMP
PAGE 13
TO VATICAN...
1748 Plan of Rome by Giambattista Nolli, showing the dramatic transformation by Michaelangelo (constructed 1536-1546): the frontside of
the Tabularium becomes the backside of the Pallazo Senatorio. The new Capitoline Hill uses the 65-meter ramp to point at its new leadership...
A proposed visit by Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in 1536 triggers the restoration of this triumphal mountain complex. Rome wants to welcome the Emperor, who was returning from the successful capturing of Tunis and Halq al-Wâdï in North Africa, in the manner once accorded to monarchs of the past. The ascension of the hill would be a crucial part of the procession. The commune prepares to "decorate the square and [adjust] other things necessary along with the ascent and descent of the square" (Lanciani). Pope Paul III commissions Michelangelo to redesign the hill. Michelangelo initiates a revolutionary transformation of the site by reversing the entrance to the Capitoline Hill: turning its back on the Forum and embracing the visually distant Vatican with a grand 65-meter stepped ramp which would approach the newly redesigned façade of the Palazzo Senatorio and the Apparatamento dei Conser-vatori, Sala degli Orazi e Curiazi, and other state buildings on the hill. Charles V's tour of Rome in the end avoids the muddy ascent towards the hill, still under construction.
1761 Giovanni Battista Piranesi, View of the Capitol, Rome. On the right, Piranesi shows the secondary route up the hill used by carriages...
In the years of construction, the projects slowly takes shape. A statue of Marcus Aurelius is placed on the square. Michelangelo, who would not see the project completed, signals the new empire - and offers it a new ramp of triumph and resurrection, now directed towards a new leadership...
It's unclear when the cordonata - the ramp - is completed or to what extent it follows Michelangelo's design. We know that due to difficulties of driving the processional carriages up the steep ramp, an unheroic side road is constructed in 1692, as also depicted by Piranesi in 1761.
PAGE 14	RAMP
THE FLOWS OF INDUSTRY
1870s Cattle ramp, New York.
1932 Underground cattle ramp, New York.
1990s 'Humane' cattle chute ramp, developed by Temple Grandln: "round and round just like the Guggenheim Museum."
1990s Medium sized ramped slaughter house, based on Grandin's vision.
1870 Death ramp
In the industrial revolution, the ramp takes on particular importance because of its efficiency in moving things around. As well as ramps used in industry and mining, the underground livestock ramp becomes a part of large-scale infrastructure in cities throughout the US. With the mechanization of meat production, the ramp plays a central role in transporting livestock to slaughterhouses, until the invention of the refrigerated truck in 1940. In the Chicago Union Stockyards of the early 1880s, the largest cattle market in the world, animals are brought into open pens from which they are led up gangway ramps to the packing houses, consisting of a labyrinth of wooden sheds and halls. Subterranean New York in the 1930s features a series of tunnels which lead cattle under the city, unnoticed by those above, to the slaughterhouse - a ramped underworld designed specifically for cows. Although now an almost forgotten myth, blogs like ediblegeography.com see the underground ramp system as a potential tool for a sustainable food distribution. A second type of industrial
cattle ramp, by Temple Grandin, an American doctor of animal science, professor at Colorado State University, author, activist, and consultant to the livestock industry on animal behavior, is the "humane" cattle chute, developed in the 1990s. Grandin specifies designs for ramps which funnel cattle calmly to their deaths by reducing stress: "[they] should be curved, so that the cattle just sort of go round and round and round like the Guggenheim Museum" without being able to see their fate (Grandin, Animals in Translation, 2006.) Grandin's chutes are characterized by wide curves, because cattle have the tendency to return to where they come from, tall walls so they can only see straight ahead, and through the ramp's inclination their future executioners are hidden from sight. According to Grandin's website, the chute designs are now used in more than half of US slaughterhouses.
RAMP
PAGE 15
1922 Fort Shelby Garage, Detroit, by Albert Kahn: first continuous ramped parking system.
1918-22 Car park ramp
After the First World War, the density of cars in American cities starts to reach levels where parking on the street becomes difficult. Initial discussion about the storage of cars divides into two camps, the first seeing the car as an object to be stored as if in a warehouse. The earliest parking structures, like those built by Garage Ponthieu in Paris in 1905, uses a mechanical elevator-based hoist, operated by assistants, to store cars for their owners.
The second line of thinking connects storage to the vehicle's mobility, giving drivers the freedom to park wherever they want. The ramp is the perfect ally of the wheel.
In 1918, Fernand d'Humy patents the first parking ramp system, with a system of gently inclined split-level ramps "so constructed that vehicles may travel under their own power from floor to floor of the building to and from storage spaces on the various floors." The d'Humy system becomes the model imitated throughout the 20th centum-according to some, it is responsible for the grim, cheap ugliness of today's parking structures. As a further development of the parking ramp, Albert Kahn's office in 1922 develops the first continuous ramped garage in Detroit, made out of concrete.
1919	First patented car park ramp, Ferdinand d'Humy, intended "to provide a storage building having storage space on its several floors and so constructed that vehicles may travel under their own power from floor to floor, to and from storage spaces on the several floors with the vehicles forming the ascending and descending streams of traffic moving in the same direction over the several floors."
PAGE 16	RAMP
REVOLUTIONARY RAMPS
1920 Tatlin's Monument to the Third International.
1920 The proletariat unites
'"We behaved like monks with a dogma,' wrote T.M. Shapiro, assistant to Vladimir Tatlin, designer of the Monument to the 3rd International. 'We would have nothing to do with old materials. New content must have new form. We must abandon the static forms of the age of the pyramids. With the word 'dynamic' everything begins to turn; it engenders the idea of slanting form, energetic turning, two spirals which follow each other.'"
—	Margit Rowell, "Vladimir Tatlin: Form/Faktura,"
October no. 7 (Winter 1978).
Tatlin's design for a gigantic structure to be built as a monument to the Russian revolution, in St. Petersburg, is essentially a double spiral supporting three stacked volumes
-	cube, pyramid, and cylinder - the agglomeration rising to 140 meters. These structures would rotate at different speeds. At the base of the structure, the cube is meant as a venue for lectures, conferences, and legislative meetings; this would complete a rotation in the span of one year.
1885-1953 Vladimir Tatlin
Above this, the pyramid would accommodate executive activities, completing a rotation once a month. At the top, the cylinder, meant to house an information center, issuing news bulletins and manifestos via telegraph, radio and loudspeaker, would complete a rotation once a day. The ramped structure, necessary for construction, according to some reports would be open for motorcycles which could drive up and down the immense tower...
The monument faintly echoes the ziggurats and spiral shaped minaret of the El Malwiyya Mosque at Samarra; Tatlin may also have been familiar with a ramped monument by Auguste Rodin (1894) and Athanasius Kircher's Tower of Babel engraving of 1679. The latter reveals the seemingly paradoxical intention in the tower's Babelesque design:"Tower of Babel was both the ante-type and the antitype of the Monument to the Third International: global Communism, achieved through Comintern's efforts directed from the headquarters housed in it, would reunite mankind politically and allegorically - in time also linguistically - in one shared language and endeavor." (Rowell, 1978.) Like Breugel before him, Tatlin seems to use the duality of the parable to suggest a new future for the young communist state...
RAMP
PAGE 17
1924 Lenin's sloping sarcophagus for his mausoleum in Moscow, preliminary design by Konstantin Melnikov.
2014 After 90 years, Lenin still rests in the oblique, awaiting resurrection...
1890-1974 Konstantin Melnikov
1924 Sleeping Beauty
Lenin's death in Danuary 1924 inspires a feverish race to build his mausoleum (despite the insistence of his wife Krupskaya, who insists that he would have wanted to be buried without fanfare). Based in part on a belief that the progress of science might yield a way to reanimate the dead Bolshevik leader, the Commission for the Immortalization of the Memory of V.l. Ulyanov dictates that the door of the mausoleum should be always left open. The architect Konstantin Melnikov wins the six-day competition for the design of the casket, saying he would create a "sleeping chamber for a sleeping prince."
Melnikov's design consists of a constructivist faceted glass topped sarcophagus: "The architectural idea of my project consisted in a four-faceted extended pyramid cut with two surfaces inclined inside in opposite directions which formed by intersection a dead level diagonal. Thus, the upper glass surface turned out naturally strong against any impact. The developed construction idea eliminated the necessity for framing the joints of the sarcophagus with metal. We got the crystal with starlight play of the inner color sphere."
In drawings and subsequent representations of the slumbering Lenin, he appears to be resting on an inclined surface, tilted up - the better to be displayed to the public. The casket is completed in August 1924 and despite numerous aesthetic alterations - the glass lid replaced by massive stone tablets and added Soviet Realist decorum - Melnikov's design is still in use: with his arms leaning on the casket's edges, Lenin lies ready to be resurrected from his oblique resting place...
PAGE 18 SLEEP
RAMP
1930 Sleeping masses
Six years after Lenin's casket, Melnikov designs his second sleeping ramp: the Sonata of Sleep. As part of the 1930 Green City plans for Moscow, initiated through the first five-year plan in 1928, Melnikov's idea is to increase worker efficiency by designing a "sleeping house." Through scientific analysis and control, sleeping will be optimized. The building consists of two ramped dormitories, inclined in opposite directions either side of a central block containing washrooms. It also includes control rooms where technicians operate instruments to regulate the temperature, humidity, and air pressure, as well as to waft pleasant scents, "rarefied condensed air," and soothing
sounds like bird song and ocean waves. The inclination of the dormitories is another inducement to sleep, a transitional state between standing and laying... Melnikov alleges that the ramps eliminate the need for pillows. Beds are to be built into the ramp "like laboratory tables" and, should all the scientific interventions fail, the integrated ramp beds would gently rock the worker to sleep...
(cf. Frederick Starr, Melnikov: Solo architect in a mass society, 1978.)
RAMP
PAGE 19 THEATER
1934 Lubetkin's Penguin Pool at London Zoo.
1901-1990
Berthold Lubetkin
1934 "Nature tamed - not with a fist, but with a smile"
"There are two possible methods of approach to the problem of zoo design: the first, which may be called the 'naturalistic' method, is typified in the Hamburg and Paris zoos, where an attempt is made, as far as possible, to reproduce the natural habitat of each animal; the second approach, which, for want of a better word, we may call the 'geometric,' consists of designing architectural settings for the animals in such a way as to present them dramatically to the public, in an atmosphere comparable to that of a circus."
— Berthold Lubetkin, 1938.
In his design for the penguin pool of the London Zoo, the Russian-British architect Lubetkin takes it as his task not merely to care for the physical well-being of animals, but in a dramatic elaboration of the dictum form follows function "to coax them to display their most distinctive characteristics" (John Allen, 1992). Based in Marxist scientific theory, as well as his past Soviet identity and acquaintance with Tatlin and Constructivism, Lubetkin designs the space with a spiraling concrete ramp, as a simulation of the penguins' typical rocky habitat, and as a stimulation for their theatrical qualities. Lubetkin's revolutionary ideology elicits 'naturalistic' tendencies in a new proposed relationship of homo sapien and (other) animal: animals are to serve as a constant performance. (It is also revolutionary in that it is the first project by engineer Ove Arup using gunite - newly
invented spray concrete, also used by Frank Lloyd Wright in various projects including the Guggenheim.)
The Penguin Pool (but not his earlier Gorilla House and later Birdhouse) is presented at the influential MoMA show "Modern Architecture in the UK" in 1937, and becomes an instant icon of modern architecture and perhaps the most cited project in Lubetkin's oeuvre. The zoo's first penguins are made happy by the structure, as are the staff, though it remains unclear whether the penguins could actually use the ramp as a slide, since the inward inclination was probably insufficient - if they were to try they would slide straight off the ramp.
A new cast of South African penguins in the early 2000s are less content with the ramp, failing to adapt to Lubetkin's pool (and betraying a hesitation about modern architecture's evocation of a natural landscape). In 2006 they receive a new "naturalistic" habitat with a beach, a deeper pool - and no ramp, leaving the penguins standing on a beach most of the time.
Following the penguins' move, the old pool Is restored - it's on the UK heritage listj^yl stafl^emp^generaW ing only disappointment fr®n visitors, who are treated to double boredom: penguins stapling icUe on the b^ach, on the one hand, and an empty theatre, orfthe other.
PAGE 20	RAMP
PRECURSORS TO THE GUGGENHEIM
1924 Preliminary sketch by Frank Lloyd Wright for Gordon Strong, depicting the Automobile Objective Project on Sugarloaf Mountain.
1924-1959 Prelude to the Guggenheim
"... the very quality of [a spiral's] movement, rising and adapting itself to the uninterrupted movement of people sitting comfortably in their own cars in a novel circumstance with the whole landscape revolving about them, as exposed to view as though they were in an aeroplane ... The spiral is so natural and organic a form for whatever would ascend that I did not see why it should not be played upon and made equally available for descent at one and the same time."
— Frank Lloyd Wright, letter to Gordon Strong (1925).
Frank Lloyd Wright is the first modern architect with a preoccupation with the spiral ramp, and a project commissioned by Chicago businessman Gordon Strong to design a resort facility for the summit of Sugarloaf Mountain, Maryland, is the first in a series of spirals which would ultimately result in the Guggenheim museum in New York. Referred to by both client and architect as an "automobile objective," the structure is to be a commercial tourist attraction for the large motoring public, which had grown massively after the First World War. Wright's earliest sketches deal with the geometry of the spiral. Automobiles woul<3(asgen||ttie jtructurajclGakwise, be reversed by a ramp at tro top, and desciWd yu a counterclockwise ramp
underneath the ascending one. Parking areas inside the structure open off of the descending ramp.
Early plans - made two years after the first realization of the fully ramped parking structure in Detroit by Kahn -reveal Wright's problems with the design. The first is the difficulty of positioning parking spaces within the spiral, which leads Wright to experiment with many combinations of dance halls, stages, picnic galleries, etc. He would suggest that the structure be built of Luxfer Prism Glass. The project never materializes, despite a year's work on it.
The future would bring at least four other ramps by Frank Lloyd Wright before the idea for a spiral solution seems to occur to him for the Guggenheim: "The spiral is linear, but exists in three dimensions; it defines space without strictly containing it; whereas circles, squares, and triangles are stable and static, the spiral has powerful connotations of movement." (Quoted in Jack Quinan, 1993.) As with the initial car-based design for Sugarloaf, the Guggenheim offers no choice for movement besides following the ramp - creating a curatorial revolution with its unavoidable linear flow.
RAMP
PAGE 21
1947 Morris Gift Shop,
San Francisco. Not executed. A ramp connects ground floor with mezzanine.
1947 Pittsburgh Point Park: six story double helix car ramp lined with shops, for Edgar], Kaufmann (FLW's patron for the Fallingwater house), Pittsburgh. Not executed.
1952 Spiral testing in the house for FLW's son David and his wife Gladys Wright, Phoenix.
1955 Max Hoffman, owner of a laguar car dealership, leases a building at 430 Park Avenue,
New York, to house a new showroom to be designed by Wright. The plan features a rotating showroom floor and a ramp that allows the cars to be seen from above. The building, altered twice in its history despite protests from heritage movements, is torn down in 2012, to be replaced by a generic office occupied by the Boston Consulting Group.
PAGE 22	RAMP
ARTISTS AND THE GUGGENHEIM I
1943 "Among Wright's earliest schemes ... he proposed one that was a hexagonal gallery with level floors. Straight wall segments would enable the ramp's concrete to be formed and poured in discrete linear units, easing construction."
1945 After submitting the first sketch with the ramp idea, which Harry Guggenheim finds "entirely satisfactory," Wright proposes a red marble façade, which is rejected: "I don't like red as it is of all colors the most materialistic" - implying the strength of the ramp and the atrium's abstract qualities. Guggenheim proposes yellow or green, before deciding on white.
1956 Protest: 21 Artists reject the Guggenheim ramp...
1956 Artists unite against the spiral ramp
After a decade of design, and made possible by an enthusiastic contractor using Gunite, a reinforced concrete spray also used in Lubetkin's penguin pool, construction of the "bizarre" Guggenheim museum starts in May 1956.
Eight months later a group of 21 artists, including Willem de Kooning, Adolph Gottlieb, and Franz Kline, send an open letter to the Guggenheim director Dames Sweeney complaining about the ramp, demanding adaptation:
"The basic concept of curvilinear slope for presentation of painting and sculpture indicates a callous disregard for the fundamental rectilinear frame of reference necessary for the adequate visual contemplation of works of art. We strongly urge the Trustees of the Guggenheim Museum to reconsider the plans for the new building."
The Guggenheim's head of the board Harry Guggenheim replies: "We have had confidence that artists with forward-looking and imaginative concepts would welcome any new approach to the problem of display of painting by such a great creative architect as Frank Lloyd Wright." Percival Goodman, an associate professor at Columbia close to the project, goes even further: "Why did you sign such a document and what limp of the Philistines thought it up?"
In October 1959, six months after the death of Frank Lloyd Wright, the building is completed, according to the original design. Despite a successful opening, which draws a large and enthusiastic crowd, artists, critics, and architects only visit the museum later. According Emily Genauer in the New York Herald Tribune, "The architects, like museum men and artists, agreed that the new museum provides a stunning architectural experience, but insisted it would be all wrong as a museum because it fights with the art it's supposed to enhance." (October 25, 1959.) Genauer is more generous in her review: "Dubuffet has never looked as impressive as he does here ... [the museum] establishes for visitors immediately [as] they enter its door exactly the climate of excitement and exhilaration which most abstract pictures not only require for their enjoyment but which are their very essence and the qualities they primarily express. Art has never had it so good."
Originally housing the museum's permanent collection, the attention on the ramps is slowly but surely overshadowed by the awe-inspiring space it created: the atrium. A new generation of artists creating ever larger art pieces takes over the atrium, and as a final vindication of the artists' protest of 60 years ago, in a 2014 artwork by Dames Turrell, the ramp in 2014 is finally entombed by the atrium...
RAMP
PAGE 23
...while construction proceeds...
...and when complete in 1959, three of the protesting artists have work in the opening exhibition...
PAGE 24	RAMP
RAMP AS STAGE
I960 Celebration: Cardinal Manuel Cerejeira celebrating the opening of Brasilia.
2011 Inauguration: guards posting at the inauguration of President Dilma Rousseff at the interior affairs ministry.
1960-2013 Political Mise-en-Scene
Brasilia, the new capital of Brazil, designed by Lucio Costa and Oscar Niemeyer, is a modern architectural playground of ramps. The ramp is a key delivery system for the architects' fixation on fluidity and organic movement, expressed in many of the new governmental buildings. The most notable ramp, that of the National Assembly, is the icon for the seat of government. Its design is highly symbolic, since tJit®eBtrai|p©|^th^Hlilciing|is on the sides on the ground floor andfFie ramp only leads t^an otherwise empty roof.
Lacking a further theory for the use of the ramp by the architects, it seems significant that despite the most important buildings all having ramps, the foreign ministry - where it could potentially serve a further scénographie purpose -lacks one. Still today the political ramp is deeply ingrained in the life and rituals of the country - used for celebration, protest, mourning - revealing its enduring revolutionary possibilities of misé-en-scene...
RAMP
PAGE 25
2013 Protest: Niemeyer's ramp taken over as a route to the roof of the parliament building in protests against poor public services, corruption, and World Cup spending...
2013 Mourning: Oscar Niemeyer's state funeral.
1943
tim nugent, born 1923

RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE
claude parent, born 1923
1981
PAGE 30
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
1948 Breaking ground: first wheelchair ramp access to dorms at the University of Illinois, Galesburg campus. "I was personally Involved In building ramps, and did build a few myself, including the first ones."
...what explains the statistical implausibility that the world's expert on the stairs - Friedrich Mielke - and the world's two experts on the ramp -Tim Nugent and Claude Parent - are born within two years of each other, from late 1921 to early 1923, respectively in Germany, the United States and France? By the end of the Second World War, they were 24 and 22... Mielke had lost a leg at Stalingrad, and through that fact alone developed a particular sensitivity about the movements any staircase both imposes and enables; Nugent had been in the army and was intimately familiar with a generation of handicapped that were otherwise in the prime of their lives; and Parent, perhaps less marked by the war itself, was charged by the exuberance of Les Trente Glorieuses, the French economic miracle that ended with the completion of Centre Pompidou...
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 31
1974 Claude Parent speaking in a studio on 'symbolism in architecture,'in his ramped Neuilly house. "They wanted to investigate whether there was symbolism in the oblique function. In reality there is not: the oblique was born from a purely sensory perspective."
...the case of the ramp is emblematic of the many effects a war can have (very similar, for instance, to the way the more or less direct experience of Hiroshima affected the ]apanese Metabolists in two diametrically opposite ways)... realism or aspiration?... taking care - as in the case of Nugent - or could not care less - as in the case of Parent... Parent's defiant optimism about the virtues of steepness vs. Nugent's methodical denial of the metaphysics of the incline...
PAGE 32
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
This is the way it was... back in the 40s and 50s'
The following documented quotes reflect the public’s attitudes toward persons with disabilities a few decades ago:
VA medical staffer about paraplegics flying to wheelchair basketball games— “.. .{Tjhe patients may become overtired and suffer relapses. [They require] detailed attention by Medical Specialists.”
The father of attractive AB woman student dating a post-polio law student— “I suppose the University should receive credit for trying to help these poor unfortunates, but isn’t there something you can do to protect our sons and daughters from these freaks.”
A mother writing her daughter— “How in God’s name can a girl like you be interested-not to say repeiled-by a poor unfortunate....”
A man writing to a student with disability— “... the rehab... gives you an opportunity to go to school and relieve taxpayers liability for your care... but it is costing taxpayers money to give you this and we should be protected against your dating or socializing with our sons and daughters.”
The parent of a registering student who'd been neglected for
probably die in the first semester.” [Well, he didn’t die!]
most of his life— “I don’t know why we’re doing this. He’ll
Minneapolis station manager— “... We have so much electrical equipment in the station I would be afraid they would be electrocuted.”
And these comments are contained in a master’s thesis, “Employment of Wheelchair Handicapped Persons in Broadcasting,” by Tom Jones:
Dallas TV station manager— “People in wheelchairs? They should be in hospitals or nursing homes. There is no place foT such people in broadcasting.”
This Is the Way It Was. ..“-1
1940s-50s Reflections on the severe exclusion of disabled people, with a note by Nugent.
RAMP
PAGE 33
REHABILITATION
Stephan Petermann You are one of the fathers of research and policy-making aimed at improving conditions for the disabled. What triggered this interest?
Tim Nugent A multitude of things. First of all, I was myself born with a bad heart, at a time when they didn't know much about the heart.
I had a brother who was 10 years younger, a sister who was 13 years younger, and another sister who was 15 years younger, and I actually had to raise them. It was during the Depression years and my father would move about every six months because he was made executive of maybe 20 large companies. He would decide whether they would have to go bankrupt, reorganize, or sell out. I went to six or seven grade schools and two high schools.
After I was 12 years old my heart condition was over and I got a clean bill of health. It's been quite good since. But I was always interested in physical well-being and fitness because I'd had this heart problem. I got interested early in life and they stayed with me.
By the time I was in high school I was playing basketball, football, running track. Later,
I entered the service, and was a coach in the army in postwar Germany, and I also refereed in the Nuremberg stadium in the first season after the war. I coached basketball and football in the 1st Army Division.
I came out of the Second World War a disabled veteran - though not seriously disabled: my right leg was fractured. These experiences of rehabilitation also made me appreciate doing things physically.
I was pensioned out of the army because of my leg, and I lost a good share of my hearing. I have a lot of friends who are veterans who were severely injured during the war - in fact, the majority of my students were war veterans. I'm still involved with them here locally.
SP What was your area of study?
TN Originally, health and physical education, with an option for pre-medicine. We had a joint curriculum back in the late 1930s and early 40s. Then I went into the service and they sent me to Texas to become an engineer - those skills were useful along the way. Afterwards, I came back to do my Masters in Science and Education.
In 1948, I came to the University of Illinois's Galesburg campus to initiate the Rehabilitation Education Services program. The program was meant to be my doctoral dissertation, but I never finished it because the program itself involved me so much.
OPPOSITION
SP Was there hostility to the idea of admitting handicapped veterans to the campus?
TN We faced a lot of opposition. At the end of my first year in Galesburg, Governor Stevenson closed that campus. We had to move to the main campus in Urbana-Champaign, and they did not want the rehabilitation program. The dean of the college himself was the most opposed to our program. After the second year, some of the other deans began to understand what I was trying to do and were very helpful, but there were those who said, "These people do not belong here. They belong in a boarding school -like they have in Oklahoma."
PAGE 34
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
Figures 5 & 6. Much-used University building has been equipped with ramps outside and inside of entrance door, with one door shortened and re-hinged, to accommodate wheelchairs.
Figure 7. City transit buses have hydraulic lifts in front for wheelchair users.
Figure 9. (Right) Church design utilizes landscaping and proper planning to provide ground level entrance for the handicapped.
57
1950s Achievements of the ramp, collected by Nugent: ramps for university buildings, churches, and the first busses with lifts for wheelchairs.
RAMP	PAGE 35
They thought the program would turn the school Into a "wheelchair university." They thought the presence of the wheelchair program would be demoralizing, distracting, an extra liability, and an extra cost. They thought It would discredit the university. And, finally, they doubted what the students were capable of. Those were the attitudes of the time, and that's where our fight began. We started with a budget of eight or nine thousand dollars, working In tar-papered army barracks.
Actually, our students have done very well. We have 10 or more wheelchair grads who are medical doctors; we have professors, teachers, members of congress, state legislators. Three of my graduates have given our program a million dollars each.
We spent a lot of time with them. One of the reasons I developed some of the sports programs was because that way I could project the Individuals to the public. It was one thing to hear me talk about the program to professional groups. It was another thing to see the students perform, to really see the normalcy of their Interests, their activities, their abilities and such.
SP When did you build your first ramp?
TN I don't know the precise date but It was at a Catholic church In Urbana. One of my wheelchair boys was In graduate school and he was getting married and the church was Inaccessible - and he a devout Catholic. So my neighbor and I went over and built a ramp to the church. We did another for a different church In town, and occasionally for some houses, but nothing big or In public buildings. For the campus ramps, I was Involved In the design and made sure they were built properly.
Now the new buildings are built so they don't need any ramps - so I don't need to build them anymore. Even on the hllllest sites if you orientate the building properly you can have a ground-level entrance.
SP You've always had interests in both the theoretical and physical dimensions of disability access?
TN I always say that the theoretical only carries you so far. And if people don't get that, you're stuck. I remember lecturing to all the university presidents and special legislators In the state of Illinois. In each case, they left the lecture enthused, but when they got back home, to the superintendents and the trustees, they put a line back through It In the budget.
After a period of time, though, we did become very successful. The university Is now proud of the program. They have a residency hall named after me.
ARCHITECTS
SP Did you ever encounter architects during your studies?
TN I spoke to the American Institute of Architects on many occasions. I spoke to the National Association of Home Builders. I spoke, mostly, to legal groups. If there Is a legal group or building group I didn't speak to In the early years I don't know what it would be.
SP Were architects interested, or were they also opponents?
TN They were opponents, for sure. There were three groups that refused to be on my national committee when we were developing the standards: the American Medical Association, the architects, and the Builders Association. They all thought it would increase costs and keep them from designing in their own way. It took a long time to convince them. I remember meeting with them In Washington, D.C., and showing them
PAGE 36
RAMPI: TIM NUGENT
ABRIDGED TEXT OF T. J. NUGENT’S PATRIK HAGLUND LECTURE STOCKHOLM, SWEDEN - OCTOBER 18, 1961 GIVEN AT THE FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF THE
SVENSKA VANFOREVARDENS CENTRALKOMMITTE (Swedish Central Committee for Care of Cripples)
"A Very Happy Birthday, SVCK, from all of the Countries represented in this Assembly."
May I first say "Thank You" for the genuine kindness and hospitality which you have shown me and my colleagues from many nations of the world. May I also compliment you on the excellent conferences you have conducted this past week. Particular congratulations to your Kansllchef, Mr. Karl Montan. This past week haB been very interesting, very learned, very stimulating, and very busy. It has been a week of good fellowship which I shall always remember.
SVCK and ISRD have called this past week "A Conference of Experts", yet all of us have so much to learn. Perhaps you would be interested in one or two definitions of an expert. 1. An expert is any specialist more than one hundred miles from home.	I qualify there'.	2. An	expert 1b any man who	has	organised
his Ignorance. May I live tong enough to	get the job done!
In honoring	your founder, Dr.	Patrlk	Haglund, 1 have been asked to speak
on, "Society and	the Handicapped".	May I	first, briefly, treat	the	problem
philosophlcally.
Rehabilitation is a matter of perspective, or, it is all in the way you look at it. For example, your glass can be either half full or half empty.
The way we look at it will determine our effectiveness. The way the disabled look at it will determine their future.
I feel that all people have five basic social psychological needs, and I identify these as: j.. To belong (or to be properly accepted), 2. To be recognized (individually, not categorically), 3. To exercise one’s talents and capacities (in all areas of one's physical, mental, social, and vocational
1961 Nugent's lecture in Stockholm, the starting point of the worldwide spread of the wheelchair ramp. Addressing the double standards in society towards the abled and disabled, Nugent introduces the notion of "Total Rehabilitation," which aims at removing social and practical barriers for the disabled, while maintaining emphasis on self reliance: "They must be prepared to meet, not be protected from, the normal challenges of life." Describing life at the campus in Urbana, Nugent highlights that in designing new buildings the disabled "can be accommodated without loss of space or function to the general public, without distinction and without extra cost." He briefly mentions one example of a rampconstnjctioM||te campus which became so popular that 82 percent of the staff preferred it over the stepped entrance.
Jteramp was "a benefit fat a|;"migfcnt's lecture is translated and published in 35 languages and remains a source for the development of ernaiional ooling standard!for the'disabled.
RAMP	PAGE 37
that you can be disability accessible without changing your concept of design or function. Nobody would know you've done it except for the person you did it for. In the end they became my strong supporters, but they were a tough group to fight in the beginning.
SP Was there discussion on the specific recommendations you made?
TN After I sent my advice to the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) it was reviewed by hundreds of people. In the beginning, the standards only applied to public buildings; you could still do whatever you wanted at home. Specifically the Home Builders Association was afraid ramps would consume space and make buildings more expensive. And it is really the opposite. If you design a building to be accessible, it's cheaper than building steps.
SP When was the tipping point?
TN One of the tipping points - not the final one - came in 1961, when the American National Standards were approved by ANSI. That was the point at which they finally approved the concept we had developed and the specific requirements we had listed and the actual dimensions we had proposed for accessibility, and so on. The American Standard at that time was voluntary. It didn't become really and truly effective until later in the 60s when the federal government enacted the Standard into law. The first state to enact the American Standard into law was North Carolina. Illinois had its own standard prior to that. But these didn't yet have the strength of the American Standard.
SP Were you also thinking beyond the US?
TN Not initially, because I had a lot to deal with just here. But I actually lectured in the Netherlands, Sweden, England, France, Canada, China, Japan, Australia - all over. And often these meetings were international meetings, with representatives from countries all over the world. The ideas of disability access took time to spread. But I actually received the first Patrick Haglund lectureship in Sweden back in 1961 for my work on standards for the disabled and my work in foreign countries.
SP Who was the audience at these conferences? Did architects take part or were they more focused on policy makers or doctors?
TN There were engineers, architects, educators, politicians, government leaders, but the majority of those present were scholars. The issue of disability was beginning to touch different fields in different ways, so people would come, curious to see what this idiot was doing.
SP Were you ever actually called an idiot?
TN No. Some of them thought it, though.
SP Were there any architects you were personally in touch with? Or did the debate remain within the body of the governing councils of architects representing them?
TN Leon Chatelain became the chairman of the first standards committee. And I was the director of research and secretarial committee and later on I succeeded him as chairman. He was an international architect based in Washington, D.C., and he was actually the chairman of the standards committee. He worked with me on approving the standards.
He was selected by the sponsor of the research as a chairman. These days, his son is an architect too.
PAGE 38	RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
1959 Adjustable testing ramp by Nugent, known as "the ramp to nowhere" at the Urbana campus: "We built a ramp right next to the rehabilitation center, outdoors. We could adjust the height and distance, and we could change the surface."
1959 "We ran hundreds of people with various disabilities up and down that ramp. We measured their efforts in length of time. We checked the surfaces. We checked the handrails. Based on this we determined the maximum pitch that most of them could accommodate. We checked whether a ramp that
is added to a facility should have curves on the side so they wouldn't roll off...
RAMP
PAGE 39
RAMP TESTING
SP In terms of your specific relationship to architecture, can you tell us about your research and what you have discovered about ramps?
TN The ramp represented a breakthrough in our thinking in the 1950s. My ramp study was actually the Master's thesis for one of my students. We built a ramp right next to the rehabilitation building at that time, outdoors. It was a ramp that we could adjust, both in terms of length and distance, and we could also change the surface. We ran hundreds of people with various disabilities up and down that ramp. We measured their efforts in length of time. We checked the surfaces. We checked the handrails. Based on this we determined the maximum pitch that most of them could accommodate. We checked whether a ramp that is added to a facility should have curves on the side so they wouldn't roll off. We timed participants to the tenth of the second. And if they couldn't make it, we recorded the distance they were able to make on this level or that level. In addition to our own observations, we also asked them to rank the degree of difficulty as they experienced it.
It was a complete study. Then, when we incorporated our results into the American Standard, we adjusted based on the fact that our people were experienced. They were all students and had physical training in wheelchairs or in braces and crutches. There were a lot of people around the world who hadn't had that experience yet, even in the United States.
SP So you reduced the inclination slightly.
TN We did. Of course, to make a facility accessible, from the very beginning, when you are planning for construction, you have to use its systematic orientation. Because you really shouldn't need a ramp. But in buildings like auditoriums and concert or opera halls, where there are large crowds, of course you have got to make the grade just a little shallower because of the volume of people, and you have to have a place once in a while to rest, if it's a long ramp. There should also be a handrail on each side, even if it's a wide ramp for large crowds. There should be a place where a person with braces or crutches could have security if they needed it.
SP What, for you, are the most important points about accessibility ramps?
TN Firstly: try to avoid building a ramp. But, when it is not possible to avoid, then the emphasis is on proper safety guides and facilities. My research was done in 1958 and 1959. That was just a primary effort. We went way beyond that with the national groups, and of course, they then had their own reporting procedure.
SP What is the maximum pitch for the ramp, ideally?
TN It varies, from a one foot rise every eight feet to a one foot rise for 12 feet. That is the absolute maximum. But that should only be done when the site presents a difficult situation; when, for instance, you are adding a ramp to an older building or where space is limited. Otherwise it would be one-foot-in-eight, with all the other requirements I mentioned earlier: slip surface, a handrail on each side. Even if it is a wide ramp, say 10- or 15-feet wide in a public area like an assembly hall. It is best to have a ramp on each wall for those people who are operating on artificial limbs, braces, crutches, and the like.
SP The national codes of countries including China, India, the Netherlands, Germany, and some Middle Eastern countries all conform to the range of 1:12 to 1:20 in terms of rise.
PAGE 40
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
RAMPS WITH GRADIENTS - A,3.A. A-117
This study was done at the University of Illinois during the last week of May and the first week of June of 1961. This report is a supplement to an earlier study on the same subject. The subjects were tested on an adjustable experimental ramp and on three sections of sidewalks having different but uniform pitches. All had comparable surfaces. The subjects, when tested on the experimental ramp, were not allowed to use the curbs or the handrails. If at any time the subject touched one of these fixtures, the trial was concluded and the subject was later retested on a lesser gradient. The descriptions of the four areas used for testing are:
1. Experimental ramp with curbs and handrails set at a pitch of 1.4" rise per foot and having a length of 34 feet.
2.	A section of sidewalk having a pitch of 1.4" of rise per foot and having a length of 34 feet.
3.	A section of sidewalk having a pitch of 0.7" of rise per foot and having a length of 34 feet.
4.	A section of sidewalk having a pitch of 0.4" of rise per foot and having a length of 34 feet.
1961 Nugent and his team time 102 wheelchair users, students of the Rehabilitation Center at the University of Illinois, on their test ramp. "Before the subjects were tested they were instructed that this was not a race, and that they were to proceed up the ramp at their normal speeds."
RAMP
PAGE 41
104 Subjects were tested; 2 subjects were tested in their wheelchairs and by semi-ambulation.......73 wheelchair subjects
16	semi-ambulatory subjects
17	ambulatory subjects 106 total trials at 1.4"
All of the 33 semi-ambulatory and ambulatory subjects were able to ambulate an incline of 1.4" rise/foot for 34*.
9 of 73 (12.311) tested in wheelchairs could not make 34' at 1.4" rise/ft without the use of curbs or rails.
Subjects not making 1.4" rise/ft were 12, 16, 20, 43, 49, 54, 62, 66, 74. These subjects were retested on 0.7" rise/ft. 100% made 34' at this pitch.
Three subjects were retested on 0.4" rise/ft. because of some difficulty at 0.7" rise/ft. These were subjects 16, 20 and 43. They all were able to go up 0.4" without too much difficulty.
Subject No.	Distance Attained at 1.4" rise/ft.	Time Required at 0.7" rise/ft.	Time Require 0.4" rise/ft
12	9'	25 sec.	
16	1'	167 "	62 sec.
20	O'	98 "	36 "
43	1'	123 "	42 "
49	31'	25 "	
54	27'	28 "	
62	10'	49 "	
66	28'	29 "	
74	33*	17 "	
Legend for following table:
SN - Subject Number
Disability - Diagnosis of subjects handicap Class. - Classification
This was used to give a brief, general classification of subject's disability
(1)	weakness in hands, arms, shoulders, or combinations of these. This would be roughly comparable to a cervical level injury to the spine.
(2)	weakness or loss of function of back, muscles, abdominal muscles and hip stabilization muscles. This would be roughly comparable to a dorsal level injury to the spine.
(3)	individuals that have weakness in lower extremities and.the semiambulatory and ambulatory group.
ML - Method of locomotion W.C.= Wheelchair S.A.*= Semi-ambulatory A.= Ambulatory P - Pitch given in inches of rise per foot of ramp surface D - Distance traveled at designated pitch in feet T - Time to travel distance—given in seconds
Diff. - Difficulty of ascent and descent as determined by investigator
V.E.= very easy E= easy M.H.= moderately hard H.- hard V.H.= very hard
Test conclusions for ramp inclinations of 1.4 inches per foot (3.5 cm per 30 cm), and at a rise of 0.7 inches and 0.4 inches.
PAGE 42
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT J .\0co^e"
.wo 6 °''w (Evince..
.. il'.rl
AiWI
RAMP	PAGE 43
TN 1:20 would probably be for when you have a really wide ramp In a large assembly area such as a theatre or opera house.
SP Some actually refer to the American Standards as their guiding principle.
How do you feel about the fact that part of your work has influenced the world?
TN I lectured In China twice before they even thought of this. We have had many visitors from foreign countries come and study with us over the years. We've had hundreds of students from foreign countries: China, Dapan, Sweden, Germany, France, England... all over.
SPACE CONSUMPTION
SP Do you think standards should be adapted to changing societal needs?
TN I am sure this needs to be done. In fact the National Standards is reviewed every five years - a procedure that is built in the code. But I don't see a dire need right now to change anything. There are a lot of people working with the code and they can still do what they want as long as they don't violate the standards. They can make it shallower, they can make it wider. I don't think it's a problem if they get even shallower - you are just making it even easier for someone.
The problem is the space consumption - if you change the pitch of the ramp it will consume more and more space. And in some places you don't have that space. I have been to countries where the streets were still as wide as they were in 1400 and they just couldn't do what we are doing here. They had to find different ways of doing it. It's an inborn problem of the ramp - you have to have enough space to do it.
SP Do you think there are still goals to achieve for you or for the Institute?
TN I've heard people say, "You can back down, the job is done." But the job will never really be done. Because new people come onto the scene who are not familiar with the problem. I think most architecture courses across the country at universities and colleges include this concern now. But that doesn't reach a lot of the other professions. Or the building orders, for that matter.
SP You would hope that it gets disseminated even further?
TN Yes, I think we have to reinforce the requirement that as new people come on the scene they are made aware of both the need and the solution.
SP Are you proud of your accomplishments?
TN I don't really think about that. I think I had to do a job at that time and I did it.
It's all about the purpose of what you want to achieve.
In 1948, Nugent founded the National Wheelchair Basketball Association; two years later the sport caught on, and six VA hospital teams were organized throughout the United States with games hosted by the Paralyzed Veterans of America (PVA).
2014 Nugent with the San Diego Wolfpack, who came second in the men's division (after the Carolina Tarwheels) at the National Wheelchair basketball tournament, Louisville, KY. Nugent is a guest of honor. The nationals are the most important event in preparation for the Olympics - the US wins the bronze medal in 2012 - and playeres here are gearing up for Rio 2016...
PAGE 44
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
10
Recommended Standard for Incline of Ramp into New Building
4..S
Recoranended Maximum Incline for a Ramp within or added to an Existing Structure with Limited Space.
\
CONVERSION TABLE FOR CONVERTING FITCHES IN INCHES OF RISE PER FOOT TO READINGS IN DEGREES OR PERCENT
.INCHES	DECREES	PERCENT	INCHES	DEGREES	PERCENT
0.1"	30	.837.	2.1"	10	1 7.507.
0.2"	1	1.67%	2.2”	10 30	r;.33%
0.3”	1 30	2.507.	2 3 ’'	11	19.177.
0.4"	1 50	3.337.	.".4"	11 30	20.007,
0.5"	2 20	4.1 7?.	7.5"	12	20.83%
0.6”	2 50	5.007.	2.6”	12 30	21.67%
0.7"	3 20	5.33%	2. 7"	13	22.50%
0.8"	3 50	6.677.	2.9”	13 30	23.337.
0.9"	4 20	7.507.	.7.9"	14	24.17%
1.0"	A 50	8.33%	3.0"	1 '* 30	25.00%
1.1"	5 20	9,1 77q	3.1"	15	25.«3%
1.2"	5 40	10.00%	3.2"	15 30	26.677.
1.3 '	6 10	10.83%	3.3"	16	27.50%
1.4"	6 40	11.68%	3.4"	16 30	28.337.
1.5"	7 10	I 2.507.	3.5'	17	29.17%
1.6"	7 40	13.33%	3.6"	17 30	30.00%
1.7"	8 10	14.17%	3.7"	18	30.H3%
1.8"	8 40	15.007.	3.8"	¡8 30	31.67%
1.9"	9 10	15,53%	3.9"	19	32.50%
2.0"	9 40	16.6 7%	4.0"	19 30	33.33%
See following pages for ramp construction detail;.
1961 Draft of Nugent's study "Making Buildings and Facilities Accessible and Functional to the Physically Handicapped." The recommendation that will be incorporated into the American Standard is an inclination of 1:10, and a maximum of 1:6.5.
Nugent's ultimate recommendation
RAMP
PAGE 45
1960 Unpublished ramp designs by Nugent for existing structures.
PAGE 46
RAMPI: TIM NUGENT
RECESS ENTRANCE DOOR
2005 INDIA National Building Code of India: a ramp should not have a slope greater than 1 in 20 or maximum of 1 in 12 for short distances up to 9000 mm.
OcHoeHbie napaMempbi nandycoe
>300
2010 GERMANY Deutsches Institut fuer Normung has an online tool to calculate specific situations based on ramps with a maximum grade of 1:16.7.
405.2 Slope. Ramp runs shall have a running slope not steeper than 1:12.
EXCEPTION: In existing sites, buildings, and facilities, ramps shall be permitted to have running slopes steeper than 1:12 complying \ 405.2 where such slopes are necessary due to space limitations.
Table 40S.2 Maximum Ramp Slope and Rise for Existing Sites. Buildings, and Facilities
Slope1	Maximum Rise
Steeper than 1:10 but not steeper than 1:8	3 inches (75 mm)
Steeper than 1:12 but not steeper than 1:10	6 inches (150 mm)
1 A slope steeper than 1:8 is prohibited.	
2012 RUSSIA SP 59.13330.2012 "Availability of buildings and facilities for people with limited mobility": for ramps of heights between 20 and 80 cm: 1:20 (5 percent); for ramps of heights lower than 20 cm: 1:10 (10 percent). Ramps with height of more than 3 m should be replaced by elevators, lifting platforms, etc.
2010 US ADA Standards for Accessible Design: Ramp runs shall have a running slope not steeper than 1:12 with some height restrictions.
SECTION 1010 RAMPS
1010.1 Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to ramps used as a component of a means of egress.
Exceptions:
1.	Other than ramps that are part of the accessible routes providing access in accordance with Sections 1108.2 through 1108.2.4 and 1108.2.6, ramped aisles within assembly rooms or spaces shall conform with the provisions in Section 1028.11.
2.	Curb ramps shall comply with Abu Dhabi/IC'C A117.1.
3.	Vehicle ramps in parking garages for pedestrian exit access shall not be required to comply with Sections 1010.3 through 1010.9 when they' are not an accessible route serving accessible parking spaces, other required accessible elements or part of an accessible means of egress.
1010.2 Slope. Ramps used as part of a means of egress shall have a running slope not steeper than one unit vertical in 12 units horizontal (8-percent slope). The slope of other pedestrian
2011 INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS ASSOCIATION ISO Standards provide for a 1:12 (210 mm rise) and max 1:20 (500 mm rise)
2013	UNITED ARAB EMIRATES Abu Dhabi International building code requires a maximum 1:12 ramp without height restrictions.
UNIVERSALLY ADOPTED
The global alignment of building codes conquers Babel: their language and demands for the ramp are now almost identical, with a range of 1:12 to 1:20, and the obligation of handrails and landings. Universal access has become a universal code.
RAMP
PAGE 47
2014 FRANCE Versailles
2014 TURKEY Hagia Sophia
2014 INDIA Taj Mahal	2014 ITALY Doge's Palace
2014 UNITED KINGDOM London	2014 ITALY Saint Mark's Basilica
2014 BELGIUM
2014 RUSSIA	2014 GREECE
WORLD OF ACCESS RAMPS
More and more, the discriminatory nature of the past is revealed by the addition of the accessibility ramp. From Versailles, Hagia Sophia, the Vatican, the Taj Mahal, Doges Palace, St. Peter's Basilica, St. Mark's Basilica to the average office building in the City of London, history must be adapted in order to be accessed...
2014 ITALY Vatican Museum
2014 VATICAN St. Peter's Basilica
PAGE 48
RAMP I: TIM NUGENT
2014 Kafka-esque wheelchair ramp West Dunbartonshire, Scotland
With a disabled daughter and three flights of stairs leading up to her front door, Clare Lally was desperate for easier access to her home. The new zigzagging 10-level accessibility ramp, installed by local authorities at a cost of £40,000, obliterates her front lawn and becomes the subject of widespread mockery (though the local skateboarders enjoy it), taking the worst bureaucratic excesses of the ramp to an absurd climax...
RAMP
PAGE 49
Rampant lunacy: Council pays £40,000 to fit 10-level, 60m eyesore at home of disabled girl who needed a simple ramp
"Rather than a simple ramp, her two-year campaign has resulted in the creation of this metal monstrosity ... Miss Lally, who lives with Katie's father Derek Steel, 37, said: There must have been a better solution. We weren't fighting for a massive steel ramp - we just wanted to improve Katie's quality of life. The council could have gone about the whole project in a more sensible way. They said this was the only option - to fit something into the garden - because of building regulations.'
Anything is better than the arduous climb up the stairs, she explained - but the new ramp takes up so much space that she cannot see the bottom of it from the front window of her £95,000 house, which is council-owned.
'It is a lot easier, but I don't believe that the council weren't able to do something else. What they have built is something which I would never have expected a local council to do.
'We have to open our blinds and look at it every day.'
Residents expressed their disbelief at the council's actions. One older woman, who has lived in the area since 1971, said the ramp was an 'eyesore'.
She added: 'When the council men came round, I asked if I could lodge an objection but I was told I couldn't. I was told it was going ahead.
'It's completely ruined the look of the area.'

A West Dunbartonshire 1 that they would be able ■
t

— Larisa Brown, 77
incil spokesman said the family had indicated in the past ope with the steps at the property.
He added: This proved not to be the case. As they were existing tenants, it was the council's duty to make the necessary adaptations.
'This led to the installation >f the wheelchair ramp, as requested by the family."
'ail (February 14, 2014).
2014 Ramp code followed to the letter. '"You want a ramp, I'll give you a ramp,' seems to be the message from West Dunbartonshire council." (Frances Ryan, Guardian, February 14, 2014.)
PAGE 50
RAMP
1963 Maison Drusch, the first “topled" design, photographed by philosopher Paul Virilio, who is highly impressed and wants to collaborate with Parent.
1963 Maison Bordeaux le Pecq, in Bois le Roy, a village in Normandy. Its sloping pagoda-like roof Is a prelude to Parent's "fonction oblique" theory, which for the moment still concentrated on the roof...
TIPPING	RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAC
Rem Koolhaas We want to talk with you about the condition you have called "oblique" because it's not about a wall, a floor, or a ceiling, it is in between all the elements. That's why I wanted to reconstruct your first instinct, the first time the idea came to you. I wonder what led you to this invention, that was for you universal, representing the future, and that is now obviously out of date?
Claude Parent The first impulse was not towards the oblique itself, but rather involved the idea of pivoting elements. I had an obsession with pivoting the otherwise horizontal cube. So when I had a client who was a little bit...
RK Curious? Experimental?
CP It was Mr. Drusch, a young engineer who lived with his family in an ordinary brick house with a tiled roof in Le Chenet, a small Parisian suburb for middle managers.
In the early 1960s Mr. Drusch wanted a new house, so he contacted two or three local architects from Versailles, but all their sketches were inspired by Versailles and were very rural. But when his consultant Mr. Lepoix saw this, he said: "You cannot do that, you have to organize a competition." I was one of three architects he recommended - he had gotten my name from magazines.
I won the competition with a project that was even cheekier than the one we finally built. The site was very deep, fringed with forest at the back and the village road at the front.
As I didn't want to build a house with a small facade like all the other ones around, I proposed a project raised entirely on columns. In the end, Mr. Drusch didn't want that project. He told me, "I understand your argument - but do something else."
We worked on it for one year. The situation became quite desperate, so he suggested a change of method. He said: "I have been bothering you about the outside of the house because I want to know how it is supported, and my wife has been bothering you with the inside. So let's switch roles. From now on you will discuss the interior with me - the kitchen and the bedrooms, which I don't care about - and you will discuss the outside with my wife, who doesn't understand anything about it. We did this, and it worked.
RK Role reversal - destabilizing the relationship.
CP In order to refuse the idea of the roof - or at least to transform the roof into something more than just the headdress of a rectangular ground - I thought I had to tip it over. It would be a cube upside down. Once Mr. Drusch had accepted this principle, we worked it out and we achieved it.
ANNOYINGLY CATHOLIC VIRILIO / LOURDES!
RK How did the process of tipping proceed from there?
CP Originally Paul Virilio was not interested in working with architects. But one of our friends, a painter called Michel Carrade, introduced him to me. We visited the Drusch house and the Villa Bordeaux-Le Pecq, which I had just built, and he was so amazed that he wanted to work with me.
Virilio was telling me about his passion for bunkers. He had done many studies of bunkers and he told me that we had to do bunkers.
For Virilio, "the bunker" meant a grotto, in fact, a specific grotto: Lourdes! Saint Bernadette was beatified after her visions in the grotto at Lourdes, and moved to Nevers
PAGE 52
RAMP
1958 Virilio's photo of a toppled bunker, shown with his text on "Bunker Archeology," republished In Architecture Principe No. 7: "Phenomena of a dramatic moment in contemporary history, ten thousand monuments disappear. Stripped of their functions, removed from topical contexts, these works speak of an unknown meaning. With an archeological approach, I sought in this underground universe one of the great secrets of our time.... The geometry is no longer affirmative, but eroded, worn. The angle is no longer correct, but depressed, resisting apprehension; the mass is no longer anchored in the ground, but centered on itself, Independent, capable of movement and articulation... Banal remnants, these works have taken on the basic consistency of slopes and are protected only because they are so difficult to demolish. Astounding examples of the blindness of an epoch to itself, these primitive works announce a new architecture founded no longer on the physical proportions of man but on his psychic faculties, an urbanism in which, the elementary analysis of social reality finally overcome, habitat can finally unite with the secret possibilities of individuals."
Virilio on Lourdes and the Grotto:
"I went to Lourdes [that] year for the first time, and I was knocked out. It was fabulous! Fabulous! It's the first time I've ever been to Massabielle, the grotto. Do you know what that means, Massabielle? It's Basque, the local patois for 'old rock,' where Bernadette comes from. I went on a pilgrimage with the Bishop of La Rochelle. He was going, and a few of us decided we'd go with him. Massabielle.
I went at night and it was hot, too, over 40 degrees. When I got there and I saw the grotto - I can't tell you! My heart stopped, I knew I was getting near Massabielle. I was stumbling along and gradually I could make out the path Bernadette took to go to the grotto. I kept going, and in the distance, I saw a sort of light coming from the grotto. I can't tell you. It was like love at first sight. I said to my wife, this is where we were born, where we come from."
— Paul Virilio on the grotto in an interview with Dulie Rose,
Log 2, Spring 2004.
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 53
1975 Virilio's Bunker Archeology, based on more than 10 years of research.
afterwards to take shelter from her fame, and since there was no Bernadette church already in Lourdes, she gave her name to our Nevers church. So when he talks about the origins of the oblique, Virilio always refers to this grotto. But I don't agree. I know the Lourdes grotto because I worked on its centenary anniversary project in Lourdes.
RK You were the architect who staged the centenary?
CPI was one of seven architects who worked on it. Pierre Vago, the editor-in-chief at L‘Architecture d'Aujourd'hui at the time, was in charge of the project. He was close to the priests. I was working at the magazine in the late 50s and he liked me. For Lourdes he had distributed all the big projects to others and had only the grotto to offer me. He was not taking many risks! There wasn't much I could do, so I played the role of cleaning agent. The grotto was full of ex-votos everywhere... I removed everything, and it's clean now. Only the rocks are left. I also had to design the toilets, 50 for women and 50 for men.
PEBBLE / GROTTO
RK How did this experience in Lourdes prepare you for oblique architecture?
CP Virilio is very Catholic, which is quite annoying, but because of his personal connections within the church he was able to learn that two churches were supposed to be built in Nevers and he managed to have his name on the list of designers being considered. Three competitors were asked to design two buildings. Virilio and I decided to do only one... One idea at a time [laughs],
I immediately drew the plan. For years I had certain ideas about church spaces. I've always thought that churches were in general too narrow, and I find that intimidating.
I was always late when I used to go to church. The front benches were almost empty but I never dared to interrupt the Mass to sit there. As a consequence, people like me used to stand outside instead of going in, which is silly. So I gave this church a consistent width.
RK How did you solve this? Could you also enter by the side?
CP We got lucky because the organizers decided suddenly to raise the church, but our project already had a form on the ground. So we decided to keep the floor close to the ground by raising the church on the left and right, creating a slope. And we added a staircase, right in the middle. We sketched everything together and a few days later I had finished the section. I was impressed by the beauty of the ramp in the Nevers church, which surprised Virilio. He told me: "But you've already made ramps." I told him that previously I had created ramps because I wasn't allowed to do stairs. But the church in Nevers was different. I was drawing everything myself because Virilio didn't want my staff to do it...
I personally never considered the Nevers church a grotto. I call it "le caillou gris"
[the grey pebble] to avoid the term. But for Virilio this project was a grotto, as well as a bunker. This created all our misfortune. For Virilio, architecturally speaking, nothing is more beautiful than the bunker. I used to tell him: "Quit it with your bunkers, the war has ended!" A bunker is not inhabitable, and in the Nevers project everything is about inhabiting the space. All visitors to the church go through a similar experience: at first they are confronted with the outwardly heavy and hard appearance, and then they are surprised when they get inside...
“ RK They are moved.
CP Yes, and I wrote about this effect in order to explain my understanding and differentiate my approach from Virilio's. In my perception there is something soft about
PAGE 54
RAMP
1958 Parent's "cleaning" plan, adding a ramp on both sides, a snaking concrete bench and a simple square platform for the altar...

1948 Pre-Parent cluttering of religious paraphernalia at the Lourdes grotto..
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 55
1958 Parent's Lourdes Grotto, completed: "I played the role of cleaning agent. The grotto was full of ex-votos everywhere... I removed everything, and it's clean now. Only the rocks are left."
PAGE 56
RAMP
1968 "When you walk into the church, it is clear that everything Is transformed. We do not have the same relationship to the ground, the equilibrium Is different. We believed that we were separating ourselves from the world of architecture."
1964 Sainte Bernadette du Banlay, Nevers, perspective drawing by Michel Carrade: ramping also a principle for the envelope of the building...
1968, Sainte Bernadette completed: "I personally never considered the church a grotto. I call it "le caillou gris" [the grey pebble] to avoid the term. But for Virilio this project was a grotto, as well as a bunker. This created all our misfortune."
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 57
the church. The preachers keep on telling me how surprising it is, because at first it seems uninhabitable - but once they are inside, they feel the peace.
RK But you do admit making use of the bunker's austerity?
CPI remain convinced that there are forms of bunkers that are magnificent, yes.
RK And the staircase doesn't interfere with the idea. Do you know some architects of bunkers?
CP No, but Virilio believes he knew some. He wrote two books on the subject. There must have been bunker architects because even the Loos house was an imitation of a bunker made by an architect.
After this experience Virilio proposed that I focus only on the oblique plane. But honestly,
I was worried. I told him, "You know, I don't have many customers, and they already don't really like what I'm doing. They will take me for a fool." He told me to sleep on it, and the next day I told him, let's do it! Let's make oblique architecture! Nothing more, nothing less! It was a good partnership, because each of us brought something. His idea of heaviness met my idea of ascent.
RISKING IT ALL
RK What was the response?
2014 Parent sketches the section and the lifting of the church from the ground...

CP it worked very well - except that nobody wanted this church, [laughs] I could feel it... Virilio was horrid to the construction manager. One day the manager told me: "If you keep coming up with this non-architect who keeps on insulting me, I won't do the church!" So throughout the construction process, I did two site visits per day: one in the morning with Virilio, because then the site was empty and quiet. And then a second one later with the construction manager. Finally we finished it in 1966, and the church was consecrated, and Virilio was invited to the opening.
RK Do you have the feeling that you had reinvented the ground or the wall?
Or the idea of continuity between them?
CP In the church, everything was mixed and that's why we liked it so much. I did a supermarket in Sens that at a certain point people wanted to demolish. But the preservation movement prevented them from destroying it by placing it on the list of historical monuments. That was a while ago, but I still cannot believe it! This - a historical monument! It has been criticized so much by everyone, by the entire press! [laughter] Now the Nevers Church has been declared a historic monument as well.
RK The house in I did in Bordeaux cannot be touched either. It's very strange.
CP Ah! Shake my hand!
ADHESION LIMIT
RK Do you consider the oblique function to be an invention, something new in architecture?
CP When you walk into the church, it is clear that everything is transformed. We do not have the same relationship to the ground, the equilibrium is different. But we were standing apart from the world of architecture.
1963 Church of Sainte Bernadette du Banlay, Nevers.
"The organizers decided suddenly to raise the church, but our project already had a form on the ground. So we decided to keep the floor close to the ground by raising the church on the left and right, creating a slope."
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 59
VERTICAL.
PAGE 60
RAMP
BOMAlHE . BE lAOMERENCE ' HOMAINIf . ARTIEICIEULE.
liMtre 6adherence humajhe.
¡Hr6R.yENrioN D AtCROCHA&E (.RELIEF, UMlTt M>M«fl.E«CE V£HICWLE> SPICiAUX^J^1***
DE 45&.’$Q°/onHTES POOR VEHICULES
AUTOMOBILES USUELS
,sN^n
, PENTE EGUSE DE NEVERS. 16
3$a RENTE NON VISIBLE <6%
PC 0^3 °/a
Horizohtale.
SEHSIBILITE NULtG
3uly 1966 Adherence diagram by Parent, from Architecture Principe, S5: Circulation Habitable. Parent: "I think that I made a mistake.. 30 percent inclination is fine but not 50 percent! We were ... attacked by people who noticed the disequilibrium. They were saying, 'People won't be able to walk there, they're going to fall.'"
January 2014 Parent shows the section sketch for the Tate Liverpool:
"Blue lines are pretty steep. Red is almost parallel to the floor; it is not dangerous. Because one of the conditions of the project was that the space be accessible to the disabled. So we made the deal that some ramps would be accessible and others not. It complicates the matter a bit, but that's exciting to me."
RK Apart? So you left architecture?
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
un sol à travailler: l'oblique une gymnastique à vivre :
LINCLIPAN
méthode nicole parent
1972 L'lnclipan: a gymnastics program based on the oblique developed by Nicole Parent, Claude's sister, complementing classes she taught advocating gymnastics performances and training on the ramp.
CP Yes, everyone was laughing at us. Do you know Paul Maymont? This architect who did 'Paris under the Seine' was a very avant-garde architect of his time, but he was not a very good architect. He was a thinker while we were instead very "architect." We were including the tactile sensation, the sensation of the feet.
RK I would like to show you a diagram which seems to me extremely important.
It shows the maximum of different inclinations. Do you remember it?
CP Yes, I drew this diagram. And I think that I made a mistake... 30 percent inclination is fine but not 50 percent!
RK But you wrote "adhesion limit," which I find fantastic, because you don't raise the question, "Can we live or walk there?" You just talk about "adhesion."
CP That's because we were mainly attacked by people who noticed the disequilibrium. They were saying, "People won't be able to walk there, they're going to fall."
RK Were you really convinced that the oblique condition would come to be, or was is this an exaggeration on your part?
CP Once I invented a tool, a large inclined board. My collaborators and I used it to technically calculate good and bad angles, to test maximum inclinations. We kept this board for years. Through research we discovered that, in addition to the impact of the slope, materials and adhesion were essential. The foot is the most important element; the eye is nothing compared to it. At my house in Neuilly, the slopes were very steep, they could reach 30 percent, and they were covered with carpet. I also thought of using adhesive material such as rubber, and even proposed that people use special shoes.
RK You first explored this "adhesion limit" in a church, then in a house, and then also in your urban visions. So from the first attempts in Nevers to the large urban applications you explained in 1966 in Architecture Principe, up until the present... does this represent a trajectory from optimism to skepticism to the tragic condition of the legally forbidden?
CP Terrible, isn't it? But I still try. I'm currently designing a project for the Tate museum in Liverpool, in a building by Pames] Stirling. They remembered what I did in 1970 in Venice so they asked me to design ramps for an exhibition of paintings and sculptures. Here's the plan: I work with color pencils and layers, like Le Corbusier, since I cannot use a computer. You have to complicate things or there is no fun.
RK What's the meaning of blue and red? Is there a code?
CP Blue lines are pretty steep. Red is almost parallel to the floor; it is not dangerous. Because one of the conditions of the project was that the space be accessible to the disabled. So we made the deal that some ramps would be accessible and others not.
It complicates the matter a bit, but that's exciting to me.
RK Do you remember the 'instabilisateur pendulaire' project [Pendulum De-stabilizer] you did with Virilio?
CP It was in 68, just when May 68 began. We wanted to make an experimental house made of two dwellings suspended 10 meters above ground, where I would have lived with Virilio. It is actually two houses because I didn't really want to live with Virilio.
PAGE 62
RAMP
1968 Declaring "The oblique function is the urban revolution," Parent and Virilio propose the Instabilisateur Pendulaire, Nanterre.
1970 Ah oblique test: with a group of artists, Parent designs the French Pavilion at the Venice Art Biennale, an interior landscape devoted to the oblique.
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 63
There was just a junction point where we could meet and discuss.
People would have fed us via strings.
RK Like in Mount Athos.
CP We would have been enclosed inside, seeing no one else for 15 days.
But then May 68 started in the university and it was all cancelled.
THE LIVING SLOPE OF NEUILLY
RK Can you tell us about the Neuilly house?
CP Virilio found the ramps so pleasant that he proposed that I try them in houses as well. And so that's what we did. In the Neuilly house we built two slopes: one for living and one for dining. A glass wall separates the two types of spaces. On the living side, you can adapt your position to the slope and rest in a large variety of ways.
RK The table is made for the slope, with two planes, one above the other.
Did this arrangement make for a more intense form of interaction?
CP Some people didn't like it because there was a dominant and a dominated situation. Of course, I played with that. I used to put my wife Naad and the important guests at the top. But once, the art critic [Gerald] Gassiot-Talabot came and I put him at the bottom part, which he really hated. He felt bad because he was lowest. Isn't that terrible! [laughing] We never imagined that the space could have such an effect on men.
At the time I wanted all the floors to be different from each other. The slope was completely covered with black carpet. In some areas there was foam underneath, so it felt like a cushion... without any sort of signal [laughs]. Suddenly people would feel it, and be completely surprised - but most didn't like this unexpected feeling. We called this phenomenon "the culture of tactility." But nobody was ever interested in it.
RK Is there a relationship between the slope and gender? In the sense that some slopes are better for women and others for men for example?
CP It is best for resting. On the living side, some slopes were a little less inclined, designed for resting. On the dining side, people would sit on more inclined slopes on each side of the double-level table. We could also add embedded elements in order to create horizontal planes. I was drawing a new slope for the house every day.
RK How did you stop?
CP Simply because I had to finish the house.
RK And the famous photos of people in the house?
CP It was a group of students who had chosen me to lead a studio on symbolism in architecture. They wanted to investigate whether there was symbolism in the oblique function. In reality there is not: the oblique was born from a purely sensory perspective.
RK Intuitive?
1968 Left and above: Instabilisateur Pendulaire, Nanterre; a proposal for two ramped houses elevated 10 meters In the air. Parent would live in one house, Virilio in the other.
CP Yes, intuitive. When you're standing on a flat plane, nothing happens. There is no brain activity. On the oblique, you have feelings; you feel a force when climbing and euphoria during the descent. This is the basis. The oblique creat£g£^ape$|j}ai displease peogfe because they don't like to feel off balance.
PAGE 64
RAMP
1973 Neuilly ramp: Parent decides to experiment with the oblique by adding ramps to one floor of his own house. In the elongated space of 14 x 5 meters, he creates two oblique areas with a living (left) and dining side (right).
1973 Sketch of the living room areas: "On the living side some slopes were a little less inclined, designed for resting. On the dining side, people would sit on more inclined slopes on each side of the double-level table. We could also add embedded elements in order to create horizontal planes. I was drawing a new slope for the house every day."
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 65
1952 The Neuilly house from the outside does not reveal the oblique on the inside...
I
1973 Sketch of the oblique dining area: "Some people didn't like it because there was a dominant and a dominated situation. Of course, I played with that. I used to put my wife Naad and the important guests at the top. But once, the art critic [Gerald] Gassiot-Talabot came and I put him at the bottom part, which he really hated. He felt bad because he was lowest. Isn't that terrible! [laughing] We never imagined that the space could have such an effect on men."
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 67
PAGE 68	RAMP
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 69
1974 A studio on 'symbolism in architecture,' initiated by a small group of students from Versailles including Serge Colas, Anne Fourcade and Claude Fort, takes place under Parent's mentorship. Together with his wife Naad (in orange). Parent (grey suit, yellow shirt) invites the students for a visit to the Neuilly house (finished in 1973) to show the possibilities of the oblique. "They wanted to investigate whether there was symbolism in the oblique function. In reality there is not: the oblique was born from a purely sensory perspective."
1999 "Living the oblique is not an adventure or experience, I never had the feeling oU^mg a guinea pig. It is not about a concept. Living oblique is one of the most natural and intelligent ways of living. One of the most dynamic, mobile, progressive, renewable, interactive, natural ancfflealthyjlt you complicit in the architecture in which you live, it makes you rethink your way of life, developing your sensitivity to space and people, and finally makes you keep in shape." Chloe B^^it, daughter, in Privileged.
PAGE 70
RAMP
1992 Théâtre Silvia-Monfort: "The firemen twice refused to give me the construction permit. I had to draw in bleachers that are a lot more dangerous than ramps..."
1991 Section of Théâtre Silvia Monfort, showing the initial ramp as a cladding structure ramping the pyramid.
1988 Early sketches for the Théâtre Silvia Monfort. While using the existing access ramp of the former abattoirs, the sketches show additional ramps spiraling around the pyramid...
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
PAGE 71
The children loved it. After school, my daughter's friends were asking her to come and play in our house. And they were having a good time; they were playing marbles on the slopes. Recently I met one of these kids, who has become a writer now, and he told me: "We were playing on the oblique function!" Apparently at the time his father, really upset about how interested he was, was warning him very seriously, "This kind of thing has no future." [laughs]
ACQUA ALTA
RK If this type of experience is not based on the grotto, is there another experience, a prototype, a flash point, that led you to the discovery of the slope?
CP Once, I went to Venice and saw the "acqua alta." I was in the Piazza San Marco and I said to my wife, "Look what's happening!" The water was coming out of the ground very quickly through small holes. We had to escape. It was a discovery. I said to myself, what a wonderful phenomenon, this change of condition from the ground... when suddenly you feel something that you are not able to see.
We knew we would be rejected by everyone. Today firemen are only further reducing the ramps. For the Silvia Monfort theater, they twice refused to give me the construction permit. I had to draw in bleachers, which are in fact a lot more dangerous than ramps...
PAGE 72
RAMP
2014 Parent's new home, highly choreographed with a the black bath tub In the center of the office, surrounded by sculptures.
It's a rare - and delightful - interruption of the typical architect's routine to suddenly be "'taught' a lesson by an older colleague.
I have spent unforgettable moments in the subservient position of a pupil with architectural inventors who, with remarkable freshness, rehearsed their founding principles as if they had discovered them the same morning...
My two 'ramp' lessons from Claude Parent were perhaps the most exceptional: here was a 90-year-old militant enemy of the horizontal plane sharing the essence of his lifelong campaign with a vivid energy that made you want to urgently enlist in his war on flatness.
I felt his inventory of habitable steepness where 50% represented the limite d'adhérence humaine was an implied rebuke of my own timidity. — RK, March 2, 2016
2014 CP I d'-i a supermarket in Sens that at a certain point people wanted to demolish. But the preservation movement prevented them from destroying it by placing it on the list of historical monuments. That was a while ago, but I still cannot beliasfe it! This - an historical monument! It has been criticized so much by everyone, by the entire press! [laughter] Now the Nevers Church has been declared an historic monument as well.
RK The house I did in Bordeaux cannot be touched either. It's very strange.
CP Ah! Shake my hand!
RAMP II: CLAUDE PARENT
2014 Model of the oblique Installation for Tate Liverpool.
"When you're standing on a flat plane, nothing happens. There is no brain activity. On the oblique, you have feelings; you feel a force when climbing and euphoria during the descent. This is the basis. The oblique creates shapes that displease people because they don't like to feel off balance."
PAGE 74
RAMP
GROUPE ARCHITECTURE PRINCIPE ARCHITECTURE ET URBANISME
214 AVENUE DU MAINE - PARIS 14 TÉL. 273 16-85 PRÉSIDENT: PAUL VIRILIO
CLAUDE PARENT / PAUL VIRILIO
ARTS PLASTIQUES
MICHEL CARRADE/ MORICE LIPSI
1966 The ten publications of Architecture Principe, by Parent and Virilio, published the same year as tjjyfl^gflfiggHBgfciperstudio, serve as manifesto for the duo's work on the ecies the wall
its entirety with tr*islat^|J texts, proph-
architecture
principe
Civilisation
II n’y a pas d’architecture civile. C I V ilisation
Seules. ¡'architecture reliaieuse et I'arcmtec-	......
tyre I here is no civil architecture.
deveOnly religious and defensive architecture have j^>exreally been practiced, developed, and perhaps cit^fbrought to an end.
^j^The extraordinary vertical rise of our cities disappeared for years the quintessence of civil l^a ^engineering, but it is only the cast-off of these ¡HUS|first two modes. The mass and the habitable site£area ^ave deluded us, but henceforth, the la ^clogging of urban sites must appear for what ^ouit is: the unadvanced fixation of the nomad, nos are I°d9ecl 'n the mineralization of velum, cristour apartments are but the crystallization of the migrants' tent. We live in the extrapolation nitio°^ sPat‘al definitions, henceforth meaningless et ^and deprived of substance.
£on,How then, with circulation getting dense to the villePoint °f blocking the processes of our cities, cesEcan we not understand the future characteristic caraof C'VH architecture not as "envelope" but as « |-e"support"?
Qe The surface that is actually useful is social; one facesh°uld refer here to "civil surface." The economy ^'£cof the urban ground cannot justify the vertical fjfje|order; obscure motivations still inform this type ¡nsp°f construction: the vertical partitioning of our c|0jSfaijades, our apartments being but the vestige appiof a mythology in which the sacred hearth linked mytlto domination by erection depicted an idea of natna hierarchy now obsolete, hierThis whole mesh of reasons and occult powers Tou'has completely blocked the apprehension of civil voirspace. It was not until the birth of a powerful henicommunitarian sentiment born in the industrial
3	naissance d’un puis-
......~,iautaire, ne des desor-
crises of the 19th century that one could appertain that displacement is the primary phenomenon of social mass and that urban structures should be designed not only with respect to spatial distribution but above all to encourage communication.
But this elementary observation must be taken a step further: what can be apprehended today of urban planning is a reality of habitat as well. Our aging space has reached an absurd threshold; what began with vertical partitioning, continued with the stairway, and was finished off with the elevator. Inside our apartment buildings we no longer "circulate," we just move, perhaps in expectation of being able only to "vibrate." The hallways and landings of our habitations are nothing but the old-fashioned vestiges of a space that has become imaginary.
The distribution of social space can no longer be based on the fact of vertical inaccessibility; we must undertake the "agrarian reform" of urban regions by designing a new kind of spatial appropriation, based essentially on the accomplishment of the direct communication of useful surfaces through obliqueness. The distinction of appurtenances would then be realized without the addition of foreign bodies to the dynamic of content.
A social geometry is becoming obsolete.
Beyond political theories and legislation, the end of enclosures and the disappearance of the stairway are the obligatory moment of "civilization."
Paul VIRILIO.
RAMP
PAGE 75

PAGE 76
RAMP
drives
The oblique function allows for travel. Architecture becomes the support of displacement; movement is freed from the constraint and precision of the distance traveled, and the choice of the itinerary is left open. No longer is there canalization or constraint, but distance crossed and conquered; the human fluid can pulse at its own rhythm, upheld by the spatial structure, yet independent of the formal organization of the support. His or her drives belong to the everyday or to the seasons, covering or uncovering as they will the architecture. Petrified desert, or crown submerging and concealing, solitary stroll in anecdotal laces, clusters
retained, free-falling descents in groups, measured fatigue in ascents, all the faces of human isolation and community appear - even the parades no longer find their route preset. An incessant flow coming up against the architecture in its unpredictable but sustained ebb, perhaps out in search of a new discipline.
Claude PARENT
DESTRUCTIOI
The relations of mankind and architecture are situated simultaneously on two planes: the exaltation of autonomy and the consideration of mass.
In the response of the individual as in the progressive consciousness of mass, architecture spontaneously preceded the thought of mankind.
But its rhythm is so slow with respect to man's that its advance is quickly swallowed up.
Since the initial hypothesis, spanning progressive consciousness, experimentation, implementation, all the way to generalization, the life of architecture takes and will always take several generations.
Mankind's rhythm and architecture's do not chime. There is a phenomenon of fusion and assimilation only in the brief moment of contact between these two existences: the instant of civilization.
Afterwards comes the era of vulgarization, then one of dephasing, only to reach the critical stage of discrepancy when mankind and architecture are in constant conflict.
The voluntary breaks and ruptures of the architectural rhythm, although they sometimes allow the point of saturation and dissatisfaction to be delayed, only end up in movements of withdrawal and inefficient retreats.
Thus in our time, any attempt to interrupt the slow movement of architecture, to artificially adapt it to the acceleration of mankind's rhythm through the introduction of notions of great speed of evolution, mobility, adaptability and flexibility,
are doomed to failure.
All theories of architecture's instantaneous self-destruction
are false.
On the contrary, consciousness must be awakened to the absolute, ineluctable necessity of slowing down the rhythm
RAMP
PAGE 77
Habitable spaces, bridges spanning over the outline of one of the diagonals of direct circulation of the city.
of architecture to keep it from following the acceleration of human mutation, to force it to regain momentum in a long period of maturation, and to undertake a new slow cycle of the updating and realization of a structure - an architecture which for the moment will have no contact, no link with the present in what ties that present to current affairs.
This research can in no way be guided by needs, which must, on the contrary, abstain from their satisfaction. Inevitably there will be a long period of overlapping of the two structures; one in hypothesis, with an advance on humanity; the other in a dephased state, losing ground, doomed to destruction.
Mankind must assume the initiative of this destruction. Only mankind is authorized to destroy what it conceived when it feels that this conception has become an obstacle. This is the way to accomplish its destiny in regard to architecture: destroying the obstacle of the old structure to make room in itself and in its space for the new mankind-architecture cycle, the form of which it can hardly imagine.
It is in this premonitory commitment to a still undetermined future, whose seeds, which in mankind are irrepressible,
drive it to destroy this dephased security, that mankind, leaning on architecture, breaks ground from civilization to
civilization.
We the people of the 20th century have already entered, still blind and unconscious, into our period of destruction.
This act will permit survival. This new level of consciousness through the obstacle, this voluntary victory of man over the architecture he himself created in other times for other spaces, will allow him to move to other places, accomplish other acts, think other thoughts.
From victory to slavery, from slavery to victory, short-lived mankind will survive the long period of architecture.
Claude PARENT
PAGE 78
RAMP
RAMP
PAGE 79
PAGE 80
RAMP
This diagram (W1) is designed to specify a totally schematic preliminary classification of inclined planes. Its only concern is to discriminate between the various means of mechanical displacement using the ground as support (including the hovercraft) and human possibilities.
Other diagrams will complete and compliment this preliminary classification, using the study of vertigo, age, etc... Starting from now each of these a priori classifications are submitted to the control of experience.
Section through the prefabricated structural elements, medium slope: 25%
RAMP
PAGE 81
HABITABLE CIRCULATION (2)
Through the realization of a generalized mobility in the interior of the habitation, obliqueness will transform the old cell, which was in sum nothing but a "micro-ghetto," into a veritable interior landscape that can be traveled over freely. Everything erected between man and his movement, be it stationary partitions or the nooks and crannies of furniture, will have disappeared.
The isolation screen, indispensable to privacy, constituted solely by the undersurface of the floor, the living part, the surface - support of the habitat's activity - will henceforth contain everything.
Furniture will be closely incorporated into the surface and will share in the role of exaltation of the human dynamic by becoming the means of diversification of the ground, through its volumes, its materials and its colors.
Man will thus be doubly supported:
-	on the first level: by the nature that he will overlook;
-	on the second level: by furniture which is at last useful.
The floor wing will incorporate at each stage of its elevation both the various circuits of supply and the furniture.
PAGE 82
RAMP
Dust as the partition, being inclined, the furniture, up to now a decorative object, will become in turn a useful surface, bringing to the ground its particular qualities of touch.
If today our furniture clutters our useful surface more and more unharmoniously, it is because in their present form they are but the remnants of a way of life historically out of date. We can no longer put up with the constant blockage of our natural animation.
For the city-dweller the danger lurks in the walls. They have slowly pulverized his viable space and the interior arrangement of his habitations complicated this blockage by cluttering what remained of intimate surface with furniture accidents.
The toppling of the former philosophy of the "inhabited" will, on the other hand, have repercussions on the plastic arts, on painting in particular, which was so much a part of the old mural universe, the world of frontons and palisades.
These art forms will only regain their topicality by becoming in turn an integral part of the new definition of lived space.
Paul VIRILIO.
RAMP
PAGE
DÉJÀ PARUS:
t. LA FONCTION OBLIQUE
2.	LE TROISIÈME ORDRE URBAIN
3.	LE POTENTIALISME
4 S. NEVERS CHANTIER
Avertissement: le numéro spécial « NEVERS CHANTIER » porte dans l'ordre de parution de la revue le numéro 4, chiffre omis sur le numéro.
AOUT 1966 N° 6: LA CITÉ MÉDIATE
This issue constitutes the permanent manifesto of the group Architecture Principe.
PAGE 84	RAMP
OBLIQUE RELICS
2014 Lourdes, current condition: the emptiness creates the space for a recolonizing of the space by paraphernalia - ropes, candles, glass screens.
RAMP
PAGE 85
2014 De-ramped: after Parent moves out in 2004, his experimental structure for living in the oblique, in his Neuilly house, is dismantled and erased by subsequent owners, ending in the most neutral environment possible...
2014 Parent's shopping center, occupied solely by Carrefour. After the addition of fences on the roof, painted pink in the 1990s and gray in 2010, the oblique supermarket has been added to France's preservation list, while inside, the upper ramp shopping concourse has been closed since 2010, along with all the shops...
PAGE 86
RAMP
2002 UK London City Hall, Foster and Partners.
2010 VIETNAM Hanoi Museum, gmp Architekten.
1999 GERMANY Reichstag Dome, Berlin, Foster and Partners.
2007 SWITZERLAND Zurich Cocoon, gmp Architekten.
2009 SPAIN Andalucía Museum of Memory, Alberto Campo Baeza.
2008 SPAIN Centre de Poblenou Park, Barcelona, lean Nouvel.
2007 GERMANY BMW Welt, Munich, COOP HIMMELB(L)AU.
2013 SERBIA Beton Hala Waterfront Center, Belgrade, Sou Fujimoto Architects.
2011 MEXICO Soumaya Museum, Mexico City, Fernando Romero.
2011 US Wadsworth Atheneum Museum of Art, Hartford, Connecticut.
RAMP AS ARCHITECT'S FLOURISH
In contemporary architecture the ramp is still widely deployed - as 'gesture' it defines, specifically, museum spaces all over world. But due in part to its codified limitations its quality is reduced to that of a mostly visual flourish, without haptic, experiential, or programmatic implications...
2009 ITALY MAXXI, Rome, Zaha Hadid Architects. 2011 GERMANY Haus der Astronomie,
Heidelberg, Bernhardt + Partners.
RAMP
PAGE 87
ARTISTS AND THE GUGGENHEIM II
2011 The atrium overcome: Maurizio Cattelan, All.
...in retrospect, the Frank Lloyd Wright Guggenheim is a masterpiece not only for its architectural qualities, but even more as an act of divination that initiates and articulates the direction(s) in which the future museum would develop. The ramp anticipates the huge flows that museums increasingly have to handle: by making the path inescapable, Wright introduces a way-finding system that is exciting exactly to the extent of its authoritarianism. The niches off the ramp offer a subtle degree of separation from the contemporary museum crowd. The configuration of the ramp offers two distinct experiences: the work of art in close-up, but also a contextual experience from a distance, where the Guggenheim flatters the 'horde' by transforming them into individual flâneurs...
In the Guggenheim the inclined surface of the ramp is used as museum, the ramp is used as program. Today the ramp is used for its spectacular aesthetics - to "enliven" the inertness of the ubiquitous atrium. After first trying to sabotage the construction of the building in the 1950s -based on their hostility towards the ramp - artists now devalue its raison d'être by focusing their attention on the void, using the atrium as a vertical equivalent of the Tate's Turbine Hall - a space for their spectacular grandiloquence...
2005 Ramp as POV on spectacle:
Marina Abramovic, Entering the Other Side.
PAGE 88
RAMP
RAMP
PAGE 89

PAGE 90 bibliography
RAMP
Ackermann, Dames. The Architecture of Michelangelo. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1961.
Allan, Dohn. Berthold Lubetkin: Architecture and the Tradition of Progress. London:
RIBA, 1992.
Bayer, Edwin (ed.) Parkhäuser-Aber Richtig. Ein Leitfaden für Bauherren, Architekten und Ingenieure. Düsseldorf: Verlag Bau+Technik, 2006.
Cooper, Dames G. "Two Drawings by Michelangelo of an Early Design for the Palazzo dei Conservatori." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 67, No 2. Dune 2008. 178-203.
"Encyclopedia Britannica." www.britannica. com/ (accessed April 12, 2014).
Evensen, Dave. "Body And Soul Students Continue To Thrive At One Of The Nation's Most Accessible College Campuses." October 23, 2012 available on http://illinois. edu/lb/article/4981 /68227/page= 1 / list=list?skinld=7124, (Accessed April 2014)
Genauer, Emily. "Art has Never Had It So Good As in New Wright Museum" New York Herald Tribune, October 25, 1959.
Genauer, Emily. "At Last A Big Art Controversy " New York Herald Tribune,
30 December 1956.
Glancey, Donathan. "Penguins Moved From Listed Pool." The Guardian, www. theguardian.com/uk/2004/jul/03/arts. artsnews (accessed May 15, 2014).
Graham, D. Walter. "Further Notes on Minoan Palace Architecture: 1. West Magazines and Upper Halls at Knossos and Mallia." American Journal of Archaeology Vol. 83, No. 1 Danuary, 1979. 49-63.
Grandin, Temple. Animals in Translation. New York: Scribner, 2004.
Khan-Magomedov, Selim O. Konstantin Melnikov. Moscow: Russian Avantgarde Foundation, Architecture-S Publishers,
2007.
Kose, Arno. "Die Wendelrampe der Ziqqurrat von Dur-Sarrukin: keine Phantasie vom Zeichentisch," Baghdader Mitteilungen 30, 1999. 115-137.
Löhner, Franz. "Methoden von Franz Löhner: Pyramidenbau mit Hilfe von
Seilrollenbôcken direkt auf der Pyramidenflanke." www.cheops-pyramide. ch (accessed April 15, 2014).
Mansbach, S. A. "Pieter Bruegel's Towers of Babel," Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte, Vol. 45, No. 1 1982. 43-56
Parent, Claude, and Paul Virilio. Architecture Principe: 1966 and 1996. Besançon: Les Éditions de L'Imprimeur, 2000.
Parent, Claude. L'œuvre Construite,
L'œuvre Graphique, (Catalogue d'Exposition.) Paris: Cité de L'architecture Et Du Patrimoine, 2010.
Quinan, Dack. "Frank Lloyd Wright's Guggenheim Museum: A Historian's Report." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 52, No. 4 December 1993. 466-482.
Rebecchini, Guido. "After the Medici. The New Rome of Pope Paul III Farnese" Tatti Studies In The Italian Renaissance Vol. 11, 2007. 147-200.
Reinberger, Mark."The Sugarloaf Mountain Project and Frank Lloyd Wright's Vision of a New World." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 43, No. 1 March, 1984. 38-52.
Rose, Dulie. "Lunch at Cupole with Paul Virilio." Log 2, Spring 2004. 95-107.
Rowell, Margit. "Vladimir Tatlin: Form/ Faktura" October no. 7 Winter 1978.
83-108.
Sanders McDonald, Shannon. The Parking Garage. Urban Land Institute, 2007.
Garage: Design and Evolution of a Modern Urban Form. Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2007.
Siry, Doseph M. "Seamless Continuity versus the Nature of Materials: Gunite and Frank Lloyd Wright's Guggenheim Museum." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 71, No. 1 March 2012. 78-108.
Starr, Frederick. Melnikov: Solo Architect In A Mass Society. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1978.
Virilio, Paul. Bunker Archaeology. Princeton Architectural Press, 1997.
RAMP
PAGE 91
image sources and courtesy
P8 Labyrinth of Crete (Floor plan of the Palace of Knossos) Historical Museum of Crete.
P10 Mansbach, S. A. "Pieter Bruegel's Towers of Babel." Zeitschrift für Kunstgeschichte 45. Bd., H. 1,1982.
P13 IMAGO-TERRAE; Veduta del Romano Campidoglio con Scallnata che va alla Chief a d Araceli by Giovanni Battista Piranesi / CCA Libraries.
P14 The Manhattan abattoir engraving by V. L. Kingsbury, 1877, published in Harper's Weekly, via the New York Public Library.
P15 Slant floor Storage-Floor connection by Manning Bros., commercial photographers / Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division Washington, D.C. 20540 USA; Storage building by F. E, D'HUMY Patent US 1349664 A / Data provided by IFI CLAIMS Patent Services © 2012 Google.
P16 N. Punin Archive © Anna Kaminskaya.
P19 Penguin Teachers photo by Topical Press Agency / Getty Images.
P20 Reinberger, Mark. "The Sugarloaf Mountain Project and Frank Lloyd Wright's Vision of a New World." Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, Vol. 43, No. 1, March 1984.
P24 Photo by Rene Burri / Magnum Photos.
P25 Photo by Site Congresso em Foco; AP Photo / Eraldo Peres.
P26-41 LOA, Archives Research Center.
P27 ©Deanbor / SIAF / Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine/Archives d'architecture du XXe siècle.
P42 National Building Code of India 2005 by Mahendra Institute of Engineering and Technology; online ADA guides / www. ada.gov/; All rights reserved © 1997-2014 Consultant.
P43 © Disabilitylndia.com; Courtesy of www.sagetraveling.com; "Chartres, Hôtel Montescot 08 rampe PMR" by Coyau is licensed under CC-BY-SA-3.0; © English Heritage 2012; © English Heritage 2004.
P45 HEMEDIA/ SWNS.
P46 © Deanbor / SIAF / Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine/Archives d'architecture du XXe siècle.
P50 Drusch house photo by Paul Virilio; photo Bordeaux le Pecq house by Patrice Goulet and Claude Parent, Centre Pompidou-Mnam-Bibllotheque Kandinsky. Drawing Drusch house Frac Centre.
P52 photo by Paul Virlllo from Architecture principe number 6."Architecture Cryptique."
P54 "FRANCE, Lourdes, The Miraculous Grotto, old postcard used 1948" by Iakshmidaniel2012, eBay.
P55 Photo fond Pierre Vago, SIAF/Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine/ Archives d'architecture du XXe siècle
P56 Drawing by Michel Carrade, FRAC CENTRE. Photos by Patrice Goulet and Gilles Ehrmann, Centre Pompidou -Mnam- Bibliothèque Kandinsky.
P58 Claude Parent and Paul Virilio published in Architecture principe number.
P59 Photos © Gilles Ehrmann, Centre Pompidou-Mnam-Bibliothèque Kandinsky. Drawing from Frac Centre.
P60 © Claude Parent and Paul Virilio, published in Architecture Principe number 3.
P61 L'incUpan, Nicole Parent (Robert Laffont, 1972).
P62 Drawing © Copyright by Paul Virilio and Claude Parent, SIAF/Cité de l'architecture et du patrimoine/Archives d'architecture du XXe siècle. Photo © Gilles Ehrmann
P64-65 © copyright by Claude Parent P66-69 © Gilles Ehrmann
P70 Drawings by Claude Parent,Frac Centre; photo © Gilles Ehrmann, Centre Pompidou-Mnam-Bibliotheque Kandinsky.
P74-83 © Copyright Paul Virilio and Claude Parent.
P82 Neully house photo by Cathy Pastor and Carlos Beana Redondo. © 2013; CIS Sens Commercial Center photo by Olivier Richard; photo inside shopping ramp by David Liaudet.
P86 John Carter / www.flickr.com/photos/ therefromhere/77995915/; The COOP HIMMELB(L)AU project for BMW Group / http://archistreet.blogspot.nl/2010/09/ bmw-weltmunichgermanycoop-himmelblau. html; ©Davier Callejas; Nick Brandli, Zurich; © Marcus Bredt.
P87 Maurizio Cattelan, All, 2009; Marina Abramovic, Entering the Other Side, 2005.
P88 BrazilFoundation © 2010 All Rights Reserved.
P89 Photo by Ryley Poblete.
special thanks to
khaled adham, derek adlam, cole akers, hllde bailer, andreas bernard, katrin betschlnger, koos bosma, petra blaisse, sandra bsat, patrick carrajat, chris carrol, sylvia chan, kaveh dabirl, andreas emminger, paul friedll, ralnder gabrlel, ekaterina golovatyuk, thomas grundwald, marleke van den heuvel, stefan hirschauer, richard ingersoll, barbara penner, john pidgeon/ ajp bathrooms, davld kimmerly, chen lu, roza matveeva, robert mayo, martin murrenhof, antoine picón, biblioteca céntrale di architettura - politécnico di torino architecture central library, scott tallón walker architects, karin raith, alex resikind, rotor, andreas ruby, michael salberg, sophie schlosser, anja siebers-albers, stephan showers, mary tobler, sophia ungers, ungers archive for architectural studies, julius vermeulen, sullivan dirk-jan de vries, juliana ribeiro muniz westcott, clare westcott, joachim wienbreyer, dongmei yao, inez zalduendo, jia zhao, zus zones urbaines sensibles
editors
ben davis brigitta lenz elizabeth macwillie nicholas potts todd reisz annie wang eric williams
associate editors
rebecca bego janna bystrykh giulia foscari Caroline james tiffany maria obser sergio zapata
editorial assistants
sophie abrahams elitza koeva gili merin mihaela radescu sophie vrenken
copy editor
nick axel
translation
anna shefelbine
film
elements, 2014 davide rapp
elements of architecture
rem koolhaas
editors in chief
james westcott stephan petermann
research and development
stephan triiby
design and art direction
irma boom
research associate
manfredo di robilant
contributors
tom avermaete
c-lab/jeffrey inaba, benedict clouette keller easterling jiren feng niklas maak Sébastien marot kevin mcleod alejandro zaera polo JîM't fang zhenning
AMO
a group of students from the harvard university graduate school of design, organized by dean mohsen mostafavi, were engaged in a multi-year research studio in rotterdam and Cambridge, which formed the basis for this book and the exhibition "elements of architecture" at the 2014 Venice architecture biennale.
research team
harvard university graduate school of design
harvard-amo rotterdam studio 2012
heather dunbar elizabeth eckels elle gerdeman Patrick hamon jenny hong arthur liu jielu lu will lambeth kurt nieminen tiffany maria obser nicholas potts max wong
harvard-amo rotterdam studio 2013
cynthia dehlavi Stefan dileo andrew gipe see jia ho jingheng lao alison ledwith elizabeth macwillie alison kung difei ma kangil ji annie wang eric williams
studio
rem koolhaas stephan triiby stephan petermann james westcott
2014 Venice biennale exhibition team federico martelli, antonio barone, helen billson, alice grégoire, talitha van dijk, alexander karadjian, sofia koutsenko, mikel orbegozo, cedric van parys, ippolito pestellini laparelli, timur shabaev, alice tallman, rita varjabedian
rem koolhaas amo/*harvard graduate school of design stephan trüby james westcott stephan petermann
irma boom
c-lab (inaba/clouette) keller easterling jiren feng niklas maak Sébastien marot kevin mcleod friedrich mielke institut für scalalogie hans werlemann alejandro zaera-polo       fang zhenning