

ARCHITECTURE WORDS
ANTI-
OBJECT
Kengo Kuma
Architecture Words 2 Anti-Object
Kengo Kuma
Architectural Association London
PREFACE
My purpose in writing this book is to criticise architecture that is self-centred and coercive. I am opposed to the presence and atmosphere of certain works of architecture that I have chosen to call objects. Whether or not a building is an object is determined by its character rather than its architectural style.
To be precise, an object is a form of material existence distinct from its immediate environment.
I do not deny that all buildings, as points of singularity created by humankind in the environment, are to some extent objects. However, buildings that are deliberately made distinct from their environment are very different from those that attempt to mitigate this isolation, and the difference is perceptible to everyone who experiences them.
I set out to criticise buildings that are isolated from their environment and eventually came to realise that all architectural styles are open to criticism.
Making architecture into objects was a basic principle of pre-modern architecture in the West, but even twentieth-
century modernism, which ostensibly strove for transparency and openness, was deeply tainted by the disease of objectification. Indeed, objectification might be said to be the very strategy by which modernism succeeded in conquering the world. My criticism developed into a criticism of architecture itself, both its form and its destiny. I could not help criticising architecture; equally, I could not help criticising and disavowing my own work as an architect.
However, I also began to feel quite strongly that some other form of presence - the anti-object - was possible. We can find examples of these throughout history, though they have never been part of mainstream architecture. What we choose to call them - architecture, landscape design, gardens - is not particularly important.
Certainly no one wants to listen to an architect criticise architecture in the abstract. If an architect is critical of objects, he must propose an alternative that can be scrutinised by others. With that in mind, I have chosen to use my own works to illustrate my ideas. With one exception (the Hyuga Residence designed by Bruno Taut), all the works discussed here were produced by my office in recent years. I want to set out my thoughts and limitations as well as criticise. I fully expect some critics to point out that these works themselves are still objects. I want to stir criticism and draw attention to objects, open
them up to attack. If I succeed in this, the book will have accomplished its task.
Kengo Kuma
KUMA’S DISAPPEARANCE AN INTRODUCTION TO ANTIOBJECT
How then, can architecture be made to disappear?
Kengo Kuma
Written in a manner that swings gently between manifesto and self-analysis, Kengo Kuma’s Anti-Object presents a timely critical evaluation of ‘self-centred’ architecture that is deliberately distinct from its surroundings. Kuma labels such buildings or landscapes ‘objects’ and, as his title suggests, his interest lies elsewhere. Kuma observes how the impulses of what he calls an ‘objectivisation’ of the world have permeated modern architectural culture, for which he seeks redress in ways both surprising and subtle. In the process, he deconstructs the philosophical pitfalls of modern subjectivism as well as the tired cliches of contemporary architectural contextualism. As he says, ‘No particular skill or effort is required to turn something into an object. Preventing a thing from becoming an object is a far more difficult task.’
Emerging from this is what we might call a situational
architectural sensibility, whose currency derives from the author’s distinctive voice regarding the impact of new digital and information technologies on architecture. For Kuma, the kinds of fragmentation we now experience in our daily (heavily mediated) lives create a condition that makes urgent a radical new kind of architectural project: an architecture of disappearance. ‘My ultimate aim’, he writes early on in this book, ‘is to “erase” architecture’. Such an ambition couldn’t be further removed from the majority of a younger generation of digital experimentalists today, pursuing a renewal of formalism not seen within architecture for decades. For the purposes of conjuring up an image of Kuma’s contrary aim (and owing especially to the beautiful glass surfaces in his buildings that refract images of their overgrown surrounding landscapes), I would suggest that you think here of John McTiernan’s sci-fi classic The Predator: an alien entity moving swiftly and effortlessly and near invisibly through its natural surroundings. Like McTiernan or the theorist Paul Virilio, Kuma sees new digital and information technologies as leading us to an aesthetics of disappearance, rather than image or form.
That the architect of one of the most jarring and visually disturbing examples of postmodern historicism (the surreal M2 Tokyo office building completed in 1991 to great attention and acclaim) could call for an architecture of disappearance seems hardly believable, at first glance.
But one of the ironies of the text, with its steady appeal to the benefits of contextualism, is that it has clearly afforded the author an opportunity to contextualise his own body of work through considered self-reflection.
This modest book is thus the rarest kind of writing in architecture today: an extended essay that is not so much history or theory as a volume of self-assessment and redirection for an architect at the mid-point of his career. Accordingly, we are pleased to be able to present it here in a first full English translation, as a book that embodies a central ambition of AA Words: to foster and promote architectural texts in an era otherwise dominated by visual excess and an endless circulation of images. This is a compelling context for the book that follows, a context in which it fits - and at times dissolves - seamlessly.
Brett Steele August 2008
MAKING A CONNECTION: THE HYUGA RESIDENCE BY BRUNO TAUT
It all began one hot summer’s day, with an unexpected encounter on a cliff overlooking the Pacific.
I had gone by train to Atami, a well-known resort in Shizuoka Prefecture, where I had been commissioned to design a small guest-house on top of a hill. Following my map, I took a narrow path up from the station and after ten minutes I arrived at the site. I walked around, checking views of the sea and of the mountain that rose inland. Then, as a courtesy, I called on the neighbouring house to inform the owner of the impending construction work. This house was modest and compact, with a look typical of prewar domestic architecture. Two storeys high, and made of timber, it blended in with the carefully tended pine trees in the grounds. It did not much look like the work of an internationally famous architect, yet it turned out to be the Hyuga Residence, designed in part by Bruno Taut, who lived in Japan from 1933 to 1936.
The Hyuga commission was for an addition to an existing structure, an ordinary timber-frame house with white
stucco walls and a blue-tiled gable roof. At the back of the house was a veritable hanging garden - a lawn supported by concrete columns and beams jutting out over a steep, seaward slope. The client had the idea of creating a basement within this structure, and asked Taut to design the interior. Though the basement could be equipped with windows to let in light, there was no opportunity to design an architectural form as such. The concrete structure was in place, and even the outer boundary of the room was already fixed. This was not the sort of commission one would normally expect a professional architect to undertake, let alone one with an international reputation. No doubt some local carpenter could have performed the job quite satisfactorily. Taut not only took on the project, but expressed his satisfaction with the result in a letter he wrote to a friend in Berlin. [1]
To understand the reason for Taut’s pride, we must first examine the idea of architecture as an object. Ordinarily, a building is considered an object - an independent material object distinct from its environment. The public perceives buildings to be objects, and that is also the perception of most architects. When one speaks of a beautiful work of architecture, one generally means the work in question is a beautiful object. By an excellent architect one generally means an architect with the ability to design beautiful objects.
Taut questioned such a conception of architecture. He abhorred objects, believing that architecture was more a matter of relationships. The Hyuga project gave him a rare opportunity to experiment with the relationship between architecture and the environment. The basement is half-buried in the ground and connected to its surroundings. It is incapable of being perceived as an independent object. One might even liken it to a parasite, living off its environment. It is an anti-object.
Taut did not begin his architectural career thinking that architecture was about relationships; he arrived at this idea only in a roundabout way. His experience in Japan, particularly his well-known visit to the Katsura Detached Palace, represented a final, decisive stage in the evolution of his thought. However, before discussing that visit, we need to consider the origins of his abhorrence of objects.
Taut was troubled from the beginning by a deep inner conflict that was a reflection of the times in which he lived. He referred to the nature of that conflict in a talk he gave at a retrospective of his work held in Turkey in June 1938, just six months before his death:
Professor Fischer [2] gave me the job of restoring a small gothic church and constructing a turbine hall for a steel factory. The two tendencies apparent in these works -
conforming to an old architectural tradition and resolving the demands of contemporary industry - were already present in my early youth. That is to say, the school in Konigsberg where I studied was encircled by the old gothic cathedral, the campus of the old university where Immanuel Kant had taught a hundred years previously, and the chapel with the grave of the great philosopher. We boys would always read the curious gold epitaph on Kant’s grave on the anniversary of his death, ‘The starry heavens above and the moral law within me’.
So there were two different tendencies in my youth: on the one hand romanticism, on the other two or three architectural solutions, sensational at the time, in which I used steel, reinforced concrete, an abundance of glass and a variety of intense colours. [3]
Taut made it his life’s objective to translate the philosophy of Kant into architecture. This philosophy was based on an awareness of dichotomies - Kant searched for them everywhere, avoiding all facile preestablished notions of harmony. This set him apart both from Descartes, who preceded him, and from later philosophers such as Hegel. Kant proposed a distinction between the phenomenal world and the noumenal world, between the objects of our experience and ‘things-in-themselves’,
which are unknowable as they exist apart from perception. Taut saw himself as torn between romanticism and objectivism, between visionary tendencies and a faith in technology. Kant would no doubt have characterised this as the reflection of a more fundamental dichotomy between subject and object.
The world as envisioned by classicism was a collection of objects ruled by a rigorous order, existing independently of the subject. This dichotomy came to trouble architects with the classical revival during the Renaissance. The Renaissance technique of perspective was considered to be part of the same conceptual framework as the neoclassical approach, which was to govern architecture through geometry. As a mathematically based method of drawing, perspective induces a rigorous geometrical composition. Yet it contains an inherent contradiction: it introduces into space an extremely subjective and singular viewpoint. At a stroke, the objectivity of the neoclassical world is destroyed. The dichotomy between consciousness and object is exposed, expressed in the disparity between the space depicted through perspective and the space actually experienced by the subject. At the centre of the perspective, the disparity is so small it can be ignored. However, on the margins of the drawing it takes the form of an enormous distortion. If the subject begins to move and shift his viewpoint, the static spatial perception achieved through perspective is rendered
practically useless. This shows how complex an operation the perception of three-dimensional space really is. The only way to eliminate the dichotomy between subject and object is through stage-set architecture, in the style of Leon Battista Alberti. As long as the subject remains in front of the flat, two-dimensional facade, he is able to disregard the dichotomy, and architecture is able to assume the guise of objectivity.
The dichotomy between subject and object has frequently troubled architects in the past, causing the pendulum to swing between styles, between object/objectivity and subject/subjectivity. The Renaissance was a period when architecture was object-oriented, conceived as a rigorous and transparent structure based on mathematical proportions. When a subject was introduced into the space, this was revealed as an illusion. The rigorous composition and proportions existed only when seen from upon high, from a godlike viewpoint. The moment the viewpoint was lowered to ground level all geometries lost their effect. Premised on this human viewpoint, design became a matter of deciding how to distort and deform architecture effectively. Architecture gradually became more subject-oriented. The painstakingly transparent structures of the Renaissance were transformed into distorted, exaggerated objects, that is, baroque architecture. Design came to be based, not on geometry, but on perceptual effect. Instead of the rigorous circles
and spheres favoured by classicism, space was organised around ellipses, which had greater perceptual impact. The baroque style was, in turn, eventually supplanted by neoclassicism, where a building was typically an independent object standing in the midst of nature. The Petit Trianon in the gardens of Versailles is a representative neoclassical work - a pure form in stark contrast to the palace proper, a grand, distorted exercise in the baroque. Neoclassical buildings were typically designed to be viewed from a distance, thus avoiding the distortion inherent in perspective and solving the problem of the dichotomy between object and subject. (At least on the outside: the interiors were another matter.) Architects were well aware that the neoclassical solution was ineffective when the distance between object and subject could not be maintained, so they had no qualms about abandoning geometry and adopting the naturalistic and ornamental rococo style for interiors.
The neoclassical solution in some respects paralleled the philosophy of Descartes, who developed a mind/body dualism asserting that the mind - as a thinking, immaterial thing - existed independently of the material body. British empiricists such as Locke and Hume were the first to question this understanding. In his ‘Essay Concerning Human Understanding’ (1689) John Locke wrote:
All ideas come from sensation or reflection. Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper, void of all characters, without any ideas. How comes it to be furnished? Whence comes it by that vast store which the busy and boundless fancy of man has painted on it with an almost endless variety? Whence has it all the materials of reason and knowledge? To this I answer, in one word, from experience.
The empiricist approach may be said to have had its design counterpart in the English landscape garden, which emerged as the antithesis of the French garden where plants were pruned into neat geometrical shapes and objectified - against their nature. Whereas architecture can be construed as an independent object - as an autonomous figure cut off from the ground - a garden is a continuum, the ground itself. Since architects had been corrupted by an object-oriented way of thinking, it was left to members of a new, untainted profession to develop an empiricist design method in the form of the landscape garden.
The English landscape garden was conceived as a series of qualitatively different experiences rather than as a single entity ruled by some overarching geometry. Any inconsistencies in those experiences were of no consequence. A masonry pavilion in a medieval European
style might occupy one spot, a Chinese pagoda another. From above, these mutually incompatible fragments were seen to be connected by a continuous path. An observer (that is, the subject) followed this path around the garden and at any one moment was able to experience only the fragment that was before his eyes. This was the condition imposed on each individual, so these fragments, no matter how diverse and incongruous, never seemed inconsistent. The landscape garden made manifest the position of empiricism.
Kant took this position into account but was critical of the empiricist method. He proposed that we cannot accurately know the objective order of the world merely by accumulating sensory perceptions. He believed that the subject, even in touring, say, a landscape garden, does not simply compartmentalise qualitatively different experiences but in some way perceives and defines the sum total of those experiences - a whole that makes possible their diversity. Unsatisfied by superficial experiences, the human spirit naturally seeks an underlying order. The inscription on Kant’s tomb is a statement of belief in a single, universal form of knowledge (‘the starry heavens above’) which is internalised and shared by each individual in the form of a ‘moral law’.
The landscape garden, which at first glance seems to be a
mixture of heterogeneous worlds, had at its centre the owner’s residence, built in a neoclassical style. The residence exercised control over the whole, its conservative, grandiose design expressing a facile conception of harmony. Its owner (ie the subject) was able to enjoy a diversity of experiences in an empiricist way despite, or perhaps precisely because of, his enclosure in a classical world (ie the neoclassical residence). The residence was the thing that joined together the relativistic arrangement of scenes. In that sense, the landscape garden could be described as a form of colonialism, framing a colonialist worldview. Kant’s criticism was nothing less than a criticism of the colonialism implicit in empiricism. For him, empiricism and relativism concealed a disregard for the dichotomy between subject and object, a conception no doubt influenced by the thoroughly anticolonial life he led, never once setting foot outside Konigsberg.
Kant’s aim was to establish a position that was critical of both classical and empiricist worldviews. He believed there was a fundamental divide between subject and object - between consciousness and matter - that had to be bridged by a universal form of human knowledge. But is there a form of knowledge that is truly universal? Can classicism be called a universal form common to all humanity? Or does its claim to universality extend only to the limited sphere of Ancient Greece and Rome, or to
western society since the Renaissance?
German idealism, represented by Hegel, attempted to answer this question directly, but its enquiry into the formal character of knowledge met with two setbacks.
The first of these was political. If we conclude that each community has its own particular form of knowledge, then a greater universality of that knowledge can only be achieved by expanding that community - principally through invasion. In this sense, wars of invasion were a simplistic projection of German idealism onto the real world. The other pitfall of idealism was its tendency to attach little importance to matter, instead relying on a truly ‘pure’ knowledge, unmediated by matter, to resolve the dichotomy of object and subject. Thus Hegel believed that architecture, being highly tangible, was a low form of art, while less tangible music and poetry were high art.
Though dominated by idealism, the nineteenth century was also the era of empirical science, which achieved unprecedented success precisely by sharpening its focus on matter. As science illuminated the material world, idealism was attacked on account of its contempt for matter. It was defended in philosophy by the neo-Kantians, [4] and in architecture by Bruno Taut. Both aimed to bridge consciousness and matter. The neo-Kantians were particularly concerned with fields such as sensory physiology and psychology. Taut, on the other
hand, attempted to create architecture of an unprecedented visionary power, using the new building technologies that flourished with empirical science. In most instances these technologies did not lead directly to new spatial experiences. Engineers continued to see things only within the framework of engineering, and the architectural profession, nurtured by the established academic system of education, showed little interest in change. From the start of his career, Taut felt the lure of both technology (matter) and fantasy (consciousness). He set out to combine both in his architecture, by creating works that were grounded in reality yet ‘miraculous’ in character.
Taut’s first miracle took the form of the Glass Pavilion for the Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition in Cologne in 1914. The pavilion incorporates an abundance of glass, like the Fagus Factory completed three years previously by Walter Gropius. Beyond that, however, the works are very different in character. The Fagus Factory is generally perceived as an orthodox work of modern architecture, based on modern advances in technology. The Glass Pavilion, on the other hand, is seen to be partly rooted in the nineteenth century. Yet Taut’s objective was to criticise and surpass the Fagus Factory, which he saw as an impassive glass box that made no appeal to the subject. In his mind, the material of glass was not intrinsically cold and impassive, but was capable of appealing directly to the consciousness and liberating the spirit. Inscribed
inside the Glass Pavilion were lines written by Taut’s mentor, the poet Paul Scheerbart:
Without a glass palace, life becomes a burden.
Coloured glass destroys hatred.
Light penetrates all things in the universe;
a crystal lives on.
Taut attempted to make full use of the inherent potential of glass to bridge the gap between matter and consciousness. First, he designed the building without a podium and basically made everything of glass. The dome was a double layer of glass: the exterior was clad in transparent, polished sheets of glass, the interior in small panes of ‘Luxfur Prism’, a coloured glass with a ribbed surface. The gradation of colour was quite dramatic. Blue at the bottom, the glass passed through shades of moss green and yellow, becoming an almost luminous yellow and white at the very top. The form of the ribs changed as well as the colour. Unfortunately, this space filled with strange light was experienced only by the few who visited the pavilion during the exhibition. Others were familiar with it only through a slightly out-of-focus, monochrome photograph of the exterior. The level of documentation of architecture in the early twentieth century was relatively low, and people were generally forced to evaluate a building on the basis of a few black-and-white photographs.
Bruno Taut, Glass Pavilion for the 1914 Deutscher Werkbund Exhibition
This was no doubt one of the factors contributing to the tragedy of Taut as an architect. The best-known photograph of the Glass Pavilion shows only a strange, arbitrary form, that is, an object. It gives no hint of its
transparency or light, communicates nothing of its dramatic gradation of colour. Because of its curved lines and surfaces, the pavilion was seen as a typical expressionist work - buildings were pigeonholed according to their external form, regardless of their underlying philosophy or indeed their interior spaces or plans. Taut succeeded in creating a miraculous work of architecture, but it was impossible to communicate that miracle to those who did not experience it in person.
Communicating the impact of a building to large numbers of people eventually became a primary objective of modern architecture. The issue was not to create new architecture or cities, but rather to discover architectural novelties capable of being relayed through the mass media.
Le Corbusier and Mies van der Rohe led architecture in this new direction. They created extremely photogenic works of architecture that were sufficiently new and individualistic to be recognised as such in a single, decisive black-and-white photograph. To be decisive, the photograph had to show the entire building. To permit such a view, there had to be sufficient distance between the subject (ie photographer) and the building. The building itself had to have forms and details that were predicated on being viewed from a distance. It could then be recorded on photographic paper as an easily
recognisable thing, that is, an object.
The architectural methods of Le Corbusier and Mies were well suited to this demand. As far as possible, they avoided complex forms, preferring pure, easily recognisable geometrical shapes. Subtle textures that could be perceived only from close at hand, or more precisely, photographed only in close-up, were not required. In fact they got in the way. A building that appeared to have a different texture from different vantage points was unable to present to the media a single, unambiguous overall image. Le Corbusier designed walls as white, flat surfaces, untainted by shadows or nuances. In his Oeuvre Complete, he went so far as to paint over shadows in photographs to create the impression of perfectly white walls. Beatriz Colomina’s Privacy and Publicity is an in-depth study of how these photographs were altered so as to expunge all textures.
To possess an easily grasped overall character, a building had to be cut off from its environment; it had to be a prominent object. A building that was embedded in its environment was not suited to the mass media of the time, because no single photograph could show its overall image. The same was true for buildings with ambiguous boundaries. Both Le Corbusier and Mies developed excellent techniques for cutting off buildings from their surroundings. Or rather, each independently discovered
his own method and thereby achieved the status of a master of modern architecture. Le Corbusier used pilotis to elevate his buildings off the ground. Pilotis, the first of his so-called ‘five points’ of a new architecture, [5] were proposed as a means of freeing up valuable ground space. However, his intention was not to make the ground available for use by people but rather to isolate his buildings and make their pure forms more prominent.
For Mies that same function was served by the podium. Placing a building on a podium was standard practice in classical architecture: it isolated the work in the same way that a pedestal isolated a sculpture. Mies’s revival of the form ran counter to the original objective of modern architecture, which was a repudiation of the classical architecture that had prevailed in the West up to the nineteenth century.
The possibilities Taut explored in the Glass Pavilion represented an entirely different direction. He objected to the way Le Corbusier and others were making the dissemination of abstract geometrical forms the primary objective of modern architecture - a tendency he dismissed as ‘formalism’. However, Taut was out of step with the times: the rapidly evolving media were demanding the transformation of culture and of the world at large.
Even after his Glass Pavilion had been labelled expressionist and relegated to the fringes of modernism, Taut continued his pursuit of an architecture that was not an object. His housing for the Britz Siedlung in Berlin (1925) has a horseshoe-shaped plan, but its huge perimeter wall curves so gradually that from the ground only a partial view is possible. What one notices are elements like the soft textures of the wall, or the beautifully detailed window frames faced with blue tiles. The only way one would ever perceive the project as a horseshoe-shaped object is from above, in a bird’s-eye view. This is precisely why Taut adopted an extremely gentle curve: he sought to erase the architecture and forestall its objectification. He tried another tactic -polychromy - in the Weissenhof Siedlung (1927), a showcase of experimental housing that also included work by Mies and Le Corbusier. In contrast to the smooth white walls of the formalists, he used many different colours for the exterior of his housing, just as he had used multicoloured glass prisms in the interior of the Glass Pavilion.
Bruno Taut, Britz Siedlung, Berlin, 1925
Taut’s objective was to bridge the gap between matter and consciousness, world and subject. He tried to connect them using glass and colour, but his work was dismissed as personal and subjective. The budlike silhouette of the Glass Pavilion and the polychromatic exterior of his
Weissenhof housing were described by critics as ‘selfindulgent’, wilful acts of expression.
During these interwar years, neo-Kantianism lost its force and was supplanted, in part, by phenomenology. Superficially, phenomenology also attempted to overcome the dichotomy between matter and consciousness, but in contrast to neo-Kantianism, it did so by focusing exclusively on consciousness itself. Employing the methods of empirical science, it succeeded in describing, objectively and verifiably, that which had been thought impossible to analyse and articulate - the flow of consciousness, even as it changed from moment to moment. As a result, consciousness became a thing without a clear boundary, perpetually in flux.
Edmund Husserl described this process:
Focusing our experiencing gaze on our own psychic life necessarily takes place as reflection, as a turning about of a glance which had previously been directed elsewhere. Every experience can be subject to reflection, as can indeed every manner in which we occupy ourselves with any real or ideal objects ... Through reflection, instead of grasping the matter straight-out - the values, goals, and instrumentalities - we grasp the corresponding
subjective experiences in which we become ‘conscious’ of them, in which (in the broadest sense) they ‘appear’. For this reason, they are called ‘phenomena 16]
Just as phenomenology came after neo-Kantianism, so constructivism emerged after Taut. There were close parallels between them. Both philosophy and space abandoned the hazardous task of trying to bridge the gap between consciousness and matter, restricting themselves to a single domain of enquiry: phenomenology to the realm of consciousness, constructivism to matter. The constructivists analysed a building and articulated it into major elements such as floor, wall and ceiling, which were then broken down into further small fragments. The combining of these articulated architectural elements was the ‘scientific’ means the constructivists used to realise a space in flux. In both phenomenology and constructivism, however, the application of scientific methods never yielded entirely satisfactory results. On the one hand, the more consciousness was scientifically analysed, the less it resembled the real thing; on the other, constructivist architecture appeared far too ambiguous and unstable. People began once more to search for certainty and comprehensibility. Architects sought to recreate clear boundaries and a sense of totality; the result was the architecture-as-object promulgated by Le Corbusier and Mies.
Rietveld Schroder House, Utrecht, 1924
Naturally, this demand was not simply an expression of conservatism; it reflected the limits of early-twentieth-century media. The flowing, dynamic character of constructivist spaces could not be communicated through a single black-and-white photograph, but required moving images. Moreover, while the constructivists were careful to articulate individual compositional elements, they were surprisingly insensitive to the relationship between architecture and the environment. For example, in the Rietveld Schroder House - a representative work of De Stijl, a movement influenced by constructivism - the delicate elements of the house are set rather offhandedly upon the ground. Constructivist and De Stijl architects were never able to create clear, indelible images, because their works had only an ambiguous relationship to the environment, appearing in photographs as a confused and wilful dance of small, scattered fragments.
Therein lies exposed one of the paradoxes of the twentieth century. Constructivist and De Stijl architects were spatial revolutionaries, but they did not understand the nature of space in the media. By contrast, Le Corbusier and Mies were spatially conservative, but understood space in the media and used it adeptly.
Le Corbusier and Mies achieved positions of leadership in twentieth-century architecture by defining objects that were ideally suited to the contemporary approach to
bridging matter and consciousness, which was to reduce both to the status of objects. Matter was reduced to ‘products’, by which I mean objects that are distinct from their environment, that assert themselves and excite the subject. Meanwhile, consciousness was reduced to objects called ‘existences’. The current of existentialism proposed that meaning does not derive from some natural order, but from the actions or interpretations of the solitary individual. Isolated from larger groups and communities, the individual seeks solace in products. It is only when both sides have been broken down into objects that objects seek each other out and the free and direct connection of object to object becomes possible.
Le Corbusier and Mies did not simply design objects; they knew how to make objects appealing and to whom they should appeal. They understood perfectly that the architectural products/objects with the strongest and broadest appeal were private houses. Taut, on the other hand, was more interested in exploring new forms of mass housing and even proposed the collective undertaking of household tasks. His sincerity also accounts for his misfortune. He failed to understand the twentieth-century paradox that individuals, as isolated subjects, shunned groups in any form. They were sustained in their isolation by the dream of escape from their mediocrity through the possession of attractive products. Isolation was not to be relieved by collectivity but was to be redeemed by the
ownership of products.
Le Corbusier and Mies were far more savvy. Declaring ‘the house is a machine for living in’, [7] Le Corbusier published a project called Maison Citrohan (a play on Citroen), a private house that was to be produced and consumed in the same way as a commercial product, an automobile.
Such polemical declarations and projects, disseminated far and wide through the medium of print, stimulated the public’s desire for new kinds of houses. The mood was encapsulated in the ‘Modern Architecture: International Exhibition’, which started in New York at the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in 1932 and then travelled to department stores such as Sears and Roebucks in Chicago and Bullock’s in Los Angeles. The event played a decisive role in the victory of modernism over other styles of architecture. Philip Johnson, [8] who helped organise the exhibition, advised participating architects to submit private houses, as it was the building type that the public was most interested in. A model of the Villa Savoye by Le Corbusier and the Barcelona Pavilion [9] by Mies were especially well received. Cut off from the earth, these products possessed the most powerful iconic character and made the strongest impact.
Japanese Imperial Crown Style
The ‘Modern Architecture’ exhibition not only sealed the
triumph of modernist architecture, but through the medium of the private-house-as-object set up a connection between modernism and the middle class. Besides achieving social status, modernism acquired an enormous market for its works. Art museums began to lend their space (ie their authority) to a distinctive twentieth-century kind of event: the architectural exhibition. Just as department stores became a necessary context in which to sell objects called ‘products’, so art museums became a necessary context in which to sell objects called ‘private houses’ to the middle class. Art museums effectively served the same role as department stores.
Objects took over twentieth-century architecture, and Taut did not adapt to the trend. After his confrontation with Le Corbusier and Mies at Weissenhof, he was regarded as a failure. His reputation plummeted and he received few new commissions. Then, when the Nazis came to power, he was ostracised because of his socialist beliefs. In 1933, he learned of plans for his arrest and fled Germany for Japan, accepting an invitation extended the previous year by the Nippon International Architectural Association (NIAA). [10]
At that time Taut was probably more interested in the Soviet Union and the setting it offered for forms of collective living. He had visited Moscow in 1932, at the
invitation of the executive committee of the Mos-Soviet. However, major political and cultural changes were also underway in the Soviet Union, paralleling the shift in western Europe. Russian constructivism had been rejected and a faction promoting a monumental, nationalistic architecture - a typically object-oriented style of architecture based on traditional models - was in the ascendant. Taut came to the painful realisation that there was no place for him there.
For that matter, the NIAA, which had invited Taut to come to Japan, was also being forced into a corner. The country was moving inexorably towards war and in architecture the so-called Imperial Crown style, characterised by concrete structures topped by traditional Japanese-style roofs, was becoming dominant. Both Russia and Japan were adopting monumental styles. Any association that espoused modernism found itself in a difficult situation.
It was around this time that a cause celebre grew around Kunio Maekawa, who had spent two years in Paris working in Le Corbusier’s atelier. [11 Corb’s polemical writings and buildings had already earned him legendary status among younger architects. Having studied directly under him, Maekawa was regarded as a figure of great promise. Soon after his return to Japan, he made a bold proposal for the Tokyo Imperial Household Museum. The
competition rules clearly stated that the building was to be in ‘an Oriental style, based on Japanese taste, in harmony with the [museum’s] contents’. In protest the NIAA announced that its members would refuse to submit proposals. Maekawa, on the other hand, coolly defied the injunction and presented a scheme in the Corbusian idiom - a magnificent, radiantly white box raised on a row of slenderpilotis, like the Villa Savoye. This object won Maekawa the admiration of young architects and at a stroke he became a modernist hero.
On one side of this conflict was the Imperial Crown style, and on the other was Maekawa’s modernist scheme. Unable to support either camp, the NIAA was caught in an uncomfortable position. Seeking somehow to escape its plight, the association extended its invitation to Taut. What it did not yet realise was that Taut himself was in difficulties. In all likelihood, if he had not been in such dire straits, he would not have accepted the invitation, and he and Japan would not have had their fateful encounter.
Travelling first on the Siberian Railway and then by boat, Taut arrived in Tsuruga Harbour on 3 May 1933. The very next day, he was taken to see Katsura Detached Palace. His reaction was eagerly anticipated. The NIAA was confident that Katsura, with its exposed post-and-beam structure and its simple, unornamented design, would appear to Taut’s eyes to be modernist. It believed it
could use the palace to repudiate both the Imperial Crown style (which was claimed to be representative of Japan) and the ‘imported modernism’ practised by Maekawa -and wanted Taut to endorse its stratagem. Thus arrived the fateful day of 4 May, which happened to be Taut’s birthday. His reaction was not entirely what the association had expected. He was thrilled by what he saw.
Today is probably the most exquisite birthday I have ever had ... Katsura is truly a miracle without parallel in the world of culture. Here, ‘eternal beauty’ is revealed more remarkably than in the Parthenon, the gothic cathedrals or Ise Shrine. [12]
The association was surprised not just by Taut’s deep-felt response but by the aspects of Katsura that he found so impressive. He showed little concern with the question of the palace’s modernist character; by that time his interests extended beyond modernism. Instead he wrote: ‘The essence of this miracle is the style of relationships - that is architecturalised interrelationships.’ [13] Taut was referring first of all to the relationship between the subject and the garden. In fact, he discusses the garden more than the architecture and even when he touches on this, he discusses it not as an object but as a medium connecting the subject to the garden.
A bamboo veranda for viewing the moon is in front of the waiting room for guests. From here one can see the entire garden including the pond. The sight is so beautiful one wants to cry. The abundance of forms - many turtles are on the stone, some stretching their necks high ... The diagonal line of the landing on a promontory in the pond helps one best to understand this ... [It] leads the eye along its line to a deep growth of azaleas, and further to a bridge leading to a Buddhist hall [Enrindo] and hut [Shokatei]. [14]
This is an unusual view of architecture. Taut studiously disregards objects and considers just the connecting relationships. Moreover, he attempts to be as scientific and objective as possible, even though the subject matter is subtle and ambiguous. The internal dichotomy that had long troubled Taut no doubt accounts for this unique stance. It had been his lifelong dream to bridge the gap between consciousness and matter, but he flatly rejected the twentieth-century ‘solution’ of reducing consciousness to ‘existences’ and matter to ‘products’, both linked through the statistical nexus of marketing. Instead, he deliberately adopted a more difficult and ambiguous strategy, attempting to use elements such as glass and colour to mediate between matter and consciousness. In doing so, he suffered repeated setbacks.
In the end, strolling through a garden in a Far Eastern country he had come to almost by chance, Taut unexpectedly encountered a beautiful form of connection between consciousness and matter.
Nothing in the Katsura garden could be called an object. Taut frequently expresses surprise at the openness or ‘absence’ of Japanese architecture, remarking ‘Can this be called a room?’ [15] His surprise carries no negative nuance. Even with an imperial villa such as Katsura, there is no attempt to create an object, in contrast to western residences. Absence is further emphasised by the simplicity of colours and forms in the interiors. Taut likens this to the stage of an open-air theatre, which is essentially a place of absence until the addition of people and colourful clothing and cushions generate diverse spaces - what Taut calls ‘architecturalised interrelationships’. When this happens, the place suddenly begins to take on life. The very air changes. The subject remains to the end a human body and spirit. Conversely, in a space dominated by objects, the subject remains to the end an object. The space never takes on life and remains frozen, even if body and spirit are introduced into it.
As he considers relationships, Taut comes face to face with the issue of time and discovers that matter and consciousness are connected in a way that is not just
spatial but temporal. While time can be rendered abstract in the framework of architecture, one cannot ignore time within a garden. A building may be perceived in its entirety in an instant, a garden not. The introduction of time weaves relationships between elements, lending a dynamic character to what had seemed to be an absence. Taut describes not just the spaces of Katsura, but the time flowing through it.
The path passing through the woods and leading to the tea-house [Shokatei] is a philosophical preparation. First there is a quiet pastoral, a murmuring stream and a small waterfall - from around this point, a serious transformation begins, with coarse stones, such as might be found on a windswept shore, the tip of a promontory ... The stern stones seem to command the visitor to meditate. A rough stone bridge leads to the tea-house. The tea party is held without ceremony and with no regard for differences in social status, however, once the party sits down to a meal in the larger room, sounds of the waterfall are heard once more and for the first time one sees sunlight falling on the cascading water. A turtle that had been sunning itself on a rock in the middle of the pond sinks into the water with a splash. Fish swim up to the surface and reveal their scales, and cicadas sing
delightful songs in the shade ... The world is truly beautiful. [16]
Taut also made sketches of Katsura. In an attempt to capture time in a two-dimensional framework, he combines images in ink with signs such as arrows and lines of text. He draws them so that they overlap one another on the Japanese paper (washi). The overlapping is significant, for it suggests the layering of time. He also uses transparent lines and planes in light ink to record the course of movement. Brushstrokes, by their transition from heavy black to light black, indicate the passage of time. Chinese black ink (sumi) is a medium that can describe time in that way. These sketches reflect a
personal wrestling, on Taut’s part, with the greatest difficulty confronting twentieth-century architecture and art as a whole - the integration of space and time. Sigfried Giedion’s best-known book, Space, Time, and Architecture (1947) sets out the theme:
The essence of space as it is conceived today is its many-sidedness, the infinite potentiality for relations within it. Exhaustive description of an area from one point of reference is, accordingly, impossible; its character changes with the point from which it is viewed. In order to grasp the true nature of space the observer must project himself through it. [17]
Giedion contended, furthermore, that this was comparable to the connection of space and time made by Einstein in his 1905 work, ‘On the Electrodynamics of Moving Bodies’. The problem was that twentieth-century cultural spaces were disseminated through two-dimensional architectural photographs. How was time to be captured in such small, flat objects?
Here, Giedion first extolled the cubists. In his view, the unexpected overlapping of multiple images in their paintings succeeded in expressing ‘time’, as did a certain kind of modernist architecture in which there was a visual overlapping of two spaces separated only by transparent
glass. For Giedion, the overlapping alone was a sufficient expression of time. The simplistic nature of his observation reveals the limitations, not of his abilities as a critic and historian, but of the culture of the times. How do glazed spaces in fact flow? What does the subject experience, and in what form? At what speed, at what rate of acceleration, does time flow through the consciousness at that moment? These questions would have arisen naturally if one had begun to deal with the concept of flow, but they were never considered. Addressing them would have required a much more powerful medium than photography. Giedion and other observers of the period were satisfied merely with time being expressed in some form in the limited framework of paintings and photographs. They were unaware that painters in non-western cultures, including Japan, had long before devised highly sophisticated ways of connecting time and space.
The ramps of Le Corbusier’s Villa Savoye, Poissy, 1928
Modernism set out to connect time and space, but ultimately managed only to create objects that used an abundance of glass. This recourse to glass was too facile a solution. The result was merely another form of object.
Le Corbusier did not himself favour the use of glass to connect time and space; rather, his strategy was to introduce movement by means of stairs and ramps. He created multilevel spaces even in small houses, equipping them with devices that enabled one to experience a spiral upward movement. Here too, however, there was a problem of representation. Filmmakers can record spiral movement simply by carrying a camera up the stairs, but
a single still photograph can only document a moment in time: if the stairs are enclosed, views taken from the outside show only the enclosing wall, while from the inside they show only details such as steps. Le Corbusier discovered an ingenious way around this problem. His solution was to fully expose the staircase or ramp and place it in a large space, turning it into a remarkably radiant object that symbolised what would otherwise be impossible to see - movement.
Ultimately, modernism simply substituted the question of transparency and movement for the question of time. Its means of connecting space and time was to create an architecture of glass objects or to turn paths of circulation such as stairs and ramps into objects. In this way time was captured in photographs that were freely disseminated throughout the world.
Taut rejected this solution completely. In connecting time and space, he did not first reduce time into an object, but instead allowed it to retain its living, flowing character.
The Hyuga Residence in Atami was his first experiment in this regard. Being only a basement addition, the project had no exterior as such. From the start, it could not have resulted in an assertive object. Since Taut disavowed objects, he welcomed the conditions of the programme. According to Tokugen Mizuhara, who was then his
assistant, Taut sat down at a drafting table and completed the drawings for this complex addition in half a day. During that time, he kept on muttering to himself, ‘maybe so... maybe so’. He may have already been immersing himself in the space and time of the house as he imagined it. His words may have been a measure of the very pulse of the house.
Bruno Taut, Hyuga Residence, Atami, Shizuoka, 1936
Taut’s enthusiasm must have seemed puzzling to those around him. People were shocked, too, by the result. A space that looked less appealing in photographs was difficult to imagine. Everything was painted in restrained, dark colours, and no element was allowed to assert itself
visually. There were several different floor levels but no conspicuous stairway-as-object. Taut’s design approach was diametrically opposed to that of Le Corbusier, who was adept at turning every means of vertical movement into an object.
The Hyuga Residence was constructed in 1936, at a time when the tendency in culture and philosophy was to reduce everything to easily comprehensible fragments, that is, objects. Architecture was being torn between globalism and nationalism, but this opposition, like all others, was conceived as an opposition of objects. Simple, unornamented objects representing globalism were pitted against stylistically ornamented objects representing nationalism. Each camp strove to radicalise the design of its objects. In Japan, white boxes in the Corbusian idiom were counterposed to buildings in the Imperial Crown style. Each side made its buildings extremely autonomous and clear-cut in form. That is, each side sought to create perfect objects, and the situation was fraught with tension.
Taut was summoned to serve as an arbiter in that conflict. Both sides waited with bated breath for him to pass judgement, to choose one set of objects or the other. However, Taut did something completely unexpected. He rejected the very terms of the question, as a matter of choosing between different objects.
The HyUga Residence is not an object. Moreover, Taut’s juxtaposition of Japanese tatami and western-style wood flooring seems almost to mock the glowering opposition of globalism and nationalism. In fact, his mind was already too preoccupied to mock anything, because he had become aware of a problem that no one else had yet noticed.
For Taut, the house became an experiment to see how the manipulation of the two planes of floor and ceiling could set up different relationships between consciousness and the environment. He was concerned to create varying floor levels, with a range of textures and rhythms. Thus the sea in the distance is perceived very differently depending on where one is sitting or standing. Sometimes the sea seems suddenly to rise like a wall before one’s eyes; at other times it feels as if one is floating on the water The diversity of such experiences cannot be conveyed by a simple medium such as a photograph.
Furthermore, Taut carefully experimented to see how the space resists or yields (and, as a result, how time flows) when a person moves between the two planes of floor and ceiling. For example, at the bottom of the stairs one is confronted by a bamboo-covered wall. Bamboo is a dimensional system with a definite character. The human eye and body become accustomed to the pitch of bamboo. The moment that happens, they adapt to its rhythm and
scale, losing the scale of perception they had maintained up to then. The same thing is experienced at Katsura. On confronting the bamboo fence there, you lose your habitual sense of speed and scale and enter the garden as if you’ve been washed clean of the everyday world.
For the basement ceiling, panels of paulownia were individually cut to form a fan-shaped pattern in reverse perspective. Their slight deviations from the parallel change the perceived depth of the space and create an unexpected spatial resistance to movement by the observer. An optical illusion that baroque architects used on a grand scale was applied here to a modest space defined by wood and paper, with incomparably greater precision and delicacy. Such manipulations were much too delicate to be captured by the media of the time. But this was of no concern to Taut: with this project he felt he was, for the first time, dealing in a very real way with the question of how to create an architecture that was spiritual in character, rather than formalist in the Corbusian vein. Now he no longer needed to invoke spirituality. All he had to do was to select each material, give it dimensions and decide on its detailing. That is how a person who is creating a truly new architecture will proceed.
This experiment by an architect who completely disregarded the power of the media was naturally either ignored or ridiculed. The Japanese architectural world
regretted the support it had given him. It began to be rumoured that he was Jewish. The Hyuga Residence was completed in September 1936. Around a month later, on 15 October, Taut left Japan to become a professor in the faculty of architecture at the Fine Arts Academy in Istanbul. For the next two years he threw himself into teaching and design in Turkey. Then, on 24 December 1938, he died at the age of 58, of heart failure caused by overwork.
Today, we too must deal with the issue Taut confronted. We have been made to recognise the limitations of a world ruled by objects. The individual is not an autonomous, solitary object but a thing of uncertain extent, with ambiguous boundaries. So too is matter, which loses much of its allure the moment it is reduced to an object, shorn of its viscosity, pressure and density.
Both subject and matter resist their reduction into objects. Everything is interconnected and intertwined.
However, the failure of objects is not something that has only now been exposed. Up to the late 1920s, it was assumed that if the economy of the world was broken down into free particles, an ‘invisible hand’ would automatically bring everything into equilibrium, connecting subject and matter and balancing supply and demand. When the Great Depression exposed the limits of this approach, John Maynard Keynes stepped in and
saved the day. He rescued the object-based economy by discovering a way to connect time and space. It is worth noting that in doing so he did not resort to a planned economy. Time and space are commonly believed to be connected by means of plans; in reality, however, a plan is nothing more than the spatialisation of time - a spatialised scheme about an assumed point on the temporal axis called the future. Its fatal flaw is the absence of any methodology for intervening in a thing that is as formless and continually in flux as time.
Instead, Keynes conceived a way of directly intervening in time, of making it palpable. He did not believe in the existence of free and autonomous particles (ie objects) entirely cut off from time and space, but rather linked the value of products/objects to a variable of time called the interest rate. A central bank can guide the economy through the manipulation of the interest rate precisely because the interest rate mediates between time and space. Keynes’s innovation was to design the connection between time and space.
The second way that Keynes intervened in time was through public investments in construction, which effectively appropriated future financial resources and transferred them to the present. Time cannot be abstracted in the production and consumption of large-scale public works, which take a long time to produce and even longer
to be consumed and accepted. By their very nature, these buildings are equipped with a time-lag function that allows them to be used to intervene in time. Additionally, ordinary products are received by an individual, whereas buildings generate some form of communal character -therein lies their potential, as well as their fate. Buildings were the form of matter that departed the furthest from the formula of breaking down both matter and consciousness into particles, that is, small objects. They came to play a central role in the twentieth century precisely because they were most out of step with the times.
Architects realised this as well. Le Corbusier ended Vers une architecture with the words ‘Architecture or revolution. Revolution can be avoided.’ Like Keynes, he suggested that the large-scale construction of buildings would help to prevent a revolution. The course of his career closely paralleled that of the economy in the twentieth century. Le Corbusier achieved his early fame with detached houses designed with conspicuous forms: the Villa Savoye (1931), a radiantly white object set on pilotis, was his supreme masterpiece in the house-as-object genre. Thereafter, he subtly changed his style, becoming more interested in collective or continuous housing. Le Corbusier’s clients changed too, from individuals to public institutions.
Le Corbusier was not the only architect who changed.
Modernism as a whole underwent a major transformation around 1930. Its focus shifted away from individual objects towards public monuments. This decisive change in direction can be said to have extended the life of object-type civilisation. Enormous buildings intervened in spaces where small objects had once been dispersed and served to eliminate the imbalance between them. As Le Corbusier had predicted, revolution was avoided, thanks to architecture. More precisely, architecture served as an extremely effective reactive device for institutions keento avoid a revolution.
Nevertheless, the limits of public construction were evident from the start. These buildings were nothing more than a delaying tactic, and could be used to intervene in time only because of the delays caused by their enormous size. More precisely, they were required to be enormous in order to induce delays - to postpone the day when the problem would have to be confronted. Keynes himself understood this better than anyone else. When told that his policy did not really solve the problem at all in the long run, he is said to have replied ‘In the long run we will all be dead.’
When the economy is experiencing a stage of growth, postponing the resolution of a problem is as good as solving it. The pressing task of confronting revolutionary forces - that is, communism - helped extend the viability
of Keynesian policies. However, once those revolutionary forces were eliminated, the limits of Keynesian policies were invariably exposed. So, too, were the limits of construction as a course of action. Pitifully feeble, these enormous objects do not have the power to bridge consciousness and matter, to connect space and time. The weakening of buildings has only been accelerated by electronic technology, by which means a direct transfer of time has become possible.
We no longer need to first freeze time into an object (for example, a staircase or a ramp) in order to disseminate it through a photograph, as Le Corbusier once did.
Likewise, Keynes’s method of intervening in time by investing in construction projects seems far too indirect and cumbersome. Today, we do not depend on the mediation of objects to intervene directly in time. Time has become something more immediate. Space has become continuous with time.
Moreover, electronic technology has caused a major change in the connection between consciousness and matter. Previously, objects were thought to influence consciousness, so architects competed to create the most radical forms of objects, in the belief that these would have the most powerful impact. Now, however, it has become clear that electronic technology has the ability to transform consciousness without recourse to objects or
even to matter.
Put simply, everything has become connected. Or rather, everything was already connected from the outset, but in the modernist era encounters with unfamiliar worlds fostered the illusion of disconnectedness. People invented the fiction of objects, that is, the fiction that every subject is a self-sufficient, solitary object called an existence, and that every matter is a solitary object called a product. Enormous objects, in the form of buildings, were introduced to prolong the life of this desolate world of dispersed objects. These objects were supposed to form bridges between subjects, creating an opportunity to nurture communal life and connecting space and time. However, the world was already closely and diversely connected before the introduction of buildings. Buildings-as-objects were only obstacles to such connections. When electronic technology connected the world, people began to register the failure of architecture, and the failure of objects.
Nevertheless, we are composed of matter and live in the midst of matter. Our objective should not be to renounce matter but rather to search for a form of matter other than objects. What that form is called - architecture, gardens, computer technology - is not important. Until a new name is given to that form, I will call it the ‘anti-object’.
NOTES
1.	The letter, written in June 1936, was addressed to Martin Wagner (18851957), a building inspector for Berlin who was staying in Istanbul at the time.
2.	This is Professor Theodor Fischer of the Technische Hochschule, Stuttgart, in whose office Taut worked for eight years from 1904.
3.	Bruno Taut, ‘Hitotsu no aisatsu’ (An introduction), in Zoku kenchiku wa nanika(What is architecture, 2), trans. by Hideo Shinoda (Tokyo: Kajima Shuppankai, 1978).
4.	The philosophical school of neo-Kantianism originated in Germany in the latter part of the nineteenth century, supposedly in the 1865 injunction of Otto Liebmann (1840-1912) to ‘return to Kant’. The rapid decline of neo-Kantianism after World War I coincided with the rise of existentialism.
5.	Le Corbusier developed the ‘Five Points’ around 1926 and published them together with his work for the Weissenhof Siedlung of 1927. They were (1) pilotis; (2) roof garden; (3) free plan; (4) horizontally continuous window; and (5) free facade.
6.	Edmund Husserl, in ‘Phenomenology’, his article for the Encyclopedia Britannica (1927), revised translation by Richard E Palmer.
7.	Le Corbusier, Vers une architecture, 1923, trans. Frederick Etchells as Towards a New Architecture (London: John Rodker, 1931).
8.	Philip Johnson (1906-2005) was at the time an architectural historian. He was involved in setting up the architectural design department at MoMA. He subsequently became an architect and is said to have been the setter of trends such as postmodernism and deconstructivism in the late twentieth century. He was a new type of architect, characteristic of the twentieth century: the
9.	Though built for an exhibition, the Barcelona Pavilion was designed by Mies as a type of residential space. This, too, shows the strategic importance Mies accorded to private houses.
10.	Founded in 1927 in Kyoto, the Nippon International Architectural Association was a group of avant-garde architects. Seigo Motono and Isaburo Ueno were among its six founding members. There were ten foreign members including Gropius and Taut. Its manifesto began, ‘Architectural style is to be purged of a dependence on traditional forms and based on, not a narrowly defined national character, but authentic locality.’
11.	Kunio Maekawa (1905-1986), a representative modernist architect of Japan. His best-known works include the Kanagawa Prefectural Concert Hall, Tokyo Metropolitan Festival Hall and Tokyo Marine and Fire Insurance Company Building. He adopted a ‘technical approach’ and advocated a modern design backed by technology.
12.	Bruno Taut, Nippon, Tauto no nikki (Nippon, Taut’s diary), trans. by Hideo Shinoda (Tokyo: Iwanami shoten, 1975).
13.	Bruno Taut, Nihonbi no saihakken (Rediscovery of Japanese Beauty), trans. by Hideo Shinoda (Tokyo: Iwanami shoten. 1939).
14.	Bruno Taut, ‘Katsura rikyu’ (Katsura Detached Palace), in Tauto chosakushu (Collected Writings of Taut), (Tokyo: Ikuseisha, 1946).
15.	Bruno Taut, Nihon no kaoku to seikatsu (Houses and life in Japan), Sanseido, Tokyo, 1958; trans. by Hideo Shinoda of Das_ japanische Haus und sein Leben.
16.	Nihonbi no saihakken.
17.	Sigfried Giedion, Space, Time, and Architecture (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1947), 356.
FLOWING OUT: ‘WATER/GLASS’, ATAMI, SHIZUOKA, 1992-95
The site I was given was next to the Hyuga Residence and had a similar topography, being set on a cliff by the sea and accessed from a road on a higher level. I liked the descending approach. Walking down to a building is very different from walking up to one. A building on a higher level is seen against the sky; you have to look up at it and acknowledge its presence as an object. A building on a lower level, on the other hand, is difficult to see. In extreme cases, you may be right on top of it before you know.
Walking down to the Hyuga Residence, you come across a garden with a pleasant lawn that juts out towards the sea. Beneath this lawn is a narrow, dimly lit space containing an addition designed by Bruno Taut. There is no outward hint of the existence of the space - the architecture is made to disappear, far more effectively than any conventional basement. Moreover, there is no lower vantage point from which you can look up at the building, so precipitously does the land rise from the sea. Nor does the access road on the upper level reveal its
presence; from there all you see are the trees growing on the cliff. The Hyuga Residence is hidden from view from both higher and lower levels. It is doubly absent.
The conditions were the same in the project I call ‘Water/Glass’. The building is visually shielded in nearly all directions. The only place from which its exterior is visible is the garden of the Hyuga Residence - a gesture made out of solidarity with, and as an act of homage to, Taut.
To make a building without a display exterior, as such, the architect must relinquish the use of forms and abandon the idea of making an object. This does not mean closing the architecture off from the outside world. In ‘Water/Glass’ the architecture is made to disappear, even as the building opens itself to the outside world. In this there is no contradiction.
Architecture can never be closed off completely. That is the premise of my work. One may enclose space with walls and bury it underground, but architecture is always situated in - and connected to - the world. More precisely, architecture is a device mediating between the subject (ie mankind) and the world. The goal of this project was to reconfirm that fact. Establishing the relationship between the subject and the world happens to be the goal of the intellectual occupation we call
philosophy. That being so, the goal of this project can be said to be an engagement in philosophy through architecture.
There are two forms of connection between subject and world: the frame and the floor. A typical example of a device for visually framing the world is a window punched into a wall. For the device to function effectively, there must be a certain distance between the subject and the world. The frame selects some particular element of the disordered environment while screening out all other elements. Through this process of elimination, it generates an object - an object summoned from the outside world. Thus the frame form is another name for objectification. The world regulated by or perceived through the medium of the frame form is a world of objects.
Before the advent of modern architecture in the twentieth century, western buildings were masonry structures, constructed of courses of brick or stone. Window openings in massive masonry walls had to be relatively small. From the Renaissance, western paintings (apart from murals) were also premised on frames and isolation from the surrounding environment. Photography, which regulates vision by means of the viewfinder, emerged in the nineteenth century as an extension of that frame form and subsequently became a dominant medium of
expression. Indeed, in its various guises, the frame form has been the basis of western perception and expression. It is a means of producing objects and will forever continue to be so.
In the traditional Japanese house, perception of space is controlled by the
floor.
In ‘Water/Glass’ I chose to adopt the other form of connection, the floor form, which regulates only the floor on which the subject stands. This is the traditional form of Japanese architecture, a product of post-and-beam construction in the same way that the frame form is a product of western masonry architecture. The Japanese have tried to minimise walls that separate inside from
outside. (The relatively enclosed tea-house is an exception, but even there the walls are far from solid and inside and outside are connected in diverse ways.) Installed between the posts and beams are panels that can be slid open or closed. There are of course no punched windows. The perception of space is controlled, not by the frame of a window, but by the floor. The subject, being of flesh and blood, always stands on a floor of some kind: he does not look at the world from on high, or float in mid-air like a phantom. Neither phantom nor god, the subject is a physical being. The floor form only regulates this quite natural state of affairs - and repeatedly reminds the subject of his absolute, unalterable human condition. All physical beings return to the floor form because they have to stand on a floor. Therefore, almost all possible relationships between the world and the subject are merely variations on the floor form. The floor form is open and inclusive. The frame form, on the other hand, requires the subservience of both subject and object. No other relationship between the world and the subject is possible as long as the frame is the medium. If, for example, the subject were to approach the world and attempt to connect with it in a tactile way, the frame would obstruct both that movement and the relationships that might arise from it. In such circumstances, the world appears only as a collection of visual objects separated from the subject. The frame robs the world of its diverse, multilayered and interactive character, reducing it to
paltry objects. The frame and floor forms do not represent merely architectural or methodological opposites; they represent two opposing ways of perceiving the world.
‘Water/Glass’, section through top floor
‘Water/Glass’ is an exploration of the potential of the floor form. The experiment takes place on the top floor, which is formed of a single, shallow pool of water on a bed of dark green granite. The dark colour of the stone makes it difficult to gauge the depth of the pool, which is just 15 centimetres. Instead one sees only the trembling, radiant surface of the water, which seems to float weightlessly on top of the cliff. About 100 metres below is another surface of water - the sea. The two parallel planes are used to explore various ways of connecting the subject with architecture and the world, where the pool represents architecture and the sea represents the world.
The pool is essentially a veranda made of water
The boundary conditions of this installation shift from moment to moment, responding to the changing moods of nature. At particular times, you perceive the upper and lower planes of water as a single continuous surface and you have the sensation of floating on the sea. In that moment, the subject is directly connected to the world by the medium of water. Inclement weather can reinforce this impression. On rainy days, the boundaries between world
and architecture melt: sea, sky and pool are transformed into a mass of blue-grey particles that envelop the subject. Even the distinctions between solid, liquid and gas disappear. In such moments, the building expands infinitely and becomes identical with the world. At the same time, everything in the world is compressed into and embedded within the building.
This strange phenomenon, in which the building and the world become identical, is of short duration: the illusion of oneness can be destroyed in an instant. A slight shift in the fall of sunlight, or in the shadows generated as the wind stirs the surface of the sea, causes the architecture and the world to disengage once more.
It is the strange nature of water that makes this experiment possible. Able to alternate easily between its solid, liquid and gaseous states, water makes our attempts to categorise the world look foolish. Water is also an infinitely sensitive receptor, responding to the slightest changes in the environment. Whereas objects are always in an active mode, water is always acted upon. Even its configuration is determined by its receptacle. Water is consistently passive. That is why the floor of water of ‘Water/Glass’ functions as a receptor.
At Katsura Detached Palace, which Taut so admired, there is a bamboo veranda that also functions as a
sensitive receptor. The veranda is said to have been created for viewing the moon. The lustrous bamboo reflects the colours of the world in a fascinating way; the grooves between bamboos inform us of slight changes in the angle of light by translating them into more perceptible changes of shadow. In the past, verandas had to be made of bamboo, but today we have the technology to make them of water, a receptor many times more sensitive and passive than bamboo.
To induce such diverse relationships between receptor and environment, it is not enough simply to enclose a surface of water within a building. The water surface itself must not become an independent object, but must serve (or more accurately, efface itself in serving) as a medium between the subject and the world. In this project, three steps were taken to ensure that it would do so.
One was to control the physical relationship between the subject and the surface of water. The architectural plan and circulation had to be carefully devised to ensure that the pool was always interposed between the subject and the outside world. At the same time, views of the pool from the world at large had to be completely eliminated, to prevent the pool of water from being reduced to an independent object - an object as banal as a goldfish bowl. Once it becomes an object, a thing like water
cannot be turned back into a medium connecting the subject and the world; such is the power of objects and the fragility of media.
For the same reason, views of the pool from above a certain height had to be eliminated. A bird’s-eye view would have turned the pool of water into just one of countless objects existing on the ground. The level that allows a bird’s-eye view might be called the ‘metalevel’. This is simply another name for the viewpoint from which all things in existence are perceived as objects. The moment the subject stands at the metalevel, subject and object are sundered: objects close themselves off and the world turns its back on the subject. In ‘Water/Glass’, the idea was to keep the interior floor level as close as possible to the level of the water, so as to keep the subject on the same level as the surface of the pool. This naturally created major problems of waterproofing - one of the challenges in detailing this building.
Another measure concerned the detailing of edges. The subject attempts to read everything there is to know about a material - such as hardness, density, tensile strength and temperature - from the boundaries of that material. A projection of a few millimetres on the boundary can expose everything about the material; so can the faintest curvature. The treatment of edges can be of decisive importance for architecture, particularly in Japan, where
styles are differentiated by the detailing of edges rather than by ornamentation, as they are in the West. Sukiya architecture, for example, is divided into shin, gyo and so styles by the way edges are treated. [1] Are the corners of columns at right angles or have they been chamfered or rounded? If they have been chamfered, then by how many millimetres? One can read the true character of a material and the character of the building as a whole by the way edges are treated, which is often quite subtle. Some edges in a building can be of critical importance. ‘Water/Glass’ was all about the detailing of the edges of the pool.
The surface of water seems to float weightlessly on top of the cliff
The pool is essentially a veranda made of water. Verandas in traditional Japanese wooden architecture have no borders: the slats are cut off at the ends and left as they are. The edge of the veranda connects the interior of the building to the garden and links the subject to the world.
A veranda of water requires more delicate detailing than one of wood. It loses its border only if the water continues to brim over. Here, it overflows into a drain and is
recycled by a pump.
The water does not just overflow, it emanates. It flows out to the sea and to the outer world. It was the neo-Platonists who suggested the concept of emanation. The process by which they arrived at this concept is interesting. Plato held that the world was composed of Ideas - eternal Forms modelled on pure geometric forms such as spheres and cones - and their copies. The former were universal and unchanging. They arose from human reason alone and so were immaterial. The latter were the imperfect, changing manifestations of those Forms in the physical world. Plato’s Allegory of the Cave points to the limits of human perception. It says that we are like prisoners in a cave, our necks chained so we cannot move. The world of eternal Forms exists behind us, beyond our field of vision. The light from a fire and puppet-show tricks enable us to glimpse just the shadows of those Forms.
Despite founding an object-oriented philosophy, Plato himself recognised the difficulty inherent in object-oriented thinking. The attempt to understand the world as a collection of Forms (or objects) further separates human beings from the complexity, ambiguity and profundity of the thing called reality.
Both Aristotelian philosophy and the neo-Platonic concept of emanation were intended to overcome this
difficulty. Aristotle said that Forms were not independent entities, but existed only in the concrete individual things that were visible to the subject. They were the essence (ousia) of those things. For Idea, he substituted the word eidos, derived from the word for ‘particle’. Yet giving up the concept of an abstract, universal prototype meant that objects simply became particles; they were no longer an effective tool for ordering the world. To compensate for this Aristotle devised a different ordering logic, which placed every object of human apprehension into one of ten static categories. [2]
The neo-Platonists, on the other hand, used the concept of emanation to connect the subject with the eternal Form (ie object). They held that Forms, although distant objects, influence the subject through emanation: the disturbance of spatial order by the introduction of a temporal dimension. It is important to note that emanation is not movement: they are two fundamentally different concepts. Movement introduces a temporal dimension without destroying the spatial framework (as in Newton’s mechanics of motion), whereas in emanation the frame called space is itself shaken and threatened, causing space and time to be forcibly connected. As the Allegory of the Cave makes clear, Plato himself recognised that the introduction of the concept of eternal Forms would result in spatial dislocation. He recognised that the subject (ie the individual) would be separated from the object. Neo-
Platonism attempted to solve the difficulty of spatial dislocation by introducing the factor of time.
As a movement, modernism was object- and Idea-oriented. It aspired to an international (ie universal) style of architecture, embodied in pure geometrical forms (such as the cones and spheres fetishised by Le Corbusier). Postmodernism was called forth to confront the difficulties of such an object-oriented way of thinking. Abandoning the concept of universality, it took refuge in an Aristotelian approach, categorising everything and juxtaposing all cultures and traditions in a relativistic way. For a time, the entire world was under an Aristotelian illusion that postmoderism, through categorisation, had closed the distance between Form and subject.
I wondered if it was possible to be simultaneously critical of the object form of modernism and of postmodernism.
In other words, could I overcome the object form, not by resorting to categorisation, but by adopting a different type of universal form? That is when I thought of emanation and arrived at the idea of an overflowing pool of water. Through emanation, the outside world becomes more real and manifest to the subject. It was important that emanation occur in a particular element of the building, namely the floor. Simply creating a glassed-in oval-shaped room would not liberate architecture and connect the subject to the world: to someone enclosed in
such a space, the world would appear as an enormous wraparound landscape photograph. By contrast, in ‘Water/Glass’, the floor itself flows out of the room, connecting the subject (who stands on the floor, and relies on it as a datum) to the world at the far end of that flow.
In this way, the top floor of ‘Water/Glass’ is a stage for inducing emanation, one that closely resembles the stage in No.
Ordinarily, a theatre stage is intended to represent the world. The stage space being delimited, rules of perspective are often exploited to create the illusion of depth, so as to better imitate the real world. The baroque stage is a representative example of this type of theatre. The No stage, by contrast, was originally an open space, with no walls. It was not meant to be a representation of the world, for the world clearly existed on the other side of the stage. Completely open No stages of this kind are depicted on screen paintings in a genre called Rakuchu rakugai zu (Scenes in and around the Capital). [3] By the end of the sixteenth century, the No stage had evolved into its present form. A wall called the ‘mirror board’ (kagamiita) was built at the back of the stage and a bridge (hashigakari) was attached to the left-hand side, at a shallow angle. The relationship inherent in the original open form, and the philosophy behind it, were nevertheless retained. An old pine tree, symbolising the landscape that had once been visible beyond the open
stage, was painted on the ‘mirror board’. The stage in No is neither complete in itself nor representative of the world. It merely mediates between the world that exists beyond it and the subject, that is, the audience. For that reason, the No stage does not attempt to imitate the world, to simulate depth or three-dimensionality.
In No theatre, the bridge and the stage are never parallel
In baroque theatres, foreshortened passageways are often added behind the stage to create the illusion of depth, but the bridge in No is not intended to create such an illusion. It allows an actor to make his appearance on the left and move towards the right, similar to the principle of the illustrated handscroll (emakimono), which is unrolled
from right to left. [4] Containing time within space is vital for both the illustrated handscroll and the No stage. A space that is too deep disturbs the temporal flow because the subject is apt to forget time, being absorbed into the space. But neither must spatial depth be entirely eliminated, for if it were, the handscroll or the stage would no longer represent the world. There must be space, and the space must be consistently shallow. For that reason, the bridge and the stage in No are never parallel but are joined at a slight angle in plan. The divergence from the parallel is so slight as to seem almost an error. The result is a quite difficult condition in which spatial depth and temporal depth coexist. We have become so accustomed to perceiving space and time as separate things that we forget this is the fundamental nature of the world and even feel the connection of time and space to be a contradiction.
On the No stage, this contradiction is resolved by means of the floor, an element belonging to both space and time. Whereas the wall is an exclusively spatial element - its presence is easily perceived at a distance and from a fixed (ie nontemporal) viewpoint - the floor unfolds as the subject moves. It is revealed in its entirety only gradually, that is, over time. Consequently the floor is not simply spatial but also temporal in character. This dual nature of the floor is used to advantage on the No stage to bridge the gap and connect time and space.
No actors maintain a low centre of gravity at all times. They walk as if they were gliding over the floor. Sometimes, an actor will stamp on the floor and the sound, amplified by jars installed beneath the stage, will resonate through the space. The sound is in effect a signal to the audience to focus its attention on the floor. Diverse emanations unfold as a result in the apparently simple space.
Similarly, the key to the plan of ‘Water/Glass’ is not the walls or the columns but the floor, which is sometimes made of water, sometimes of glass, so as to draw one’s attention there. The continuous murmur of flowing water is a further reminder to the subject to pay heed to the floor. In ‘Water/Glass’, the pool of water is first inserted between the subject and the world, then the oval-shaped glass domain B and the diagonally oriented domain C are inserted into the middle of the pool. The result is a multilayered medium. The subject is not presented with another world, complete in itself. I had no desire to call forth or fabricate another world. The world out there already exists. As with the No stage, a medium is inserted between the subject and the world, and that medium induces emanations.
‘Water/Glass’, top-floor plan
In Japan, space is neither complete in itself nor closed. It is merely a medium. A stage space is not another world set in opposition to the everyday world, but a medium introduced between subject and nature.
The No stage is said to express the otherworld, that is, the spirit world. That is no cause for surprise. What is surprising is that even the otherworld is treated as nothing
more than a medium. It shows how little importance the Japanese attach to the otherworld in and of itself. No is divided into genzai no and fukushiki mugen no. In the former, actors represent real human beings living in the present (genzai). In the latter, actors can alternately represent spirits of the dead and the people they were in life. Time in fukushiki mugen no can stop, progress and regress.
The hashigakari bridge is used to effect these shifts. The actor crosses the bridge from the dressing room, which is called the ‘mirror room’ (kagaminoma), and enters the stage. The orientation of the bridge induces a diagonal movement that is unique to No. Diagonals suggest the shift from space to time and from time to space. They are also often used in illustrated handscrolls to express the miraculous coexistence of the spatial and the temporal dimensions. Whether in the illustrated handscroll or on the No stage, any attempt to represent depth - both temporal and spatial - inevitably generates discontinuities. The diagonal makes it possible to bridge these without difficulty; it induces emanations.
Similarly, domain B in ‘Water/Glass’ is linked by the diagonal bridge C to the world on this side, that is, domain A. What is important is not that the bridge is diagonal but that people on the bridge move diagonally towards the sea; in doing so, they move diagonally
through space and time, invalidating the notion of their separateness.
I would like to create buildings that open up opportunities for connecting the subject to the world. A towering, object-oriented architecture impedes such a connection; a perfectly transparent architecture also has difficulty serving as a medium. Using actual matter, I would like to create an architecture that mediates and relates.
I found not only the concept of emanation but the principle behind optical lenses useful. A lens connects the subject and the world. It is transparent yet regulates the relationship between the world and the subject. The ovalshaped glass room in ‘Water/Glass’ was inspired by my memory of a particular container-like lens, formed of thin panels of glass, that I made in junior high school. The index of refraction of such a lens can change depending on the difference in density between inside and outside. If the outside is water and the inside is air, a lens of seemingly convex configuration will function as a concave lens. The lens I made as a student was far from object-like; it gave me a glimpse of the nature of a medium. ‘Water/Glass’ is like an enlarged version of that lens of long ago. First, I used glass to cut out an ovalshaped portion of air. The air inside the glass container is cut off from the air outside; the index of refraction changes depending on light conditions and the weather.
This space functions alternately as a convex and a concave lens. As far as possible, I wanted to avoid a thing that was fixed - a thing that was an object.
The philosopher Spinoza is said to have been a lens crafter by trade. If the story is true, his trade was in keeping with his philosophy. Spinoza rejected objects. That was the point on which he differed most from Descartes, who lived a century before. Descartes conceived mind and matter as separate, autonomous substances, that is, as objects. Spinoza, on the other hand, held that the two were different aspects of the same substance, which he called alternately God and Nature. (His ‘God’ was not a supernatural being but merely a mechanism of nature and the universe.) He wrote, ‘Individual things are nothing but modifications of the attributes of God, or modes by which the attributes of God are expressed in a fixed and definite manner’. [5] That worldview is analogous to the image of a lens. In the centre is God, the sole illuminant, the point from which all light radiates: mind and matter exist merely as singular points of density that slightly refract light passing through them.
Spinoza’s theory is also interesting in that he rejected the distinction between space and time. He believed that for God such a distinction was meaningless. The illusion that a thing called time existed was the result of mankind
having made the thing called space independent.
That view is quite close to the time-space image I tried to produce in ‘Water/Glass’. A desire to connect the subject and the world was the starting point for the design. As the design evolved I began to feel that the subject and the world could never be connected through manipulations aimed at achieving only a spatial connection. Connecting space to space is a simple matter, so is connecting time to time. However, once the subject is introduced into the picture with the intention of connecting the subject to the world, the distinction between time and space must be transcended. Modern science and modern architectural planning, which are premised on a distinction between time and space, are of no use in such an endeavour. That is because they have as their starting point a Cartesian worldview based on the independence of objects and the separation of time and space. ‘Water/Glass’ represents a different position, one that rejects objects and makes no distinction between time and space, but is altogether scientific.
NOTES
1.	Shin, gyo and so are the printed, cursive and very cursive styles of writing Chinese characters. The terms are also used to indicate grades of formality in fields such as flower arrangement, garden design and architecture, shin being the most formal or basic form, so being the least formal form, and gyo being in between.
2.	Artistotle’s ten categories are: Substance, Quantity, Quality, Relation, Place, Time, Posture, Habit, Action, Passion.
3.	The Rakuchu rakugai zu was a genre of screen painting that developed in the late Muromachi period and was in vogue in the Edo period. The usually paired screens depicted scenes in Kyoto and the suburbs.
4.	The illustrated handscroll (emakimono) was a form of Japanese narrative art, especially of the Heian period and Kamakura period, in which illustrations are often accompanied by text. Two well-known examples of the form are the Genii monogatari emaki, which survives in fragments, and the Ban Dainagon emaki.
5.	Spinoza, Ethics (1677), part 1, proposition 25.
ERASING:
KIROSAN OBSERVATORY, OCHI-GUN, EHIME, 1991-94
The island of Oshima lies off the coast of Shikoku, to the northeast of Imabari City in Ehime Prefecture. It covers 45.5 square kilometres and has a population of 10,000. Tangerines and fishing are the main industries. Part of the Geiyo Islands, the largest archipelago in the Inland Sea, Oshima is next to Ushima, an uninhabited island that is reputed to have been the birthplace of a notorious pirate clan that operated in these waters centuries ago.
The highest point on Oshima is a 315-metre peak with the curious name Kirosan (‘turtle-aged-mountain’). Although little more than a hill, it looms over the small island. The residents of the nearby town asked me to design an observatory on top of it.
My first visit took place on a winter’s day. The mountain was not a pretty sight. Several years earlier, the summit had been levelled and trees cut down to create a so-called Observation Park. The park was a cold, windy, desolate place, almost devoid of life. The only structure was a small public toilet.
The townspeople wanted to create an observatory that overlooked the outlying islands. They wanted the building to be a symbol of the island and the town. In short, they wanted a monument. There were few constraints. The site was large enough. I was free to determine the internal programme. It was not a built-up area, so planning regulations were not very stringent. Nevertheless, the project proved extremely difficult. I developed various schemes, but none of them was satisfactory. I grew impatient. I could not get the bleak image of the Observation Park out of my head. There are times when the absence of programmatic constraints can actually make it difficult to arrive at a design, but that didn’t seem to be the problem in this case.
I thought through the problem once more and came to the conclusion that the very idea of an observatory involved a contradiction. Typically, an observatory is constructed to take advantage of a beautiful environment. However, its construction can spoil that environment. It does not matter how beautiful the form of the observatory is; in fact, the more beautiful it is, the more conspicuous it is likely to be, to the detriment of the environment.
Observatories demonstrate the self-centred nature of human perception. They are generally objects - that is the core of the problem. I wondered if this observatory could be made transparent, that is, effectively erased, so
minimising the damage to the environment.
I therefore tried designing a transparent object. My real aim was not to create an object, but to choreograph a sequence of movements by the subject - that is, to create a device controlling his vision. Nevertheless, given the site - a park on a hill - it was inevitable that any kind of mass would appear as an object in the environment. With this scheme, I could only try to minimise the impact of that object by employing a material that was as delicate and transparent as possible.
To achieve transparency I decided to use a steel frame, which allows for more delicate columns and beams than a concrete structure. Preliminary calculations showed that, when reinforced with diagonal bracing, columns and beams could be made of steel tubing with a 200-millimetre cross section. The result would be a boxshaped structure, 40 metres long, 6 metres wide and 12 metres high, wrapped on two sides in stainless steel mesh. The vertical planes of mesh would divide the site into three layered spaces - a bamboo grove, a sandy beach, and an area carpeted with wildflowers - representing the three different types of landscape on the island. At intermediate points in the sequence, glass boxes would penetrate the mesh, enabling the subject to pass from one spatial layer to another.
The purpose of this was to remind the subject that the world is not absolute but is instead diverse and relative in character. The subject was to be made to understand this, not through intellectual argument, but through physical experience. In ascending to the top of the observatory, the visitor would pass easily from one thinly sliced layer to another, from one world to another. Such thinly sliced spaces are rare in the real world but commonplace in cyberspace, where they allow speedy transitions from one layer to another. Computer games depend on that speed of transition. One of the ideas of this scheme was to introduce into real space the structure and speed of cyberspace.
Though thin, each of the three spaces in this scheme had character. Instead of being closed, they were open and connected to the natural environment of the outside world. They were not complete in themselves, but served to mediate. For example, a difference of a few centimetres in the subject’s position relative to the stainless steel mesh completely altered his vision of the world. Seen through the mesh, the Inland Sea appeared in vague outline, as if rendered in an impressionist style. Seen without the filter of the mesh, it became a landscape straight out of the Mediterranean, sharply delineated, with bold shadows. Such things do not happen in spaces that are designed to be complete in themselves, which necessarily have depth. The scheme confirmed the fact that the position of the
subject determines the appearance of the world to a large extent. It showed that the world could be freer, lighter and more relativistic.
Model of preliminary scheme
The culmination of the upward sequence of movements was to be the subject’s arrival inside a hollow, free-form volume made of living plants. That volume was the sole opaque object in the project. All man-made objects having been made transparent, the only object permitted to assert itself was a natural one. It was almost as if a fragment of the forest was floating in mid-air on top of the mountain. I felt that this scheme effected a decisive
reversal. Since Ancient Greece and Rome, artefacts have been made to stand out as figures against a natural ground - a schema that has enabled architecture to assert its superiority over nature. In this project, however, nature was the figure that stood out against a man-made ground. This reversal was intended to serve as a criticism of the traditional relationship of contrast and domination.
Elevation of preliminary scheme
Plan of preliminary scheme
Ultimately, however, I decided to discard the scheme. I did so for two reasons, one having to do with transparency, the other with the critical stance that was expressed. Using a transparent material such as glass is not always enough to erase an object. Many glass buildings are in fact conspicuous objects that thoroughly dominate their environments. In terms of erasing an object, the setting is more important than the choice of
material. In this case, the setting was a summit that had already been levelled and turned into a perfect pedestal. Anything that is set on a pedestal becomes an object, regardless of what it is made of or how discreetly it is placed. Most works of contemporary art are tiresome because they rely on this particular property of the pedestal.
No particular skill or effort is required to turn some-thing into an object. Preventing a thing from becoming an object is a far more difficult task. I had intended to criticise the system for generating objects, first by erasing the object through the use of transparent materials, and secondly by creating a ‘natural’ floating object made of living plants. However, the scheme was still premised on a levelled site: I was not repudiating the use of a pedestal. In that sense, I was taking a stance that was both critical and conservative.
I began to wonder if it might not be possible to reverse the nature of the mountain peak itself, to make it the very opposite of a pedestal. If I could achieve that, it would represent a far more decisive repudiation of objects than the use of transparency. Even though the working drawings were nearly complete, I decided to abandon the scheme I had developed and take another approach based on burial. Simply placing the building below ground without altering its basic form would be the same as
concealing an object. My intention was to make the polar opposite of an object. I wanted to explore the potential of a form that was concave and thoroughly passive rather than assertive.
My starting point was to restore the topography. I conceived a concrete structure, with a U-shaped crosssection, set on the existing open space at the summit and bermed and planted on both sides. The top of the mountain was to be restored to its original height, with the observatory forming a slit-like excavation at its apex. Instead of an observation deck, it was to be an observation trench.
Section and model of revised scheme
I decided on the method for planting the berms only after careful study. If the plants did not quickly take root, the steep banks of earth might be washed away by rain. A landslide was the last thing I wanted. First, a welded metal net was used to hold the banked earth in place; then a viscous solution of seeds, fertiliser and fibres was sprayed onto the berms. By these means vegetation was restored to the mountaintop.
The trench is completely open and exposed to the sky, but is nearly invisible unless one is directly above. Only a thin, sharp slit appears on the face of the mountain. Here, as in nearly all public projects, the client had expected me to create a monument. Being able to meet such expectations is considered the test of a good architect. However, the only monument on this site is the natural landscape, Kirosan itself. I felt that it should be the only thing to admire here.
Observatory terrace
Visitors are momentarily taken aback by the downward orientation of the approach. They do not anticipate walking down, even part of the way, to an observatory on top of a mountain. After passing through a narrow opening, where the walls press in on them from both sides, they arrive at a sunken plaza. The space is open to the sky but enclosed on three sides by high walls. On the fourth side is a large stairway. The only thing visitors can
see of their surroundings is the sky; they wonder what sort of observatory this can be. Ascending to the top of the stairway, their field of vision suddenly expands: the islands of the Inland Sea are spread out before them.
From this deck (Deck 1), visitors make a 180-degree turn and cross a narrow bridge with a cypress footway. The bridge connects with Deck 2, located at the opposite end of the observatory, where there are views of the natural landscape. Nature has long been considered sacred in Japan. In many religious spaces, the object of veneration is natural. (At Omiwa Shrine, for instance, it is a mountain. [1 ) Typically, visitors to a Japanese shrine are led through a carefully orchestrated sequence, which often includes a bridge. The culmination of the sequence is the shrine building, beyond which worshippers may not go -the object of veneration itself remains out of bounds. For this reason the man-made structures that mediate between worshippers and the venerated object are not massive or assertive, but rather lightweight, fragile and subject to weathering over time. They are most often made of one of the pale, lightweight, fragrant woods, such as cypress, that have been highly prized in Japan since ancient times. Hence my choice of cypress for the bridge, as this observatory, too, is a device for mediating between people and nature. A hierarchical sequence carefully and gradually leads visitors into the inner depths of nature.
Deck 2 is at the highest point of the observatory, the last stage in the hierarchical sequence. From there, visitors go down a separate, steep stairway which returns them abruptly to the sunken plaza. I felt that Deck 2 required a device that effects this sudden reversal - something like the mirror typically positioned in the innermost depths of a Shinto shrine space. Having crossed a bridge, climbed the steps and reached the inner sanctum, the worshipper peers eagerly into the mirror, but the mirror rebuffs his gaze. It does not simply obstruct vision, but shows how it is imperfect, self-centred and self-referential.
The mirror in a shrine strips the act of seeing of its privileged character. I sought to create a device that performed a similar function. My solution was to arrange three pairs of cubes on Deck 2 - half of them function as seats while the other half, positioned opposite, are equipped with monitors.
When a visitor sits on the first seat and looks at the monitor opposite, he sees an overall image of Deck 2. If he looks carefully, he sees himself sitting on the stone bench - and is unsettled to realise he is being watched. The camera, hidden among trees, is difficult to spot. When the visitor sits on the second seat and looks at the
monitor opposite, he sees his own face in profile, his gaze directed slightly downward. Here too, the camera is well concealed: it takes some time to find the small hole bored into the lower part of the adjacent seat. When the visitor sits on the third seat and looks at the monitor opposite, he sees an image of woods - the same woods, directly ahead, that he can see unaided. However, that natural view differs from the image captured by a video camera in colour and resolution; where the image seen by the unaided eye has no fixed frame, the video image has a fixed frame and a clear boundary. Here too, the camera is hidden, suspended beneath the floor of the deck.
Electronic technology is used in these devices to expose the imperfection of vision and reverse its privileged status. Under ordinary circumstances, the seeing subject is under the illusion that he dominates what he sees. However, seeing also opens up the possibility of being seen. Anyone who dominates another through vision is always vulnerable to a brutal reversal.
Akira Kurosawa’s 1963 film High and Low [2] depicts the possibility of just such a reversal. A child is kidnapped from a luxurious residence situated high on a hill in Yokohama. The picture window of the residence affords a panoramic view of the city below. The kidnapper calls the wealthy owner. ‘I’ve got your child’, he says. ‘You can’t see me, but I can see everything you’re doing right now.’ The roles have been reversed. The owner of the residence is brutally stripped of the privileged status bestowed on him by his high vantage point.
Kurosawa is pointing out the danger inherent not just in seeing, but in objects. The hilltop residence is a typical object. Set on high ground, as if on a pedestal, it is a product of bourgeois desire. Looking through its
enormous picture windows, the occupants come to believe that they dominate not just nature but the world as a whole. At the same time, the bourgeoisie wants the world to see the manifestations of their sensibility and wealth. The suburban house enabled them to satisfy this dual desire - to see and be seen. As a result, the twentieth century was the century of suburban houses, which proliferated at an extraordinary rate until they dominated the landscape.
Eventually, however, it was realised that these objects were not as ideal a form as had been supposed. Success was assured only when an object stood alone on a hill, dominating and being seen by the rest of the world. When there were multiple objects, those conditions no longer applied. The view from the object was no longer of the natural landscape or the world at large, but of objects built by others - other people’s houses. The subject was overwhelmed by these unwelcome sights. Moreover, every object was continually observed, inside and out, by its neighbours.
In the suburbs, the misery of High and Low is an everyday occurrence. The dual desire to see and to be seen leads to instability. An object may be made transparent, but it remains an object. And transparent, it is more thoroughly under observation and more thoroughly dominated.
c : camera
— : SEE (**
—► . see1 • see2 (A
Conditions in the surburbs are in a sense even more wretched than those in the panopticon, a prison system conceived by the English jurist and philosopher Jeremy Bentham (1748-1832). In the panopticon the cells were arranged so that they could all be kept under constant observation from a central tower. Foucault saw this system as the model for modern disciplinary society. [3] In fact, disciplinary society is more completely realised, in a less obvious form, in the object-strewn suburbs of today. There is no need there for a central control tower: evading observation is impossible.
The observatory is a facility for stealing looks at visitors
Instability is not endemic to the suburbs: all buildings that are objects share it. One way to overcome the instability of objects is to thoroughly expose it - through theft. Theft is an effective method against those who build objects and with naive delight show the rest of society how much they have to lose. For most people, a house is an irreplaceable asset, the fruit of a lifetime’s work. That is precisely why some resort to theft, and why theft has such an impact.
The observatory is a facility for stealing looks at visitors
The observatory is a facility for stealing looks at visitors
Kirosan Observatory is a facility for committing theft, for stealing looks at visitors. The beautiful natural environment lures people to the place. Once there, they are invited to go up to the decks from the plaza. On the final deck they are given their comeuppance: ‘You cannot see me. I can see everything you are doing.’ Fear must be instilled in those who would possess and dominate the rest of the world through vision and objects.
NOTES
1.	Nara Prefecture. The object of veneration of Miwa Shrine is the mountain Miwayama.
2.	Original title Tengoku to jigoku(literally. ‘Heaven and Hell’), based on the novel King’s Ransom bv Ed McBain.
3.	Michel Foucault (1926-1984). French social scientist. historian and author of Surveiller et punir: naissance de la prison. trans. Alan Sheridan.
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison(New York: Vintage 1977).
MINIMISING:
NO STAGE IN THE FOREST.TOMOYA, MIYAGI, 1995-96
I was asked to design a No stage in Toyoma. a small town on the Kitakami River. about 70 kilometres north of Sendai, the seat of Miyagi Prefecture. The name Toyoma. written with the characters for ‘ripen’ and ‘rice’. may be a reference to the area’s rich harvests of rice. but is more likely to be a corruption of toyama. meaning ‘distant mountains’. Toyoma. which has been producing rice since the Edo period (1600-1868). prospered as the castle-town of a branch of the Date clan. From the Meiji period (1868-1912). its location on the Kitakami River helped make it a transportation hub; for a few brief years it was even the seat of the prefectural government. With its beautiful buildings and townscapes. the town is almost like an open-air museum. However. its population. now calculated to be 6.000. has been declining in recent years.
Toyoma has a number of old cultural traditions but townspeople are proudest of its own distinctive style of No, which has a 400-year history going back to Date Masamune. a daimyo of the domain of Sendai. [1] Masamune loved No. He added original touches to the
Kita and Komparu schools and founded the Komparu Okura school, later known as the Okura school.
There has always been an active interest in No throughout the Tohoku region. [2] Whereas in western Japan No was performed by professional troupes - originally the descendants of nomadic hunters - here it was performed by ordinary villagers. The prototype of Toyoma No is believed to have been a synthesis of the Okura school and a form of No that had been performed in the town long before Masamune came on the scene.
Townspeople rather than professionals continue to perform No in Toyoma. The local No society has 70 members and is the last of its type in Miyagi Prefecture. No is still such an integral part of everyday life that No songs are sung at practically every ceremony. But despite this, the town did not have a theatre. The townspeople’s desire for a stage dedicated to No led to this project.
From its necessarily limited financial resources, Toyoma managed to scrape together 190 million yen. Constructing a No theatre is usually said to cost 500 to 1,000 million yen, so in working on this project, we had to make every yen count. Architectural work nearly always involves a struggle between the ideal design and the reality of the budget. However, as I discovered, no such opposition or conflict arose here.
In creating this project, I gradually began to understand that the use of material ought to be minimised in such a space. As a consequence, the design objective did not conflict with the reality of the budget. That did not mean the design was without difficulties; in fact, it consumed an extraordinary amount of time and effort.
Minimisation is very different from minimalism. Its motive is not the simplification and abstraction of form, but rather the criticism of matter. This critical attitude is consistent with No theatre, which is often focused on the spirit world. Zeami perfected a form of No in which almost all the characters are spirits of the dead. [3] In plays in that form, time as experienced by the dead and time as experienced by the living are intertwined. The spirits censure this earthly world and the matter from which it is composed. That is the essence of No.
Of course, the actors are made of flesh and blood, and the stage is made of materials such as wood and tiles. It is both the paradox and the source of appeal of No that it uses matter to censure matter. Such paradoxical criticism of matter is what I mean by minimisation.
In what way, then, does No criticise matter? First, by the low position it assigns to it. In both the spaces and the direction of No, a low centre of gravity is of crucial importance. Raising a thing to a high position affirms its
presence and causes it to lapse into being an object. For this reason everything in No is kept low. When all things that might rise up are eliminated, all that is ultimately left is the floor. The floor therefore acquires a particular importance.
No actors walk in a distinctive way called namban, half-crouching and gliding over the floor. This posture is said to be modelled on the movements of farmers in rice paddies. However, in light of the fact that the tradition of No was maintained by people who were descended from hunters, it cannot be attributed simply to farmwork. Actors walk in this way precisely because a low centre of gravity is demanded of them.
A space for No must also be low, that is, close to the floor. One might even say that a No space can be reduced to three floors: the main stage (butai), six metres square; the floor called kenjo where spectators sit; and the shirasu, the white pebble-covered stretch of ground between the stage and the kenjo. The stage is a space for the spirits of the dead, that is, the other world; the kenjo is the world of the here and now, and the shirasu divides these two spaces. The three floors with three different functions are all that is essential to the No space. Everything takes place close to the floor. To make certain that spectators focus on that area, the actors stamp their feet on the floorboards. Jars are arranged beneath the
stage to amplify the sound. Every design device is intended to focus attention on the floor and to lower the centre of gravity of the performance as a whole. No one looks up at the roof over the stage - it is there simply to protect against inclement weather, and to wrap the stage in dark shadow. The spirits of the dead must not stand out but must sink into the dark shadow of the roof, barely distinguishable in the faint light reflected by the white pebbles.
In 1884, the construction of an entirely enclosed No theatre called Koyoza in the Shiba district of Tokyo destroyed this traditional arrangement. The building, which made it possible to perform No throughout the year, immediately became the prototype for the modern No theatre. Its stage and the seats arranged around it were both enveloped in a large outer structure. This prevented the weather from affecting performances, but many things were lost in the process, including the low centre of gravity. The building envelope became of necessity an enormous structure with a high ceiling, sheltering not just the stage but also the roof directly over it. Outwardly, the No theatre became a conspicuous object with a high centre of gravity. Inside, the roof over the stage became a towering object in the high-ceilinged space. Even more devastating was the treatment of the shirasu, which was reduced to a narrow strip less than two metres wide. The space that was once central to No, separating this world
from the next, had been virtually eliminated.
The No theatre in Toyoma was intended both as a criticism and as a reversal of the arrangment first introduced in Koyoza. Indeed, calling it a theatre is apt to give rise to a misunderstanding, for this suggests an enclosed, self-sufficient structure, that is, an object. Our goal was neither an object nor a building, but rather a garden in which three floor surfaces are carefully placed in a natural environment.
That idea was inspired by the site that the town provided - a beautiful hillside covered by woodland. Among the trees stood an abandoned house. I felt that I could create an excellent No space by arranging three floors on that spot. The floors would be open to the woods. There seemed to me no need for walls, for a complete building.
The work was more like garden design than architecture. First, I situated the stage and the bridge (hashigakari) in the landscape. Those two elements together constitute the performance space of No. I arranged the floor for spectators in an area facing the stage. The kenjo is covered with tatami mats, which need to be protected from rain, so I provided the area with a roof, that I made as low as possible. A steeply pitched roof like the one over the stage would have been too assertive, turning the kenjo into an object, whereas it is strictly a place for the
spectator - that is, the subject. As a result, the kenjo is practically modernist in design, resembling a Miesian building composed simply of a floor, a roof and the minimum structural support. It is open on all sides, though it can be closed off with movable glass panels when necessary.
Between the wooden floor where spirits dance and the tatami-covered floor where spectators sit is the shirasu. Those three floors are open to the landscape and people can access them at any time. That is the biggest difference between this stage and the enclosed No theatre of the Koyoza-type. In principle, a Koyoza-type theatre is closed except during performances. People are not free to come and go - a problem that nearly all public buildings share.
I wanted to propose an alternative to such closed facilities. Toyoma No is a form of No performed and watched by townspeople; it is an extension of everyday life. Anyone can approach the No stage at any time. They can stroll around the stage as they might stroll through a garden; they can even go into the woods. They can close their eyes, listen to the sounds of the woods, and imagine past or future performances on the stage.
More than just open up the space to the public, I wanted to make the tatami-covered kenjo a community centre for the townspeople. They proposed many possible uses for
the space, including a practice room for the tea ceremony and traditional Japanese dance. At my suggestion the dressing room is also used during the day as a small museum displaying No masks and costumes, and in the evening as a place for practising No songs. In this way, each room serves multiple functions. By crossprogramming and by opening up the space to the natural environment, I was able to dissolve the rigid framework of architecture.
In opening up the space to the woods, my greatest concern was the design of the shirasu. Ordinarily, this is a left-over area between two structures, the stage and the kenjo. In the modern era, the focus of design has always been objects; the design of open space has been treated as a matter of secondary importance. A garden designer is usually called upon to deal with the space that is left over when the structures (that is, objects) have been completely designed. Here, however, I felt this process ought to be reversed. This narrow, residual area is in fact key to the performance of No, sometimes separating and sometimes miraculously connecting this world and the otherworld. If it were correctly designed, it could assure the success of the scheme.
I felt that the shirasu had first of all to be large. I based its size on the shirasu of the south No stage in the Nishi-Honganji temple in Kyoto, but in contrast to that shirasu,
this one is stepped so as to create another spectator area, a second kenjo, with a side-on view of the stage. This lateral view forms the main view of the stage, with the woods beyond providing a backdrop. (This sightline is indicated by arrow X in the plan on page 133.) Usually the main view of the stage is from the front, with the so-called ‘mirror board’ (kagamiita) seen directly behind. From this viewpoint (arrow Y in the plan), one cannot see beyond the mirror board.
The mirror board came into being as a way to enable performers to access the stage from the dressing room without being seen. It is painted with a stylised pine, the lower portion of which is never depicted, as it is meant to represent a tree standing behind the stage and partly screened from view. The introduction of the mirror board was a major event in the evolution of No. It helped create a backstage circulation route and, in the depiction of the pine, provided an opportunity for further artistic expression. However, something important - the open stage, a quite unique theatrical space - was lost.
The natural environment that had originally existed beyond the stage was not a world unto itself, but simply another layer of space interposed between the spectator (i.e. the subject) and nature. Creating an entirely separate world within the confines of the stage would require an enormous space and ingenious stage devices. Stages in
the West in fact underwent such a process of enlargement and elaboration.
No, however, took the opposite path. Its spaces were gradually stripped of material until they were reduced to simple frames that are self-effacing and so able to enclose anything. The otherworld (the immaterial world) reveals its true nature only when seen in the framework of this world (the material world). Likewise, this world begins to reveal its true nature only when seen in the framework of the otherworld. No in that sense is a drama about framework. It was to restore the stage’s original character as a framework that I reorganised the entire spatial arrangement around a view of the stage in the X-direction, with the woods forming the background. The dark woods suggest an eternal distance that no man-made object can block. This position also provides a sideways view of both the kenjo (this world) and the stage (the otherworld); it makes manifest the great divide between them, but also their overlapping through the arrangement of the stage. The view suggests both result and structure, both representation and being.
The dark woods behind the No stage suggest an eternal distance
Here, I made two decisions. One relates to the quality of the shirasu. This ground area is usually made of white pebbles: its whiteness indicates its special quality. In addition, it is considered to have originally symbolised water. In the No stage built out over the sea at the famous Itsukushima Shrine in Hiroshima Prefecture, water is used to separate this world from the otherworld. Perhaps ‘separate’ is not entirely correct in this case: the stage and
the kenjo are not divided but instead both float on a surface of water that stretches as far as the eye can see.
Whether made of water or of white pebbles, the shirasu is not on the same level as this world and the otherworld (the stage), but exists in a space on an entirely different plane - that is, on a metalevel. It must therefore have the quality of infinite extension appropriate to the metalevel. It must be a space without form or distance, a space so abstract it seems almost mathematical in character. Establishing a spatial metalevel makes possible the creation of a dramatic metalevel.
Section showing the two stages and, between them, the shirasu - ground that belongs neither to this world nor the otherworld
On this site in the woods, however, I felt that white pebbles would be inappropriate. The trees and the damp earth beneath them were both dark. Set against that dark background, the white pebbles would be too conspicuous and assertive. I decided to use crushed black stone
instead, so the shirasu blends in with the forest floor, which in turn becomes an extension of the shirasu and thus comes to represent the metalevel. Just as the water in ‘Water/Glass’ preserves its abstract quality by continuing to flow out and spill over into the sea, the shirasu maintains its abstract state by continuing to flow out and spill over, from the stage towards the woods.
The shirasu
The other decision I made concerned the detailing of the stage. My first idea was to use a traditional design expressing the ideals of No. In a traditional No theatre, the main stage is six metres square; to this are added a bridge that meets the stage at an angle and a side stage (jiutaiza) 1.5 metres deep. The main stage is raised 90 centimetres above the shirasu, with a wainscot covering its lower portion. I was troubled by the idea of the
wainscot, which would have created the impression that the stage was a large mass, an object, on the shirasu, whereas my objective was to reduce the materiality of the stage until it approached the condition of an immaterial frame - ideally, a single thin floor floating over the shirasu. The only precedent I could find for such a stage was the stage at Itsukushima Shrine. It had no wainscot, probably because the wood panels would have rotted in the water.
View showing the two stages
I came to the conclusion that this No stage, too, ought to be designed as if it were built on water. Such an interpretation seemed in accord with my decision to use crushed black stone instead of white pebbles on the shirasu, because deep water appears dark. I gradually began to picture a pale stage floating on dark water on the forest floor. Eliminating the wainscot reduced both material and construction costs. Design ideals were in
Once I had eliminated the wainscot, I began to be troubled by the thickness of the roof over the stage. The traditional roof has multiple layers of shingles applied at its bottom edge to make it appear thicker and enormous end-tiles (so-called ‘ogre tiles’), more than three metres high, ornamenting the ridge. It is too heavy and substantial to be called an immaterial frame.
I wanted to strip the roof of as much matter as possible. In a traditional No stage, the roof is either gabled or hipped. A triangular gable would have presented itself to the kenjo, turning the roof into an enormous object. By contrast, a hipped roof would present only its lower edge to spectators; by reducing the thickness of that edge, I thought I could reduce the apparent volume of the roof as a whole. The lower edge of the roof was made quite thin, as in sukiya-style architecture. For the ends of the ridge, I used kawazu tiles, which are only about 15 centimetres high, instead of the larger ogre tiles. The ridge tiles, too, were thin and low in profile.
Plan of a typical No theatre
Despite these efforts, the use of tiles presented problems. Being thick and heavy, they inevitably increased the presence and materiality of the roof. It would never be thin, no matter how we detailed it. We were studying alternative roofing materials when we came across a natural slate quarried in a mountain near Toyoma. This local slate was used to roof two well-known Tokyo landmarks: the old Ministry of Justice Building (Ende and
Bockmann, 1895) and Tokyo Station (Kingo Tatsuno, 1914).
What made the slate attractive was its thinness, a result of the great pressure it had been subjected to deep underground. Each material has its own distinctive system of dimensions. Knowing the material, one can with fair accuracy predict the dimensions of a unit of that material and the width and depth of a joint between two such units. The strength of the material and the method of construction define that system of dimensions.
Conversely, given the dimensions, one can determine both the material and the method of construction. One can tell through dimensions everything about the way the material was collected and transported. Dimensions must therefore be determined with great care.
I decided to roof the building with this local slate. I liked the fact that it could be as thin as 6 millimetres, in defiance of the normal system of dimensions for stone. Materials are all basically the product of action and movement. In most cases, however, materials do not have the capacity to acknowledge that fact, nor do we have the capacity to understand it. Materials have incredibly rich histories, but we don’t know how to read them, so materials and buildings remain silent.
I hoped that the 6-millimetre dimension would provide an
opportunity to break that silence. We conducted repeated experiments on the stone’s strength and were able to reduce the thickness even further, to 4.5 millimetres, which proved to be its limit. I felt that the slate would be most articulate in the vicinity of that limit.
The thickness and the distinctive surface texture reveal a great deal about the slate: the rippled folds on its surface tell us it was not cut by machine, but split with a wedge.
In his perceptive study of folds, [4] Deleuze reexamines Leibniz’s sense of materiality. Leibniz believed that matter is not composed of autonomous particles (i.e. objects) with absolute hardness; nor is it a fluid of absolute liquidity (i.e. ground against which objects stand out as figure). Matter is instead aggregation and the product of pressure applied to aggregation. Time is built and folded into matter, and so cannot be separated from it. When the natural slate of Toyoma is split, that essential nature of matter is instantaneously revealed. Splitting the slate into thin sheets reduces its volume and leaves only time exposed on its surface.
No is similar in its effect. Matter and volume are reduced until they are virtually eliminated, making it possible to come and go freely between the immaterial and the material worlds, between life and death. Matter is converted into time. At Toyoma I attempted to take the reduction of matter in No even further. The stage, stripped
of its wainscot, becomes a single thin plane floating in the woods. Split into the thinnest possible sheets, the slate drifts between matter and time. Matter melts away into the woods.
The dissolution of the distinction between matter and time and the conversion of matter into time are not themes unique to the dramatic spaces of No. We are today engaged in an effort to regain time. Up to now, time has been suppressed by an excess of matter. By stripping away matter, we can restore time. Enabling matter to articulate time, we can excite the flow of time. To do so, we must criticise matter but at the same time believe in the potential that is surely sealed into it. The result will be the emergence of something that is not so much architecture as landscape.
NOTES
1.	Date Masamune (1567-1636), warrior of the Azuchi-Momoyama and early Edo periods. He was made daimyoof the domain of Sendai after siding with Tokugawa Ieyasu at the Battle of Sekigahara in 1600.
2.	Tohoko, the northeastern region of the main Japanese island. is comprised of Aomori. Iwate, Miyagi, Akita. Yamagata and Fukushima Prefectures.
3.	Zeami (1363-1443), actor. playwright and critic. In his treatises. Zeami formulated such aesthetic principles as yugen (subtle beauty). Zeami’s father Kan’ami (1333-1384), also an actor and a playwright. took an older genre of performing art known as sarugakuand. under the patronage of the third Ashikaga shogun. Yoshimitsu (1358-1408), elevated it into a dramatic art form of great refinement. His troupe. the Kanze school. is still one of the foremost schools of No.
4.	Gilles Deleuze. Le Pli: Leibniz et le Baroque (Paris: Editions de Minuit. 1991); trans. by Tom Conley as The Fold: Leibniz and the Baroque (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 1992).
UNRAVELLING: JAPANESE PAVILION FOR THE VENICE BIENNALE, 1995
The Venice Biennale is held every two years in the Castello Gardens, usually referred to simply as the Giardini. I was asked to design the space of the Japanese Pavilion in 1995, which happened to be the centennial of the biennale. The Giardini have two broad avenues that meet at right angles and terminate in symbolic, object-type buildings: at the end of one avenue is the enormous white Italian Pavilion, at the end of the other is the British Pavilion. The size and location of a country’s pavilion reflects its political importance at the time the park was laid out. The physical arrangement of the park is supremely baroque, as is the idea of representing nationstates by pavilions that express national character in their design. The nature of this event, which has nations competing against each other, parallels the system on which the entire site is based.
Castello Gardens, Venice
The Japanese Pavilion stands next to the German Pavilion, which in turn is next to the British Pavilion, one of the two focal points of the park. It is a favourable location that certainly seems to reflect the pro-Japanese sentiments that prevailed in Italy from the time of the Axis. Despite this, the pavilion is easily overlooked. Most pavilions in the park are grand, neoclassical compositions, equipped with pediments and colonnades that emphasise
their entrance. The Japanese Pavilion is a grey, windowless building, with an entrance tucked away behind some trees at the end of a winding path. Its damp and dim pilotis area seems an anomaly in the otherwise bright environment of the park. People in the Japanese art world have a very low opinion of the pavilion. The obscure entrance is held to be at least partly to blame for the low attendance figures and lukewarm reception attached to most exhibitions held in the space.
Why was the Japanese Pavilion built this way? Why does it turn its back on the worldview and order represented by the other pavilions? To learn the answers to these questions, we must examine the process by which the building was constructed in 1955.
The architect, Takamasa Yoshizaka, had a reputation as a free-spirited child of nature with an international outlook rare among his countrymen.^ He was once described as ‘a man who could dance with the Queen in mountainclimbing boots’. After working in Le Corbusier’s atelier from 1950 to 1952, he set up his own practice in Japan. His international background and experience secured him the job of designing the Japanese Pavilion for the Venice Biennale. This was a great honour for Yoshizaka, who was then only 38, but the job proved extremely difficult. Besides the problems entailed in working in a foreign country, he had to adhere to a tight schedule - only three
months were allocated for actual construction. The greatest problem of all was that the organisers of the biennale required the pavilion to be in a ‘Japanese style’. Essentially what they wanted was a building with a traditional Japanese tiled roof. There was no way that Yoshizaka, fresh from Le Corbusier’s atelier, would accept such a condition. He was compelled to resist. This battle, however, was somewhat irregular; Yoshizaka’s foe was not the Orient but Orientalism - the West’s idea of what it considered to be Japanese. Rejecting the idea of a tiled roof, Yoshizaka proposed instead an unorthodox building with a flat roof and pilotis. Eventually, with the opening of the exhibition only six months away, the biennale officials had no choice but to approve, or rather acquiesce to, his proposal.
Yoshizaka’s pavilion, site plan
The building that Yoshizaka designed resembles, but at the same time is somehow quite different from, works by his mentor. Where Le Corbusier used pilotis to turn a building into an object by raising it off the ground and severing it from its environment, there is a different nuance to Yoshizaka’spilotis. In plan, the columns supporting the Japanese Pavilion are arranged like a pinwheel. Le Corbusier, on the other hand, always used a colonnade to indicate the front of the building, aligning his columns to draw the observer’s attention, endow space with directionality, and give the building an impressive
face. That cannot be achieved with a pinwheel arrangement, which does not give space directionality but only allows it to revolve. No single elevation is emphasised; the building/object has no face. That is not the only strange thing about Yoshizaka’s use of pilotis. After devoting so much effort to separating the building from the earth, Yoshizaka then banks up the ground so that it reestablishes contact with the building near the entrance. The building is an odd object, nearly independent of, yet clinging to, the environment.
Yoshizaka’s pavilion, plan and section
Yoshizaka attempted something strange inside as well. There was originally a hole right in the middle of the roof - not a skylight, simply an open hole. Naturally, this allowed rain and air to enter, along with dead leaves. To drain the water, Yoshizaka opened a hole in the floor right below the one in the roof, so that the rain trickled down directly to the pilotis. Yoshizaka’s aim was to create a
connection between heaven and earth by way of architecture.
Allowing rain and wind to pass through the space played havoc with temperature and humidity levels. It also created a very real risk that the artwork would be damaged by the rain. The holes were quickly closed. The enormous columns of the pilotis were also a problem. Rising through the interior in their pinwheel formation, they disturbed what would otherwise have been a simple cubic space, of the kind that is generally deemed most appropriate for the display of art. Instead of a neutral container, the Japanese Pavilion offered a mazelike interior, a nonuniform space that is agitated and difficult to understand.
In many respects, the building was a clear failure. Even after his death, Yoshizaka continues to be denounced as someone with no understanding of the requirements of a space for art. However, there is always much to be learned from failure, whereas little can be learned from success. Yoshizaka’s failure in Venice was especially intriguing to me.
Many things about the pavilion become clear if we consider what Yoshizaka was trying to create, not as a building, but as a garden. Here, the ground rises to touch and indeed enter the building. Space extends
uninterrupted from the garden outside to the interior, which forms another garden, exposed to wind and rain. Inside, the four pinwheel columns establish a certain order and generate invisible passages. A space that begins as a volume is in this way unravelled and transformed into a space of passages, a space of temporal sequence. What Yoshizaka attempted to do was to unravel an architecture conceived as a spatial entity and turn it into a temporal one.
Yoshizaka’s pavilion
a radiant white object lifted off the ground
No one took any notice of this idea in 1955. Everyone’s attention was focused instead on the radiant white object lifted high off the ground, designed by a young man who had returned triumphantly to Japan from Le Corbusier’s atelier. In that sense, Yoshizaka was doubly alienated, having to struggle against Westerners seeking a ‘Japanese’ object on the one hand, and Japanese seeking a ‘western’ object on the other. He could not meet the expectations of either side. The media of the time, which depended on still photographs, were naturally unable to communicate the nature of the space. Eventually, Yoshizaka had to confront the fact that he could only win recognition by offering up objects to the world. At first he
attempted to capture in space the wild, living, flowing nature of earth, wind and light. Later in his career, he made it his task to translate, fix and freeze that wild nature into objects that took on the organic look of freeform sculptures. Through these wild, ‘individualistic’ objects, Yoshizaka secured his status as a creative architect.
My aim in Venice was to restore some of the fresh, wild quality of the original interior. First, I wanted to revive the flow between interior and exterior. I wanted the entire pavilion to suggest one continuous garden. Repeated remodelling had turned the interior into a uniform, monotonous space severed from its surroundings. The hole in the roof had been closed, and a strange, mandala-like pattern in marble on the floor had also been concealed under a grey carpet. We proposed filling the space with water in order to turn the interior back into an exterior. We would create a garden, not with soil and sand, but with water. Yoshizaka had attempted to make the interior a part of the cycle that binds heaven to earth by punching holes through the roof and the floor. We devised a system to allow the water that covered the floor to flow and circulate, just as the wind and rain had circulated through Yoshizaka’s interior. I will never forget the moment when it was set in motion and the purl of flowing water spread throughout the dark interior. The closed, stagnant space was forced open.
New layout
The floor was covered with black waterproof sheeting which made it virtually impossible for the casual observer to gauge the depth of the pool, though the water was actually only five centimetres deep. A space of immeasurable depth thus suddenly appeared within the limited framework of the building. I laid a narrow path over this black pool. The path had to be like a flimsily constructed, narrow bridge over a river, to make the water
seem that much more powerful. I selected thin boards of pale wood, 70 centimetres wide. Visitors walked on the bridge with some trepidation. The water dominated the entire interior space and forced the very air inside the pavilion to move.
How, then, should the path be arranged? I spent a great deal of time on this question, because the layout of the path would largely determine the design of time. On the path, visitors experience everything that the pavilion has to offer: every scene, every fragment of the interior, appears in its place in a sequence. The path is both a spatial and a temporal axis. The massive, aggregated object that is the pavilion unravels into a line called the path, in the same way that a ball of yarn unravels. This path circles the pool of water much as the path circles the pond in a Japanese stroll garden. [2] In classical western art, objects are placed on solid podia; by contrast, in a stroll garden, objects are seen floating on water. The pond exists to force objects into this unstable, precarious state where they are stripped of their weight and reality and turned into visual images. The stroll garden can be said to be a technology developed precisely for that purpose. An even more vivid example of this is the practice among aristocrats of the Heian period (794-1185) of filling a bowl with water and enjoying the reflected view of the moon; they essentially turned the moon into a visual image.
New circulation path through the pavilion
On the far side of the water in the Japanese pavilion we arranged various items, most notably Waterfall by the Japanese-style painter Hiroshi Senju. The painting was interesting first of all for its technique, which involved standing a huge black sheet of Japanese paper (washi) on one end, and pouring an enormous volume of white paint over it. Traces of the flow of liquid are fixed on washi just as traces of light are fixed on photographic paper.
Although classified as a painting, the work defies categorisation: it is in fact closer to a camera obscura than a painting.
Waterfall by Hiroshi Senju
Furthermore, this ‘waterfall’ was arranged in the pavilion so as to be reflected in the pool, which made it seem more like a projected image. The movement of people on the path caused the water to ripple, making the reflected image ripple as well. It was as if the waterfall depicted in the original work of art had suddenly begun to flow. The image of an image seemed to take on life.
A description of a somewhat similar arrangement is to be found in a Heian-period collection of poetry by Minamoto no Yorimasa. A waterfall was painted on a wall in the garden of fellow poet Fujiwara no Norikane. Real water issued from a hole (presumably connected to some source of water behind the wall) in the lower part of the painting, and from a distance, the painting could be mistaken for an actual waterfall. [3]
Astonished, Yorimasa wrote:
I cannot forget, asleep or awake,
The sight of the waterfall that was real yet painted.
To this Norikane replied:
I cast on your heart strings of water From a wall built in the world of dreams.
Works of trompe I’oeil of this kind were referred to as okoe. The okoe raises the question of what is reality and what is representation. There are, first of all, actual things called waterfalls; paintings of waterfalls are representations of those things. Water is one of the most difficult subjects to represent in paintings, as it is not perceived as an object independent of the environment. It is by nature an anti-object and can respond to light in two very different ways, appearing either as transmitted light or as reflected light. It has often inspired new forms of
expression in paintings precisely because of this, Monet’s ‘water lilies’ being a well-known example.
A waterfall is arguably an even more difficult subject than a pond of water lilies because it is continually flowing and can be perceived both as volume and as particles. The creator of the okoe in question undoubtedly found conventional means of depicting a waterfall to be unsatisfactory and therefore devised a new form of expression that merged painting and real water. (Lacan would have said that the occasion demanded the merging of the world of imagination called painting with the world of reality called water.) Moreover, the paired poems added yet another layer - the world of symbols - to the work. The layering of the world of reality, the world of imagination and the world of symbols is indeed one of the distinctive techniques of traditional Japanese spatial expression. Such layering is also often found in more contemporary works of art employing electronic technology.
Experiencing this work of art must have involved a strange form of appreciation. Ordinarily, one is admiring the technique and sensibility displayed in the representation. Here, however, the opposite was true: overlapping an expression of the world of imagination with a subject belonging to the world of reality demonstrated the inadequacy of the world of imagination.
That inadequacy was precisely what was being admired and appreciated. The poems - expressions belonging to the world of symbols - supplemented and underlined the fact of admiration. Confronted by object and representation, by the world of reality and the world of imagination, by the real and the virtual, the observer occupied a metalevel. Neither object nor representation was entirely satisfactory. What the observer was actually admiring was the metalevel itself.
The introduction of water into the pavilion at Venice took a similar form. The theme of the exhibition was the impossibility of representation. First, Senju painted a waterfall. The painting was executed using a special technique in recognition of the impossibility of such a task. A further level of critique was added by the presence of actual water in front of the painting. The water reflected Senju’s painting and suggested a basin at the bottom of a waterfall. The rippling of the water brought the basin into being, making it many times more real than the painting of the waterfall above. Like the artist of the painting described by Minamoto no Yorimasa, we made the waterfall as real as possible with the help of actual water, even though it made the impossibility of representation all the more evident.
This elaborate two-fold denial was repeated in our layout for the pavilion as a whole. Yoshizaka did not believe that
a country could be represented by a single architectural image, any more than a waterfall could be represented by a painting. Punching a hole in the roof was a way of asserting that belief. Just as the Heian-period artist had opened up a hole in the middle of the painting of a waterfall, he opened up a hole in the middle of the building and tried to draw in the wind and the rain -elements of the real world.
Unfortunately, Yoshizaka’s pavilion failed to open up architecture. Reality was not introduced into the building as forcefully as water was through the painting. Yoshizaka preserved the object even as he punctured it: the hole, like the oculus in the Pantheon in Rome, reinforced the building’s centralised character and ended up making it more coherent as an object. Therein lay the paradox of Yoshizaka as an architect, or perhaps the paradox of the times: an attempt to introduce the outside world and dissolve architecture ultimately strengthened the object. After the Venice Biennale, Yoshizaka did not try to open up architecture to the outside world, but instead tried to introduce the outside world into architecture in orderto seal it in. In opening a hole in the Venice pavilion, he was in some respects anticipating the trap in which he would become ensnared.
Making architecture into an object means distinguishing between inside and outside and erecting a mass called
‘inside’ in the midst of ‘outside’ (of which nature is one version). More than any other architect at the time, Yoshizaka turned his attention to, and attempted to assimilate, that outside. However, he knew instinctively that by doing so he would be creating a stronger ‘inside’.
That was not a method unique to Yoshizaka, but was in fact the prevailing approach in architecture in the second half of the twentieth century. The modus operandi of postmodernism, for example, was to strengthen architecture by assimilating what had been excluded up to then as being ‘outside’ modern architecture, including premodern architectural styles and simple natural materials such as stone and wood. In this way, the ‘outside’ was used and consumed, in conformance with the methodology of capitalism.
What we attempted to do in Venice was to reverse that method; our intention was not to revive architecture by assimilating the outside, but rather to dissolve the framework called architecture and to let what was inside flow out. To do this we designed the interior as a garden. The wooden ‘bridge’ inside the pavilion was extended outside. It stretched into the trees that had been planted by Yoshizaka, dissolving the articulation of interior and exterior.
Our last remaining problem was the sequence of the route
through the pavilion. Yoshizaka’s plan does not embody any concept of sequence. Indeed, it is often asserted that, though music and literature are sequential, there is no sequence in architecture. With a work of architecture, one is free to look at the exterior from any direction and at any time one chooses. If access is not restricted, one can enter a building and walk around its interior spaces at will. All that is true if architecture is considered as an object. However, if architecture is regarded as a temporal entity, it becomes a series of experiences unfolding in time, that is, something sequential. Architecture is a continuous form not unlike literature and music, in which case architectural design is the design, not of form, but of sequence.
Our aim was to redesign as a temporal entity a building originally designed by Yoshizaka as an object. However, completely divesting architecture of its character as an object is impossible, since architecture is composed of actual matter. Well aware of that impossibility, we still attempted to shake up the building. We tried to stretch it into one continuous, linear route and to make it endlessly ‘oscillate’ between being a temporal form and being an object. A subtle approach to sequence and speed is most important in such a scheme. Many people mistakenly regard architecture as something permanent because, compared to many other things in everyday life, including our own bodies, buildings seem immune from the effects
of time. Because of this people have become less sensitive to time in the context of architecture. They need to be reminded that the design of space is by no means different from the design of time. They need to recognise anew that buildings are also fragile things that are subject to the effects of time: they are fleeting experiences, in a sense. We were concerned not so much with forms and materials, as with sequence and speed.
At first we considered using the approach exactly as Yoshizaka intended. A pathway covered in pale timber would pass through the trees and climb the stairs to the entrance. Yoshizaka’s scheme had only this one entrance, but we discovered a small emergency exit on the side of the building and devised a continuous route going in through the entrance and leaving through the emergency exit, from where it passed through the pilotis area and eventually joined the avenue in front of the pavilion. In this way, time and sequence would be introduced into the building: a coherent object would be stretched into a continuous temporal entity. On the night before the opening, however, we chose to reverse that order, and switched the starting point and the finish.
With our original sequence, visitors would have accessed the building by way of the entrance as Yoshizaka intended. Yoshizaka’s entrance was modest and casual compared to the baroque entrances of other pavilions, but
the stairway and canopy were still sufficiently monumental. When we stood in front of the entrance, the building confronted us with unexpected force as an object. However, when entered by way of the emergency exit, the building had no way, as it were, of putting up a front. In a sense, it disappeared. Reversing the sequence changed the form completely and demonstrated the dynamic, unstable nature of the relationship between human beings and matter. I suddenly became aware of this while walking around the completed pavilion. From the avenue, visitors first entered the dim and somewhat dank pilotis area and then went in through the narrow emergency exit. After walking through the pavilion, they left through the formal entrance. Visitors were scarcely aware of the canopy and stairway at the formal entrance. Unless they looked back, the architecture was effectively effaced.
The question is whether we want architecture to be effaced or to stand out - the darkness that we call the ‘outside’ can achieve either. We need just to take note of the direction and speed of the flow of time within it, then we can carefully and gently float matter in that current and, like a thing without substance, matter will flow quietly away.
NOTES
1.	Takamasa Yoshizaka (1917-1981), an architect known for a unique style that combined modernism and the vernacular. As professor at Waseda University, he was mentor to many regionalist architects such as Atelier Zo.
2.	The stroll garden developed in the feudal period (1573-1868). It has a path laid around a pond, with various views and elements alluding to famous places in classical works of Japanese literature arranged along that path. The oldest extant stroll garden is said to be that of the Katsura Detached Palace. After I showed him around the completed Japanese Pavilion, the performance and conceptual artist Nam June Paik remarked, ‘You had the Katsura Detached Palace in mind, didn’t you? That is my favourite work of architecture.’
3.	Quoted in Nobuo Tsuji, Nihon biiutsu no hyoid (‘Expressionism in Japanese Art’), (Tokyo: Kadokawa Shoten, 1986). Minamoto no Yorimasa (1104-1180) was a military aristocrat and poet of the Heian period (7941185). The poet Fujiwara no Norikane (1107-1165) was his cousin. Tsuji suggests that Norikane’s reply was an allusion to the raigozu, a painting of the Amitabha from whose hand an actual five-coloured string was extended to a dying person, in order to summon the Buddha of compassion to lead one to paradise.
REVERSING:
CHOFU THEATRE, TOKYO, 1997
I designed a stage for the dancer and choreographer Haruakira Isshu. Except that is not quite true. Designing a demarcated space called the ‘stage’, distinguished from the ‘seats’, seemed to me a limited endeavour. I was more interested in the space of the theatre, the relationship between performers and audience, and rather than confirm the pre-existing relationship, I wanted to reverse it. There are various forms of reversal: this one was topological, involving the reversal of stage and seats. The dancers danced, not on the stage, but in the empty seating area, while the audience sat in the space ordinarily called the stage.
Reversing stage and seats does not mean much if the two areas are spatially of equal value, but of course in the modern theatre they are not. The stage is a privileged space raised above the level of the seats, like a classical building on a podium. This endows every performer and object on it with a privileged character.
The status of the stage is further elevated by the proscenium arch that frames it. Naturally, the arrangement
and effect of that frame are asymmetrical: it appears as a frame only when viewed from the seats, and not from the stage. Thus reversing stage and seats requires careful calculation, as a simple reversal of space does not produce a reversal of effect. In this case I chose to screen the proscenium arch with a vinyl sheet, which intervenes at all times in the relations between the two spaces and makes possible something more than a simple reversal - a relativisation and dissolution of the privileged status of the stage.
The process of separating and elevating the stage above the seats began in antiquity, in the evolution from Greek to Roman theatre. Early Greek theatres were open to the environment. They had rising tiers of seats arranged in concentric circles; the stage was round and occupied the lowest level inside the seating area. Seats and stage were not in opposition, but were literally one space.
That unity was soon destroyed with the addition of a wall at the back of the round stage. Behind the wall was the tent (skene) where the actors dressed. Later this was replaced with a wooden hut and then a permanent masonry structure (which was nevertheless still called a skene). Eventually, the front wall of the skene began to function as the background for the stage, endowing the objects on it with a privileged character. The next step was to shift the focal point from the circular stage at the
lowest level to the proskenion in front of the skene. This effectively drew a clear line between stage and seats. The skene was subsequently made larger and acquired an elaborate, palatial facade which became the prototype for the Roman theatre.
With the introduction of the proscenium a clear line was drawn between stage
and seats
The development of the Roman theatre was not simply a matter of spatial change, for a theatre is temporal as well as spatial: it has a route and a sequence, evident in the way in which the audience is introduced into the seating area. In Greece, spectators entered at the level of the circular stage (called the orchestra). They stood first on the low stage, affirming the continuity between stage and
auditorium, and only then did they step up to their seats. In Rome, by contrast, spectators descended to their seats from entrances at the highest level. This sequence had a decisive effect on the structure of space, serving to increase the distance between stage and seats. It increased further with the introduction, in early seventeenth-century Italy, of a proscenium arch framing the stage.
Roman theatre space
The nineteenth-century composer Richard Wagner attempted to go further still and effect a complete separation of seats and stage. With the cooperation of Gottfried Semper,]!] he constructed what he believed was the ideal theatre space in Bayreuth. As if to make doubly certain that seats and stage were separated, he built two proscenium arches. He placed the orchestra in a pit between the arches, concealing it from view. The stage became an entirely separate world, its otherworldliness and privileged character only reinforced by the music emanating from a hidden source. Wagner devised a new
arrangement for the seating as well. He dispensed with the horseshoe configuration and with the boxes and galleries that were customary at the time and instead arranged the seats in shallow concentric rows around the stage. In addition, he dimmed the lighting in the seating area and kept the ceiling low to ensure the audience would focus on the stage. The lifeblood of opera is spectacle, and to heighten the spectacle, the stage was made to dominate. In Bayreuth, isolated individuals confronted the privileged object, one on one.
Wagner’s ideal theatre space, the Festspielhaus at Bayreuth, which opened in
1876
In a sense, Wagner’s ideal theatre space became a prototype for twentieth-century spatial form, not only in architecture but also in urban spaces. The spatial form of the suburbs is quite Bayreuthian: house is separated from house by a set distance and a buffer zone of lawns. Just as the ceiling over the seating was kept low in Bayreuth, so everything in the suburbs is kept low, including the buildings. Just as the low seats confront the high stage, so the low suburbs confront the tall, privileged city. Needless to say, the city overwhelms the houses.
If the suburbs are the product of a Bayreuthian vision of the city, then fascism is the product of a Bayreuthian vision of politics. The masses are isolated into individuals, left, as it were, in low-ceilinged darkness and then suddenly confronted by a transcendent and radiant being. It is no accident that Hitler was a devotee of Wagner. Hitler attempted to translate Bayreuth into cities and buildings.
Bayreuth’s structure is more visual than theatrical.
Wagner attempted to effect a complete separation by means of the proscenium, a process that ultimately yields a condition much like film or television, where the image on the screen is the only reality for the spectator. The
isolated spectator facing the stage in Bayreuth is not so very different from the solitary viewer in front of a television set. Moreover, if an image on the screen has sufficient reality, then there is little need for performances of the sort produced in Bayreuth, which require elaborate staging and live actors.
Experimental theatre forms: constructivist installation and Hans Poelzig's Grosses Schauspielhaus, Berlin, 1919
The decline of opera as an art form coincided with the advent of the cinema, which offered spectacles that rivalled stage productions, but were generally much more affordable. By the 1920s film had become the most popular form of entertainment in the United States, with Americans seeing on average one movie a week. At the same time, something happened to opera as an art form. Schoenberg’s Moses undAron and Puccini’s Turandot were both left unfinished. Opera was unable to compete with the new medium of film, and was weakened further with the invention of television in 1933. Opera was the first form of theatre to suffer a decline precisely because it had demanded the most complete separation of the stage from the seats. However, theatre space did not simply wither away. As staged productions came under increasingly intense competition from visual media such as film, experiments to change the structure of theatre space itself took place throughout the world. Though diverse, these experimental forms curiously shared one thing in common: all of them rejected the proscenium arch. This was quite natural, if one thinks about it.
Wagner had doubled the proscenium arch and achieved
the separation of the stage from the seats, but that separation had led to the weakening of dramatic theatre and its eventual defeat by screen images. In this light, the reintegration of stage and seats was seen as the only way to revive drama and restore the allure of the theatre. The theatre had to use the power of actual space to fight nonspatial media such as film. The French poet and director Antonin Artaud declared, ‘We will discard stage and seats and replace them with one place. We will not compartmentalise or obstruct, no matter what we use.’
However, all these experimental spaces ended in failure. They were defeated, not by the traditional theatre form, but by screen images, which proved to be more spatial than the new theatres. What was this spatiality that screen images succeeded in achieving? Screen images made possible both an immersion in space and a comprehension of its overall structure. By means of their frames and the movements within them, by the way figures entered and exited, they developed a dual character, referred to as spatiality, whereby the audience was able to be inside space and at the same time to stand above it. Conversely, screen images that simply showed a continuous, uncut scene from the viewpoint of a protagonist were not at all spatial and left viewers with only a vague, claustrophobic feeling.
This is similar to a condition described by the French
philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty in his last, unfinished work. [2] He pointed out that in asserting the subjectivity of space, phenomenology is apt to fall into the trap of visual solipsism. To escape that condition, we must see a viewer other than ourselves, in a ‘cycle of the seeing and the seen’. This cycle can be said to be the alternation between two positions, one inside space, the other on a metalevel.
For much of the twentieth century, architecture sought to achieve a spatiality comparable to that of film, but was unable to achieve it. The situation only began to change with the emergence of electronic technology. It is an article of faith that the intervention of computers will restore interaction between subject and space, enabling one to ‘walk through’ a place. Such ‘interaction’ is in fact no better than a camera fixed in a position approximating the subject’s eye, no better than visual solipsism. In donning a virtual-reality device, the subject simply falls deeper into a solipsistic, claustrophobic trap. The development of personal computers equipped with graphical user interfaces (GUIs) offers a way out of that trap. Interfaces such as Microsoft Windows allow users freedom of movement between different sessions; they can switch screens at will. The switch takes precedence over any single image on the screen. It allows the subject to control the space projected on the screen, that is, to be on a metalevel of space. The cycle of inside and metalevel
comes into play, and image is raised to the status of space. Moreover, the space that arises is a completely interactive space.
Screen images in the twentieth century acquired spatiality through the cycle achieved by the camerawork. Unfortunately, that cycle was produced solely by the creator of the screen images; it was unilateral. Twentieth-century screen images had space but no spontaneity, no capacity for active participation. As long as film was the dominant art form, these constraints placed limits on cultural production as a whole. However, thanks to the intervention of PCs, the subject is now able to alternate spontaneously between metalevel and inside space for the first time. That is the greatest contribution that computers have made to our culture.
Eight layers of bubblewrap were laid on the stage
I wanted to use the idea of a screen switch to reestablish the direct link between spectator and stage. First of all, I reversed the stage and the seats. This was not in itself my objective, but merely a means and a process. In its preexisting form, the stage is the privileged space and the seats are an adjunct to it. In cyberspace, on the other hand, the subject has precedence, manipulating both switch and space. I wanted to restore the privileged status of the
subject on this stage too. To do this, I brought the spectators onto the stage and had them look down on the seats, which became the de facto place of performance. The existing stage was about one metre above the seating. Here, the spectators for the dance performance sat higher up, perched on eight layers of bubble-wrap that were laid directly on the stage. Built-in lighting lent a white glow to the layers of bubble-wrap. The soft, wobbly floor was both tangibly and visually unstable.
In Bayreuth, Wagner made the seats dark and hard in order to amplify the radiance and dynamism of the stage and assert its privileged status. In this project, however, I amplified the freedom and the instability of the subject by means of a softly cushioned and brightly lit material. I amplified the privileged character of the subject almost to excess. Seats and stage were divided by a transparent screen, a vinyl membrane 15 metres high, in the place where the proscenium arch would normally be. I thought of the screen as an oversized CRT. Water trickled down the screen and the relationship between the two spaces could be determined by changing the volume of water and the lighting. The screen thus functioned as a kind of spatial switch.
Water screen dividing seats and stage
Water trickled down the screen and was collected in a stainless steel box, from where it was pumped back up to the top. A computer controlled the volume of water and
degree of illumination. The screen was made of sheets of polyvinyl chloride, a material widely used in plastic hothouses. I thought of using glass, but a single sheet of glass can be manufactured only up to a certain size and I wanted to avoid any joints. There was also a danger that the structure necessary to support the weight of the glass would be more conspicuous than the glass itself. The polyvinyl chloride sheets were simply overlapped.
Neither the overlaps nor the sheets themselves were discernible because of the continuously trickling water. The spectators were aware only of the switch.
I used water because it is both material and immaterial. It has substance, yet is image-like in character. We think of the water that flows out of countless different taps as being the same everywhere, just as we think of the images on countless television screens or computer monitors as all being the same. Water thus occupies a halfway point between substance and image, the material and the immaterial. That was why the switch had to be water.
I first used water as a switch in a collaboration with the theatre group Et in terra pax, when they performed an experimental piece, The Humidity of Transmission, in ‘Water/Glass’. A video of a previous performance [3] was filmed by the director Jun Kurosawa and the video was projected onto a white wall as a backdrop for the live performance. A ‘water switch’ was installed between that
performance and the audience. Layer upon layer of reality and image, the material and the immaterial, were thus overlapped. The boundary between reality and image was extremely ambiguous, because each was as rarefied and fluid as the other. The switch in this case was not made of vinyl but was a single, enormous sheet of acrylic with water trickling down it. The subject, that is, the audience, used the device to switch on or off the multiple layers arranged before it. By manipulating the switch, the audience could call up, erase or overlap specific spaces. They could do this quietly and instantaneously with an almost mathematical precision because all the layers, including the switch, were made of the same materials -the bodies of the performers and water. The body swimming in water A was instantaneously transmitted to water B or suddenly began to swim, live, on the other side of the water switch.
With the water switch, an audience can occupy a metalevel over the stage. The next goal is to create multiple theatrical spaces where each spectator will be able to manipulate the switch separately and spontaneously. This is not something I want to do simply in theatrical space but for each individual in real space. This does not call for the creation of a battery of special devices or spaces. We are already moving through real space surrounded by and equipped with many electronic devices - the fusion of real space and cyberspace has
already been achieved to a remarkable degree. With the support of diverse technologies, we are repeatedly and instantaneously shifting between spaces of entirely different modes. However, urban design, architectural design and theatre design scarcely acknowledge that fusion. Planning continues to adopt a Wagnerian approach based on separation: the stage is cut off from the seats and made autonomous; space and architecture are also cut off from the audience (i.e. the subject) and made into autonomous objects. The subject and space must be connected once more. To that end, the object must be stripped of its privileged status, stage and architecture must be stripped of their privileged status; everything must be reduced and restored to a state of wilderness.
Then grass will grow, roads will form, rain will fall and streams flow. These are all switches, that is, symbols. These switches will connect the subject to the wilderness. Only then will the audience be connected to the stage, and the subject to space and the world as a whole.
NOTES
1.	Gottfried Semper (1803-1879), German neoclassical architect. The most radical theorist among nineteenth-century architects, Semper laid the theoretical foundation for the modern architectural movement.
2.	Maurice Merleau-Ponty, Le visible et l’invisible, 1964; trans. Alphonso Lingis, The Visible and the Invisible (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1969).
3.	Koya Arimura put on an unbelievable performance, swimming in a pool of water only 15 centimetres deep. With her slender physique, Arimura seemed as fluid and rarefied as water.
SUBSTITUTING:
ELECTRONIC MEMORIAL SPACE, TAKASAKI, GUMMA, 1997-98
A certain corporation asked me to design a memorial to commemorate some 800 people who had worked for them during their 100-year history. Frankly, the project did not interest me much in the beginning. The only apparent solution was to design an object made of stone. I could not even be bothered to sketch ideas on paper.
A memorial is an extension of the tomb, one of the two extreme forms of architecture. Its purpose is to endure, to intervene between subject and time. At the other extreme, the role of a building is to intervene between subject and space, that is, to shelter. Architecture alternates between these two extremes.
Ordinarily, if we want to make something that will endure, we turn to a shape of cohesive force, believing it to be the only form that will impress itself on people’s memories. The word monument is derived from the Latin for ‘remind’. The function of a monument is also to last through time; thus it aspires to be a powerful, conspicuous object.
Does this mean that objects are the only form to last through time? I was not so sure. Modern art was concerned with time. The cubists, for example, attempted to depict multiple moments in time on one canvas. Modernist architects were also interested for a while in manipulating and designing time. (Giedion’s seminal work on modern architecture, after all, was entitled Space, Time, and Architecture.) However, their attention ultimately shifted to the problem of universal space, which they defined as a space with movable partitions that allowed for adaptation to any change in use. Modernists saw this as a means of dealing with multiple moments in time. It was not; it merely offered a possibility to alter space. The typical modernist method was to substitute space for time, disregarding all phenomena related to time, such as memory.
That was why I thought of making memory and time the central issues in this project. But would it be possible to intervene in time without using an object? I gradually came to feel that the project had the potential to be an extremely interesting experiment. Two things provided me with useful hints. One was the Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial in Washington, DC. This is extremely reserved by the standards of the US capital, especially compared to the nearby Lincoln Memorial. It has an extremely low profile: nothing projects above the ground. The lawn dips down and the memorial serves as a retaining wall. The
names of some 60,000 American soldiers who died in the war are all carved into the black granite that covers the wall. There are no objects here. Nevertheless, we are able to remember; we are able to capture time.
Maya Lin, Vietnam Veterans’ Memorial, Washington, DC, 1982
Bruno Taut provided the second pointer, with his essay, ‘Honouring the War Dead and Wounded’, [1] published in 1915. At this sensitive time just after the start of the Great War, architects and designers had to decide what stance to take towards war and death. Taut’s essay was sharply critical of monuments, arguing that they effectively denied the purity of the very ideals they were intended to commemorate. The alternative he proposed was quite
eccentric: the remains of those who had died in war were to be transferred to a garden. There, amidst fountains, waterfalls and glass structures, plants would be nurtured by soil enriched by the remains, and a new spiritual garden would grow. According to Taut, what was needed was not a symbol of the dead but a place to remember the dead. [2]
Even though I had been asked to design a memorial, my first recommendation was that nothing monumental be built. I proposed creating a garden instead, just as Taut had done during World War I. The site was by no means large, measuring only 18.8 metres by 10.5 metres. I didn’t want it to be visually dominated by a single object.
Objects are devices for giving space a symbolic focus. Two supreme examples of this are the Arc de Triomphe and the Eiffel Tower, which convert the spatial extent of Paris into points in the popular imagination. Objects freeze and fix spaces that are otherwise indeterminate and ambiguous, they compress information - and that is why people continue to construct them.
A monument is the compression of time and space. Thus, monuments can be said to be the compression of history, and graves the compression of death. I wondered if there might not be a method of compression that did not depend on objects.
The simplest form of compression is proportional compression. A map reduces space by this means, premised on a bird’s-eye view. For the subject, space is reduced to a two-dimensional pattern. There is no way to gauge proportional relationships with mathematical precision since space has already been lost through compression. One of Borges’s fictions tells us of a country where the pursuit of cartographic accuracy results in the creation of a full-size map, exactly the same size as the land it represents. This can be read as a criticism of bird’s-eye-view compression - a warning that it entails the forfeiture of space.
In order to preserve spatial extension and depth, the subject must first stand inside rather than above or outside space. We are then faced with a difficult decision: where to position the subject inside the space? Using that difficult-to-determine position as the datum, what method for spatial compression could be conceived? How could Gumma Prefecture be compressed into the given 18.8 metre by 10.5 metre area? The set task was to convert a map-like, bird’s-eye-view space into a subjective space within which the subject is located.
I became interested in morphing operations because they involve the deformation of space around a fixed point that does not itself undergo deformation; in parallel, a subject inside the space sees his position as a fixed point while the rest of the space appears deformed. Morphing operations were originally devised as a way of mathematically describing the deformations that result from the introduction of subjectivity.
Perspective is another means of compressing space. The problem with it, however, is that space is frozen after it is compressed. A perspective drawing is premised on a fixed
subject inside the space and a fixed line of sight, whereas a bird’s-eye-view type of compression has a movable line of sight, though the subject remains outside the space. I explored the potential of morphing operations as a way of mediating between these two methods.
Interestingly, morphing operations require at least two fixed points. If there is only one, space revolves freely around that point and cannot be fixed. The two points I chose for my compression of Gumma Prefecture were Takasaki City, the site of the memorial park, and Mount Haruna, a peak regarded as sacred ground. The fact that space cannot be compressed without two points is quite telling. It teaches us that space is not discernible from just one fixed point, but emerges only through movement from one point to another. In that sense space is phenomenal. It arises only through the introduction of a subject with a will. For there to be a will - for example, the will to proceed from Takasaki to Mount Haruna - one must be on a metalevel that allows one to perceive the relationship between these two points. Space is generated only when the metalevel and the phenomenon of introspection both exist, and there is alternation between the two (see the previous chapter: Reversing). One must overcome both a neoclassical approach to space, which gives priority to a metalevel, and phenomenology, which sees phenomena as absolute. Morphing provides hints about ways to do so.
First, I set a course from Takasaki to Mount Haruna, then I undertook a morphing operation along that course and compressed space, taking in the entire topography. However, I felt that the landscape that was made manifest was still inadequate. The subject was certainly inserted into the space, but the result was not yet clearly different from a bird’s-eye-view proportional compression, or a map. To eliminate this type of perception I added a further operation: the folding of the set linear course. Only through such controls on a metalevel does the alternation between metalevel and introspection begin. A maze (which is what I had produced) is a device that uses folding to control the metalevel and generate space. One cannot distinguish the geographical entity called Gumma Prefecture, no matter how one looks at this maze from overhead. Nevertheless, the course, though folded, is still continuous. That is, although the whole cannot be grasped, it is possible to experience each moment and to experience a succession of moments in time. In that way, spatial extension is compressed within a temporal axis.
What I tried to do was to criticise the ordinary form of spatial compression. Ordinarily, space is compressed into a combination of object and plan pattern. However, something of crucial importance is lost in that process, namely time, which gives space richness and depth. A criticism of such forms of compression is central to the Japanese cultural tradition. Take, for example, the
illustrated horizontal scrolls (emakimono). These make it impossible to get a bird’s-eye view of the depicted space, as they are unrolled gradually from right to left, revealing only a portion at a time. As a result, space appears only along a temporal axis: space and time are inseparable. In a Japanese stroll garden, too, the appearance of space is in time: a major objective of the garden is to show that space and time are inseparable. As a building can be easily reduced to two-dimensional patterns, the architect often neglects time as a factor. That was why gardens were created: to continue to remind people not to forget time, and to criticise architecture. In Japan, garden design is thoroughly anti-architectural. The bird’s-eye view is eliminated and space appears only successively, in time, along the route (although modern designers may try to uncover a two-dimensional pattern - to compress space into a pattern - even in the route of a stroll garden). The route of this memorial park has been folded many times in order to foil such compression, just as a scroll, being rolled, foils attempts to reduce it to a two-dimensional pattern. The garden wants to remain a garden; it wants to remain anti-architectural.
Dependence on visual perception must also be avoided, if the end result is to be a genuine garden. Vision abhors time, it always desires a still image, which is why objects and two-dimensional patterns are always in demand. I decided to design the garden as an acoustical rather than a
visual space. I explored the possibility of making sound the main source of spatial information. This was to be a garden people visited to hear sounds - sounds which would evoke memories of the departed. A monument is a form that preserves time through the compression of space, a form in which visual perception is the parameter. This, on the other hand, would be a garden in which the sense of hearing would be the parameter; it would preserve time, not through compression, but through an audio playback function.
A visitor to this garden first calls out the deceased person’s name; he calls out to the dead. The sound is received by a computer and cast back in the form of a special type of echo. The system was built by Ken’ichi Sakakibara, who is both a composer of contemporary music and a researcher on the human voice. The name that is called out is first converted into overlapping sine waves (tones) that change in the manner of a time series; next, tones that are not important components of the overall sound stream (that are low in power or extremely short in connection time) are shed from the original name. The phonemes that indicate the called-out name are broken down by this means, leaving only modulation. Only someone who already knows the name, that is, the person who called it out, can recognise it from the echo. The echo is repeated throughout the garden and undergoes gradual changes.
The computer picks up sounds such as the visitor’s footsteps, the breeze and rustling leaves, and continually transforms the echo in response to these sounds, in accordance with certain algorithms. A slight change in the visitor’s stride is immediately reflected by the sound filling the garden. No object could respond as sensitively as this acoustical garden. The subject becomes ever more alert to the sounds in this garden without objects, ever more deeply immersed in the acoustic space. In listening intently, the subject is at one with time; he walks through the acoustical space accompanied by time: time and space are inseparable.
I sought gentleness, in the realms of both sight and hearing. I avoided the dominant form of the modern era -an object rising from a levelled site. The goal in the modern era has been to divide up the world and to make all of the resulting fragments (objects) interchangeable. Objects are transportable and interchangeable because they are concentrated masses cut off from the environment. Unfortunately, communication effected by means of objects is extremely poor, and landscapes full of objects are ugly and chaotic. Increased density and speed in the modern world have only multiplied that ugliness and chaos.
In this garden I wanted to achieve gentle spaces through delicate communication technologies. I built in many
electronic technologies and also used diverse spatial techniques that were first developed in gardens. A gentle space requires the subject to be extremely sensitive and alert to the slightest nuances of things and movements. Among the countless echoes reverberating in this memorial space, he must be able to hear the name he called out. Only then will he reach a silence that is sufficiently powerful to counteract the speed and density of the modern era.
NOTES
1.	Bruno Taut, ‘Krieger-Ehrung’, in Das Kunstgewerbeblatt.
2.	Here I come to a circumstance that had me wondering about the mysterious workings of fate. As I have already written earlier in this book, Bruno Taut fled the Nazis in Germany and lived in Japan from 1933 to 1936. During that time, his sponsor was Fusaichiro Inoue, the owner of a company in Gumma Prefecture called Inoue Kogyo. The corporation that asked me to design this memorial was none other than Inoue Kogyo.
BREAKING DOWN INTO PARTICLES
STONE MUSEUM, NASU-CHO,
TOCHIGI,
1996-2000
The first time I used louvres was in ‘Water/Glass’. That work is basically a transparent glass box inserted between the two horizontal planes of floor and roof. Since the roof, which extends out towards the sea, would cast an enormous dark shadow and become a conspicuous object if it were made of opaque panels, I undertook various studies to see if I could somehow make it less powerful.
One possibility was to use transparent glass, which would certainly have eliminated any shadow. However, if the glass itself were transparent, the supporting steel structure might become too assertive. I considered frosted glass. If the structure were situated above the glass, it would only appear as a faint shadow to someone looking up. Frosted glass is halfway between transparency and opacity, and might have been the ideal material for dissolving the architecture. However, I did not select it because it was not compatible with water. A 15-centimetre-deep pool of
water is a key feature of ‘Water/Glass’. The water surface reflects light, and fine particles of light are scattered throughout the space. I wanted a similar particled effect on the roof. Frosted glass is translucent but appears heavy and viscous. I wanted the roof to break up into fine particles and seem weightless.
I considered perforated metal. Like frosted glass, it is halfway between transparency and opacity and projects a particled image. However, I decided against it because the particles did not sparkle. When light hits water, particles of reflected light dance over the surface; what would produce such a glittering effect on the roof?
I decided in the end to use stainless steel louvres, with blades 1.5 millimetres wide and 75 millimetres high, set at 75-millimetre intervals. The stainless steel was livelier and sparkled more than any other material; it responded most sensitively to changes in light. The louvres cast dark, striped shadows if light hits them diagonally, or become transparent if light passes directly through. They appear in different guises depending on the environment and their relationship to the subject. If the line of sight is parallel to the blades, the louvres seem light and perfectly transparent; if it is at right angles to the blades, they seem heavy and opaque. If frontally lit, they reveal their colour; if backlit, they lose their colour and appear in dark silhouette. Louvres stand between the environment and
the subject and reflect that relationship; they interact more than they reflect. If materials that have an invariable and distinctive colour, texture and degree of transparency are absolute, then louvres are relative: their character is not fully determined by the designer or architect but is left in part to each observer, allowing for his or her input. In that way louvres are like rainbows. A rainbow is not something absolute that exists somewhere, but instead it is generated by the relationship between the sun, droplets of water and the observer. Rainbows are relative because they are collections of particles - the operative word being ‘particles’.
‘Water/Glass’, roof of stainless steel louvres
By using louvres in ‘Water/Glass’ I effectively transformed and relativised the architecture, creating a condition as ambiguous and variable as that of drifting particles; that is, I ‘particlised’ the architecture. Endeavours of a similar nature were undertaken in a number of different fields towards the end of the nineteenth century.
The impressionists, for example, ‘particlised’ painting. They believed that colours should be mixed, not on the artist’s palette, but on the retina of the observer. When colours are mixed on a palette, there is a subtractive process and the colour approaches black. The more one mixes pigments in an attempt to create a subtle colour, the darker and heavier it becomes. The impressionists attempted to avoid this by applying pure colours directly onto the canvas in dispersed dots. Mixed on the retina of the observer, these dots created subtle hues and shades.
The impressionists were critical not just of the conventional method of painting but of the relationship between the artist and the observer. Before impressionism, the artist had a privileged status, and the observer was expected to assume a completely passive role. The unilateral nature of this relationship determined the character of works of art - their technique, exhibition and dissemination. Works of an ambiguous or dispersed (ie particlised) nature were excluded from consideration because they were not easily accommodated in this unilateral relationship. The system favoured more powerful and coherent works whose objects were clear and coercive and revealed everything about themselves from the outset. There was no possibility of multiple interpretations.
In the wake of impressionism, the painter Georges Seurat
devised a specific, scientific method to depict objects -pointillism - which is most fully demonstrated in his Sunday Afternoon on the Island of La Grande Jatte (1886). Seurat assigned colours to his dots, which were fine and uniform, in accordance with the optical theories of Eugene Chevreul and Ogden Nicholas Rood, among others. He wanted to make painting scientific because science was open to everyone; in this way, he hoped to destroy the notion of the privileged artist and the unilateral character of the existing relationship between artist and observer.
Seurat died aged 31, and the method he developed was short-lived too. While he remained committed to dabs of paint of a uniform size, other artists quickly discovered that those spots of colour were a superb medium of expression, and that individuality and inner character could be conveyed by subtle changes in their size and the force with which they were applied. The touch of the artist could be as powerful and individualistic a means of expression as composition or colour. An increasing interest in individual expression led to the demise of pointillism and the rise of fauvism and other twentieth-century art movements.
A further reason for the failure of pointillism was Seurat’s idea that painting could be transformed into science by means of colour optics. This goal was not embraced by
less scientifically oriented painters. Instead, the avant-garde focused on the reduction of painting to simple geometrical objects, as defined by Cezanne and the cubists.
The end of the nineteenth century was a period of ‘particlisation’ in architecture as well, but whereas painters were concerned to integrate aesthetics and science, architects were from the start divided between an aesthetic and a technical approach. Most of the century had been marked by a battle of styles between classicism and the gothic. As historians have pointed out, the two styles share many elements in common, [1] most notably a roof with a basically triangular cross section and a centralised, stable character that exercises control over both the parts and the whole of the building. However, the impressions they create vary widely because the objective, in the case of classicism, is to heighten the intensity of the object, whereas the objective of the gothic is to break down matter. In classical architecture, the building is set on a podium, becoming a massive, highly assertive autonomous object. In gothic architecture, by contrast, the building is articulated into small elements: columns, for example, are deliberately designed to suggest bundles of slender members. As a result, there is no sense of mass but only a weightless, immaterial space.
Chartres Cathedral
Out of this context emerged art nouveau, which was critical of the heaviness and darkness of traditional architecture and its equation with political or religious authority. The whole basic structure of the world was beginning to change, as new means of transport such as the railway evolved at an astonishing rate. Whereas politics and religion were still vertical forms of communication, transport was for the most part a horizontal form of communication. Hector Guimard’s
lightweight wrought-iron entrance canopies for the Paris Metro can be seen as an expression of this change. Art nouveau buildings associated with transportation were to be made as light as possible, using the materials of the new age.
Guimard's Paris Metro canopy, 1898-1904
Art nouveau broke new ground, but like pointillism was extremely short-lived. The classical principle of validating objects through the authority of prototypes had become so engrained that it coloured the thinking even of avant-garde architects critical of classicism. In the case of art nouveau, there was too heavy a reliance on plant motifs, which were too delicate to sustain the movement as a whole.
Reservations about representation led to another approach to particlisation in architecture in the early twentieth century: industrialised buildings. Buildings are by their
very nature more or less industrialised, but the term here has a special nuance. The primary method of building in the West before the twentieth century was masonry construction, based on units of stone or brick which are laid one by one and bonded with a substance such as mortar. A building constructed by this method is inevitably a heavy mass. In essence, industrialisation referred to technologies used to break down that heavy mass into particles, and specifically to ‘dry’ construction (Trockenmontagebau). Dry construction is the opposite of wet construction, a building technique that mixes a material with water, and is completed only when that material has dried, is referred to as wet construction. In wet construction, particles adhere to each other and are not individually distinguishable. In dry construction, water is not used and the particles remain individuated. Walter Gropius foresaw the great importance of dry construction and made it a pillar of architectural education at the Bauhaus. [2] He was an ardent advocate of prefabricated concrete construction, which involved the on-site assembly of slabs and panels that had been manufactured in a factory. Particlisation was the most important theme for architects at this turning point in history.
Nevertheless, the form of particlisation known as industrialisation met with setbacks. Buildings broken down into different elements were considered weak and
ambiguous in terms of their expression, just as Seurat’s paintings were considered weak and ambiguous. The twentieth-century system of communication weeded out particlised works of architecture. However, works designed by Le Corbusier survived that process of elimination.
Oddly enough, Le Corbusier also began with particles.
His Maison Dom-ino, published in 1915, was the first important work of his career. His perspective of that scheme became one of the most famous architectural drawings of the twentieth century. Le Corbusier proposed a system based on prefabricated floor panels and steel beams. The Maison Dom-ino was without doubt a dry-construction industrialised house. In subsequent works, however, Le Corbusier abandoned the theme of industrialisation with surprising alacrity. He continued to make statements proclaiming the need for a new technology for a new age, but in his actual work showed practically no interest in dry construction. He remained to the end an architect of in-situ concrete, that is, of wet construction. His about-face enabled him to become the champion of the modern movement.
Le Corbusier dedicated himself to creating ‘scientific’ (that is, pure geometrical) forms. With dry construction, the abstract character of the planes is inevitably marred by the joints that arise between the panels when they are assembled on site. With in-situ concrete, on the other hand, pure geometrical forms can be created without
joints. Moreover concrete, with its suggestion of great mass and aggregation, is effective in endowing forms with an aura of strength. But concrete is not at first heavy, hard or strong; it is fluid, before it quickly sets and hardens. This radical and almost mysterious transformation further reinforces its image of strength.
Le Corbusier made full use of this special quality, though he did not become interested in concrete because of its method of production. What prompted him to convert to an architecture of objects was the shift from particles to objects that took place in painting, the evolution from cubism to suprematism and purism.
Le Corbusier was active in both painting and architecture and won renown by ‘trading’ between them. Together with the painter Amedee Ozenfant he initiated an art movement called purism, which focused on the pure, essential forms of geometrical objects. Le Corbusier imported that same shift into the world of architecture, so ensuring that the logic of architecture was suppressed by the logic of painting, and that the logic of production was suppressed by the logic of communication. Straddling two fields of endeavour and two systems of logic, adroitly importing and exporting ideas, Le Corbusier ultimately gave powerful objects of concrete a central role in twentieth-century architecture.
Le Corbusier was not solely responsible for the changes that took place. The twentieth-century system of communication sought objects and, as a result, twentieth-century architecture came to be dominated by objects. If we wish to recover particlised, that is, ambiguous, variable and relativistic works of architecture, we will have to intervene once more in the system of communication. Unless we critically examine and reverse our passive form of appreciation, architecture will remain object-oriented: the logic of production and the logic of the user will continue to be suppressed by the logic of communication.
Communication between architecture and people, that is, the appreciation of architecture, occurs mainly in three phases. In the first, phenomenological phase, an actual person experiences an actual space. The second phase, the realm of micromedia, determines in what form actual works of architecture are converted into media. How, for example, is architecture converted into a two-dimensional print medium? How is it converted into drawings? At what angles, in what sort of light and with what degree of resolution are photographs of architecture taken? The third phase is the realm of macromedia. This determines how architecture, having been converted into media, is disseminated or transmitted. In what forms are books and magazines on architecture sold? What kind of architecture do art museums select for exhibition, and on what basis?
What kind of visitors do they expect to attract, and how are the exhibitions promoted?
The important thing here is not the number of phases, but rather the interrelations that exist between them. The form of architecture can influence the choice of the medium it is converted into as well as the subsequent form of distribution or transmission. That influence can also be reversed: the form of distribution or transmission can influence the medium into which architecture is converted, and even the form it takes. These two opposing vectors continually roil the architectural world, generating shockwaves that reshape architectural history.
One might call pre-twentieth-century architecture photographic architecture or, better still, perspectival architecture, because from the Renaissance period perspective was the basic method of reproducing and disseminating architecture. Photography was simply an extension of that method. Like perspective, it is a medium in which time is abstracted; in other words, it converts architecture into limited numbers of two-dimensional still images obtained by a subject observing an object from a certain distance. That distance must be maintained for the object to be reproduced without distortion.
In photography a clear, absolute silhouette is required, since materials and details are difficult to distinguish from
beyond a certain distance. Moreover, the building is required to be absolute in character, since the image is transmitted through limited amounts of two-dimensional information. By ‘absolute’ I mean invariable: the character of the building must not be affected by changes either in the building’s relationship to the subject or environmental factors such as the intensity and direction of sunlight. A building that is relative in character, by contrast, is one that can seem entirely different depending on its relationship to the subject; in this sense it is like a rainbow. It is difficult to obtain an overall image of a building with a relative character from limited amounts of two-dimensional information. The image remains fragmented; it never coalesces, even when a number of different aspects are overlapped.
That is why particlised architecture is the polar opposite of photographic architecture. The silhouette is ambiguous. When viewed from a distance, it is hard to distinguish the constituent particles. A particlised work is extremely relative in nature. It can appear transparent and weightless one moment and opaque and massive the next, depending on the way light hits it. It does not possess a clear overall image and never appears to advantage in photographs or perspectives, which are best suited to objects that are not apt to blur or vary.
Just as architecture before the twentieth century was photographic, twentieth-century architecture was oriented towards the moving image, which represented the cutting edge in communication systems. Yet moving images proved expensive and susceptible to manipulation, so it continued to be disseminated by way of still pictures in books and magazines. The biggest media-related task in twentieth-century architecture was therefore to close the gap between moving images and still images.
Architecture was not the only field in which this dilemma had to be confronted. It was the very essence of the era and determined the form of every aspect of culture.
Le Corbusier devised the most ingenious architectural strategy for closing that gap. He made the path of circulation manifest (see Chapter 1, Making a Connection). By detaching stairs and ramps from other architectural elements and giving them independent forms, he transformed the path of circulation inside a building into objects. Moreover, he deliberately arranged those objects in conspicuous positions in space.
The biggest shortcoming of still images is that they cut time into fragments, and so cannot communicate the way it unfolds. What they can do, however, is capture paths of circulation, as embodied in stairs and ramps. Since these allow the subject to move and movement is a function of time, photographs of paths of circulation can indirectly suggest time. In photography, everything must be embodied in an object, and through the object anything, even time, can be evoked.
Le Corbusier’s objectified paths of circulation, captured in architectural photographs, can be said to have anticipated the GUI (graphical user interface) arranged on the screen of personal computers. The GUI is a window to time opened in a two-dimensional still image. By clicking that window, the subject can move freely to another picture, that is, to another time. One cannot click on photographs of Le Corbusier’s paths of circulation, of course, even if they do suggest time. His objects remain a
unilateral medium; there is no interactive relationship with the subject. That is the qualitative difference between images such as photographs and film on the one hand, and cyberspace generated by computers on the other.
Le Corbusier did not simply introduce time into architecture. His method was, in a sense, cinematic. Cinema has various in-built devices that connect the subject seeing the images to the space of those images. Poststructuralists showed that alternation of vision is the principle behind those devices. This insight is based on Merleau-Ponty’s criticism of visual solipsism, which I have already touched upon, and Lacan’s psychoanalysis (see Chapter 6: Reversing). Lacan conjectured that a subject comes into being only when the person is aware of being seen by others. Lacan assigned great importance to this process, which he referred to as ‘symbolic identification’.
Poststructuralist theory maintains that images taken simply from the view of a protagonist - taken, in effect, by a camera held to the protagonist’s eye - do not constitute cinema. The subject viewing such images never establishes contact with the space of the images, but only feels impatience and discomfort because he cannot confirm his own position in that space. The situation changes the moment another viewpoint, one in which the protagonist himself is seen, is introduced. The subject
confirms his position and establishes contact with the environment in the images. One viewpoint is simply insufficient. Alternation between two viewpoints brings the audience into contact with the environment. The camerawork is what makes film cinematic.
In short, the alternation of viewpoints is a necessary condition for cinematic media, just as an absolute silhouette of the object is a necessary condition for photographic media.
Le Corbusier was not an artist of film (although he did make films, such as L ’Architecture d’aujourd’hui of 1929, co-directed with Pierre Jeanneret). The medium he used most often was photography. However, by introducing another point of view, he succeeded in creating ‘cinematic’ photographs. How was this possible? Through an analysis of Le Corbusier’s architectural photographs, Beatriz Colomina has shown how he often suggested an unseen presence and thereby another viewpoint.^ He did this by depicting furniture and objects such as a pair of glasses, as well as paths of circulation. Paths of circulation suggested a person moving along those paths and the viewpoint of that person. Why, then, did he not simply introduce actual people into his photographs? The reason is that they would not have served as our proxy; our point of view can only be suggested by a disembodied presence. [4] It is
important both to suggest another viewpoint and to make possible the substitution of our viewpoint. Only then can alternation take place. Only then is the person viewing the photograph connected to and projected onto the photographed space.
Le Corbusier converted photographic architecture into cinematic architecture. He achieved this difficult conversion by designing and manipulating objects - his only recourse, given the era in which he lived. His continuing dependence on objects is what makes his works heavy and stiff: they draw us in, but oppress us. How can we free ourselves of this dependence? Let us first re-examine the relationship between the subject and the environment.
The moment the peaceful and seamless connection between the subject and the environment was severed, media arose to reconnect the two. Architecture emerged for the same reason. The media and the architecture of any given era are products of the same environment and responses to the same disconnection, so they cannot help but take similar forms. In copying each other, they amplify each other. In this way their similarity is further reinforced.
Subject and environment were first reconnected by a medium of points, namely perspective. Perspective is the
connection of point to point - the fixed point of the observing subject and the fixed point, selected from an infinitely continuous environment, of the thing observed. Photography is an extension of perspective. Two points are connected by the medium of a third point called the shutter. In opening the shutter, the photographer selects a perceptual point, that is, an instant out of an infinitely continuous extension called time.
The exterior of a building is readily perceptible as a point, independent and isolated, in the environment. This made it ideally suited to perspective. Architecture was also a favourite subject matter of photography. The medium was in accord with the subject matter, point in accord with point. A line is an expansion of a point. A linear architecture is a series of experiences that emerge the moment we perceive architecture as an interior. Moving images are similarly linear. They are the spatial, temporal and perceptual expansion of the media of points. Movement expands a point into a line. However, moving images have a fatal flaw: they are unilateral. Movement and expansion are the prerogative of the director. Only the space, time and perception of the privileged person called the director expand; only the director is free. The audience is bound to a fixed position in front of the screen and has to accept what is presented - it cannot intervene with respect to time or space.
The interior, as a linear space, is similarly a restricted enclosure. Only the privileged person called the architect understands all the arrangements of rooms and the interior as a whole. Freedom to move and manipulate space and time is the prerogative of the architect and the user experiences only a restricted space and time.
Freedom, but only unilateral freedom - that is the paradox of the relations embodied by both films and interior spaces. However, the problem is not so much the paradox itself, as the fact that the one-sided nature of the relationship has been so cleverly concealed by camerawork in films or by the circulation plan. Both work on the principle of alternation. In the case of film, it is the alternation of the viewpoint of the protagonist with the viewpoint of those who regard the protagonist. In the case of interiors, it is the alternation of the privileged overall viewpoint with the viewpoint of the protagonist who cannot help but be enclosed in some spatial unit. The classical architect invoked that alternation by arranging a large space of great height at the centre of the building, where the protagonist acquired a privileged viewpoint that enabled him to understand the building as a whole. Le Corbusier conceived a more compact and contemporary version of that device. By means of a circulation device such as stairs or a ramp, he had the subject connect with the building as a whole.
The invention of these cinematic and spatial devices enabled an essentially passive observer to identify with the privileged subject. In reality, an interactive relationship between the passive observer and the space was not possible. Nevertheless, the observer mistook the prearranged alternation of viewpoints for a subjective and spontaneous intervention in space. In film, that illusion is called empathy. In interior spaces, the passive observer comes to understand the space in its entirety, thanks to the central circulation space, and falls under the illusion that he is in control.
The illusion ingeniously conceals the one-sided nature of the relationship. That is not all that is concealed. The passive observer also comes to believe that the limited spatial and temporal enclosure is the totality of the environment. He thinks that he is closely and surely connected to the environment, because its closed nature is concealed. Such illusions governed the twentieth century.
The spatial form called the theme park is the most successful example of such concealments. The perimeter wall of the theme park is carefully hidden, lest visitors see it and awaken from their dream. In order to work its magic, it directs their gaze inwards, towards the centre, where there are spaces of a grand scale and form (such as wide boulevards offering vistas). Visitors are intoxicated by the privileged position they are allowed to occupy.
They fall under the illusion that they are completely connected to - even that they dominate - the environment. The theme park may be an enormous complex encompassing outdoor spaces, but it is nonetheless based on the principles of film and interior spaces: indeed it is the most fully developed form of spatial device of the cinematic type.
The aim ought to be, not to prolong the life of enclosures through cinematic alternation, but rather to dissolve them through particlisation. This is not a matter of making their boundaries transparent or translucent: changing the design or capacity of the surface does not change the form of architecture - an object is still an object, an enclosure remains an enclosure.
This is true even if the surface of an object is particlised. The particlisation of the surface relativises the external appearance of architecture: the exterior becomes capable of changing in diverse ways, depending on the relationship between the subject and the thing under observation. However, an object remains an object in form even if its surface becomes interactive. The interaction that is enabled is prearranged interaction, no more spontaneous than the prearranged alternation between subject and environment in film.
It is not the surface but the form that has to be particlised:
the point is not to prearrange interaction, but instead to make the arrangements themselves interactive. Rejecting objects and enclosures brings us to gardens, which are far more open than architecture. Despite this, garden designers often try to close them off. They attempt to construct unique, self-contained worlds because they are individuals who persist in unilateral behaviour, namely self-expression. In doing so, they produce gardens that are enclosures, no different from theme parks. Moreover, no matter how freely gardens may be arranged, they will still have paths that are determined by their designers. Interaction is still prearranged, and designers still exercise control over people.
If we are to achieve more open spaces, we must aim for a wilderness rather than a garden. Unless designers themselves become more open, however, we will not be able to produce such a condition. We need to abandon the idea of self-expression. Instead of stepping forward, designers need to remain completely open to visitors’ needs. Only then will we have a space without boundaries and paths. The space may consist only of an unprocessed cluster of particles - scattered rubble and grass - none the less, countless places will emerge and a network of relationships will develop the moment someone steps foot inside.
Such a condition is called a network society and is similar
to a non-hierarchical horizontal network. There are no boundaries or enclosures, no prearrangements or fixed paths, but each subject is surely connected to the world. We have gone from point (perspective, photography and architecture) to line (moving images, interior spaces and enclosures) and now we are about to embark on nets (networks and wildernesses). However, the form called architecture still survives and, as an object, disrupts the network.
The shrine structures at Ise are set on ground that is covered entirely with white pebbles representing a wilderness. The shrines are ritually reconstructed every twenty years, suggesting that the ground below is far more important than the structures built on top. The fact that the ground is covered with pebbles that have not been worked in any way is significant. The size of these stone particles is also significant. If the pebbles were any smaller, they would no longer be perceived as particles but would instead appear to form a single, heavy mass. The ground would become matter that permits no intervention - absolute, unilateral matter. If, on the other hand, they were any larger, they would become conspicuous objects, as assertive as brushstrokes in a painting. They would become, not a material awaiting intervention, but something already complete, forestalling any intervention. Their dimensions of course are not absolute; they must be determined in each case by the
surrounding environment. For example, in the sequence of spaces at Ise Shrine, the subject arrives at the pebbles after experiencing things of various dimensions, from trees to man-made structures. The entire sequential process determines the dimensions of the pebbles. There is no guarantee that those pebbles will function as particles if taken to another place. The pebbles become particles - pure, unadulterated material, anticipatory, open and thoroughly relative - only as the result of a quite prosaic operation. The first thing for us to determine should not be form or colour, but rather suitable dimensions. We can arrive at particles only in this way.
This applies to cities as well as to architecture. Modern city planning has been an attempt to regulate cities using two means, objects and enclosures. Planners used objects in the still-image phase of media development and enclosures in the moving-image stage. In the former, baroque city planning is a typical example of control exercised through objects; that is, regulation through the use of monumental, object-type buildings at focal points of the city. In the latter phase, theme parks are an example of control exercised through enclosures. The division of commercial districts and residential districts and the twentieth-century city planning method called zoning are also examples of the use of enclosures to exert control.
However, the accelerating speed of life in cities has
rendered objects and enclosures ineffective. Baroque cities, conceived as still images, cannot keep pace. Methods based on moving images have become ineffective as well. Although from a bird’s-eye view the city may appear to be nothing more than an absolutely random collection of particles, people and information within the city are constantly connecting and separating at high speeds.
We need a ‘particle-based urban theory’ to respond to this. A city in which there is a convenience store every hundred metres anticipates the emergence of a city separated into particles. To induce free and random movement of people and particles, we need city planning that is based on the planning of particles, and not on control by means of objects and enclosures.
In determining the size and ‘hardness’ of particles, the various speeds that operate in cities must be taken into account. According to Deleuze, there is no such thing as absolute hardness. Hardness is an expression of the compressive force acting on a material. A wave in the ocean can be as hard as a wall of marble, depending on the speed of a ship. Much the same can be said of particles. The viscosity, hardness and density of particles are expressions of the speed and forces acting on them. The subject must be free to roam. We will be connected to the environment called the wilderness only if we are
allowed to wander.
The wall took on the appearance of a collection of particles
To wander is to trace the contours of particles and lend our ears to the sounds they make. We must scan the distance between particles, not by eye, but with our bodies moving in time. Only then are sounds born. Everything possessing a frequency is subordinate to time, and generates sounds and colours only when its contours have been traced in time. If we want to design a wilderness we must design space as if we were composing music; we must cast ourselves in time and extract sounds from the particles of the wilderness.
The theme of the ‘Stone Museum’ is particlising stone so that it can be used to generate sounds. The museum is in Ashino, Nasu-cho, Tochigi Prefecture, a village once visited by the famous poet Matsuo Basho (1644-1694). The site contained three crumbling storehouses for rice,
made of local Ashino stone, a plain, grey andesite. Constructed in the early Showa era (1925-1988), they were architecturally undistinguished, but I felt they ought to be preserved. I proposed that the overall environment be reorganised by means of a few additions to these structures.
Existing rice storehouses on museum site
Instead of being closed and self-contained, I wanted the additions to be open and vulnerable, more like fences than buildings. My aim was to create several layers between the preexisting objects so that a free, ambiguous field - a wilderness - would gradually emerge. I felt this field ought to be, not just spatially open, but open to activities and ambiguous in character. Besides an art museum, this facility contains a shop selling local produce, a restaurant,
a local community centre and a children’s play area. Activities take place not just inside the building but also in the strip of land between it and the adjacent old highway. Additions to this type of traditional architecture are often made of glass, but I felt that glass, by its transparency, would provide too sharp a contrast to the stone storehouses and make them too conspicuous. However, a wall of Ashino stone similar to the walls of the preexisting storehouses would be neither vulnerable nor ambiguous. I decided to use the same stone but to particlise it; that is, to create a fence of stone. In this way, I hoped to make the silhouette of the stone storehouses ambiguous, causing them to melt into the surrounding air.
Particlising stone is by no means an easy task, as it is a heavy and friable material. Moreover, the traditional technique of masonry construction involves cutting the stone into units and then laying those units one by one to create a thick, heavy wall. Masonry construction is the basis for western classical architecture and the technology that made it possible, or, in other words, the technology at the heart of object-type architecture. That is why I wanted to take up the challenge of masonry construction - to see if I could dissolve the object that is so often a product of that technology.
I began with an extremely simple experiment, extracting stones one by one from a wall of masonry construction.
The wall seemed lighter and weaker after only a few stones had been taken away. Having started as a single, coherent mass, it now acquired the appearance of a collection of particles. It wavered between being and representation, between its essential heaviness and its apparent lightness, between its opaque attribute and its actual transparency. The process by which such a dual condition is produced is what I mean by the relativisation of matter. At such times, matter oscillates; it almost seems to generate sounds. We can create various tones by the way we extract stones from the wall; in this regard, designing a structure approaches the composing of music.

I searched for a detail that would convert stone into an even lighter and more insubstantial presence. I found a way of cutting it into slices that were nearly as thin as the slats of wooden louvres. The thinnest possible cross section was 40 millimetres by 150 millimetres. We attached stone slices of this dimension to stone columns in which grooves 40 millimetres wide had been carved. This was obviously a major departure from conventional methods of stone construction. The stone slices were set at 80-millimetre intervals. Since the stones themselves were 40 millimetres thick, the gaps between them were also 40 millimetres. Matter and aperture of the same dimension alternated, generating an oscillation between matter and empty air, reality and fiction, opacity and transparency. The oscillation depended on the position of the subject relative to this ambiguous wall, and the direction of light. The wall did not oscillate independently of the subject; the subject’s body and the wall resonated with each other.
Simple Garden, Les Landes
Simple Garden, Les Landes
By its very nature, stone is under enormous cohesive force. To release stone from that force and particlise it is difficult. In that sense, bamboo is the opposite of stone -it is particlised from the start. Aggregating or bundling together bamboo is as difficult as particlising stone. It is not only its round cross section that makes it resistant to bundling, but also its extremely lustrous surface and hollow interior. Using bamboo in a form such as architecture, which demands aggregation, is difficult, so it has more often been used in dispersed forms such as fences. Wood, on the other hand, is halfway between stone and bamboo; it is both easily particlised and easily
aggregated, which has made it the most popular building material in both East and West.
The cohesive force of stone was central to western architecture, which used it to create powerful objects that could express and unite the organisations and communities represented by the objects. Modernism ostensibly began as the antithesis of that western architectural tradition, that is, as the antithesis of cohesive force and as a movement to dissolve objects into particles. However, the cohesive force of concrete ultimately conquered modernism; particles were defeated. Ironically, Le Corbusier, the most adept user of concrete, then became the hero of modernism.
Dimensioning of stone wall
After Le Corbusier achieved success with the Villa Savoye, Bruno Taut arrived in Japan, having been practically chased out of his homeland. Visiting Katsura
Detached Palace on the day after his arrival, he was stunned by the sight of a bamboo fence even before he had seen the villa itself. He described himself at that moment. ‘I just stood there silently. Finally I said, “This is truly modern”.’ [5]
For the rest of his stay in Japan Taut used bamboo with great enthusiasm in both architecture and furniture. The walls of the large room in the Hyuga Residence were lined with slender bamboo, arranged vertically. The two or three hundred small lightbulbs on the ceiling of the social room are each hung from a bamboo chain, and the chains in turn are suspended from bamboo poles. In just three years, Taut learned practically all there is to know about the properties of the eloquent material of bamboo. He discovered in its particlised nature the very essence of modernity.
When I was invited to participate in a project called Simple Garden in Les Landes on the western coast of France, the first thing that went through my mind was the way Taut’s encounter with bamboo had provided him with an entirely new approach to design. We Japanese are so familiar with bamboo that we are insensitive to its power and technique. I thought that perhaps on French soil it would suggest new techniques and new worlds to those who encountered it, as it once did to Taut.
Simple Garden is part of a project directed by the French artist Gerard Boidin. Its aim is to allow children from all over the world to stay for a year in a ‘house’ in the pine forest of Les Landes and experience a life at one with nature. What we normally call a house is a cohesive human dwelling that excludes outsiders. Simple Garden is no ordinary house, but a place that attempts to establish human relationships that are open, temporary and nomadic. I felt that the container for those relationships ought to be equally open and ambiguous. The outer membrane of the structure consists of bamboo arranged in a dispersed way, as particles. A breathing fabric of natural fibre is stretched over the bamboo. Inside this space is installed a second membrane, which helps to control the temperature and humidity. Two layers of air are formed, one closer to the outside air than the other. The structure exercises a gradual and ambiguous control over not only temperature and humidity but also vision and movement. A series of spaces that is neither outside nor inside, neither architecture nor garden, extends through the pinewoods of France.
This structure of bamboo and membranes can be dismantled and moved. The site changes - in summer it is near the seashore, in autumn it moves to the woods inland. It may be in France one year, Japan the next. The structure can be freely changed in response to the configuration of the site. There are no limits to its location
or form: the particles repeatedly gather and disperse. In this case the bamboo always remains a material, just as the pebbles at Ise always remain a material. The children who use the spaces are particles as well, repeatedly gathering and dispersing.
Architecture is another name for the aggregation of matter (ie the creation of an object), and ‘particlisation’ is the reversal of that aggregation. The German philosopher and mathematician Gottfried Leibniz (1646-1716) effected this reversal in philosophy long ago, to counter the Cartesian definition of matter as an absolute mass (aggregation) that was independent of the mind. Critical of such a mass, Leibniz proposed that the universe was formed of individual particles called monads, which were distinguished by an irreducible simplicity. He believed that every experience was the outcome of the unstable combination or oscillation of these monads, which were continually changing. Leibniz criticised all attempts to create a stable, fixed aggregation, declaring ‘the monad has no window’; neither substance nor accident could come in from outside.
In the same spirit, we must continue to reject windows. We must continue to shun the stability, unity and aggregation known as the object.
NOTES
1.	John Summerson, Heavenly Mansions and Other Essays on Architecture (London: Cresset Press, 1949).
2.	Gropius was director of the Bauhaus from 1919 to 1928.
3.	In Privacy and Publicity Colomina points out that all those pieces of furniture and belongings suggest the presence of someone other than the resident and presents an interesting theory that Le Corbusier introduced the viewpoint of a detective or voyeur. See the photograph of the terrace of the Villa Savoye. Chairs are more important props than tables because they suggest human presence. Here, the chairs have been deliberately arranged at an odd distance from the table in order to serve as proxy for our viewpoint. (23, Le Corbusier and Pierre Jeanneret, Oeuvre complete 1929-1934 (Editions d’Architecture, Zurich, 1934).
4.	See the photograph of the vestibule of the Villa Savoye. Here too props have been arranged in odd ways. A table has been forcibly wrapped around a column, and a hat and coat are placed on the table, drawing us into the scene. (Oeuvre complete 1929-1934, 26).
5.	Taut, Nihonbi no saihakken.
Architecture Words 2 Anti-Object: The Dissolution and Disintegration of Architecture Kengo Kuma
Translated by Hiroshi Watanabe
Series Editor: Brett Steele
Managing Editor: Thomas Weaver
Publications Editor: Pamela Johnston
Art Director: Zak Kyes
Design: Wayne Daly
Series design: Wayne Daly, Zak Kyes
Editorial Assistant: Clare Barrett
ISBN 978-1-907896-34-7
© 2013 Architectural Association and the Authors. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission from the publisher, except in the context of reviews.
ebook edition published 2013 Distributed on iBookstore and Amazon
For a catalogue of AA Publications visit aaschool.ac.uk/publications
or email publications@aaschool.ac.uk
AA Publications 36 Bedford Square London WC1B 3ES T + 44 (0)20 7887 4021 F + 44 (0)20 7414 0783
ARCHITECTURE WORDS
ANTI-
OBJECT
Kengo
Kuma
Contents
Preface
Kuma’s Disappearance: An Introduction to Anti-Object Making a Connection: The Hvuga Residence by Bruno Taut
Flowing Out: ‘Water/Glass’, Atami, Shizuoka, 1992-95 Erasing: Kirosan Observatory, Ochi-gun, Ehime, 1991-94 Minimising: No Stage in the Forest.Tomoya. Miyagi, 1995-96
Unravelling: Japanese Pavilion for the Venice Biennale, 1995
Reversing: Chofu Theatre, Tokyo, 1997 Substituting: Electronic Memorial Space, Takasaki, Gumma, 1997-98
Breaking Down into Particles: Stone Museum, Nasu-cho, Tochigi, 1996-2000