Reiser - Umemotò

ATLAS OF NOVEL TECTONICS
PUBLISHER

Princeton Architectural Press

37 East Seventh Street

New York, New York 10003

For a free catalog of books, call 1,800.722 6657 Visit our web site atwww.papress.com.

©2006 Princeton Architectural Press

All rights reserved

Printed and bound in China

09 08 07 06 54321 First edition

No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner without written permission from the publisher, except in the context of reviews

Every reasonable attempt has been made to identify owners of copyright. Errors or omissions will be corrected in subsequent editions.

Special thanks to: Nettie Aljian, Dorothy Ball, Nicola Bednarek, Janet Belming, Megan Carey, Penny (Yuen Pik) Chu, Russell Fernandez, Jan Haux, Clare Jacobson. John King, Mark hamster, Nancy Eklund Later, Linda Lee, Katharine Myers, Lauren Nelson, Scott Tennent, Jennifer Thompson, Joseph Weston. Paul Wagnet, and Deb Wood of Princeton Architectural Press —Kevin C. Lippert, publisher

DESIGN

Research and Development Reto Geiser and Donald Mak

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data

Reiser, Jesse.

Atlas of novel tectonics / Reiser + Umemoto.

p. cm.

ISBN-13 978-1-56898 -554-1 (alk. paper)

1.	Architecture—Composition, proportion, etc.

2.	Eclecticism in architecture. I. Umemoto. Nanako.

II. Title.

NA2760.R452005

720.1—dc22.

2005034117
Contents

9 Acknowledgments

12 The Judo of Cold Combustion by Sanford Kwinter

17 Introduction

Z7 Geometry

1.	Fineness

2.	Difference in Kind/Difference in Degree

3.	The Unformed Generic: Form Acquiring Content

4.	Similarity and Difference

5.	Variety (Difference) vs. Variation (Self-similarity)

6.	Part- to-Whole Relationships

7.	After Collage- Two Conditions of the Generic

8.	Coherence vs. Incoherence

9.	A New Understanding of Difference

10.	Selection vs. Classification
7> Matter

11.	Intensive and Extensive

12.	Geometry and Matter

13.	Folly of the Mean

14.	Classical Body/Impersonal Individuation

15.	Material Organizations

16.	Matter/Force Relationships

17.	From a Static to an Oscillatory Model (and Back Again)

18.	Operating in a State of Poise

19.	Poise in an Allied Discipline

20.	Refrain

21.	Exchanges among Systems

22.	Intensive and Extensive II

23.	Machinic Phylum

24.	The Diagram

25.	Diagram Deployment

26 Fineness and the Macroscale

27.	Fineness in Allied Fields .

28.	Interdisciplinary Exchange

29.	New Possibilities for Spatial Structures

30.	Matter and Context

31.	Essentialized Systems vs. System with Singularities

32.	Exact/Anexact-yet-Rigorous

33.	Material Computation

34.	Systems Becoming Other Systems

35.	Post-Fordist Implementations
»6z Operating

36.	Mount Sinai

37.	Program: Architecture :: Lyrics: Music

38.	Operating under a Surfeit of Information

39.	Asignifying Signs

40.	Moving in the Gradient Field

41.	Accidental Animism

42.	Migration of a Pattern

43.	Emergent Structures

44.	Invention

45.	Style

46.	Panglossian Paradigm

47.	Devolutionary Architecture

48.	Optimization

49.	Classicism without Models

50.	Projecting Force

51.	Architecture vs. War

52.	The Nomad is the One Standing Still

215 Common Errors to Avoid

53.	The Abuse of the Accident

54.	The Abuse of Data

55.	The Abuse of History

56.	The Abuse of the Diagram

57.	The Abuse of Logic

58.	The lypologist’s Error
229 The World

59.	A Parable for Our Time

60.	Foamy Realities

61.	Pop Iconography as Myth

62.	Migration of Practices

6z. Migration of Ethics

64.	Desire’s Rainbow: Migration of Products

65.	Continuity and Discontinuity

66.	A Materialist Argument of Culture

67.	Neo-regionalism
The Judo of Cold Combustion

Sanford Kwinter

The story of guncotton has for years played the role of a founding myth for Reiser + Umemoto. Central to the history of propulsion that led not only to modern ballistics but to rocketry and aeronautics, guncotton was the product of g famous accident. After failing in his attempt to dissolve a wad of cotton in a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, a German chemist named Christian Friedrich Schönbein placed the sodden lump of threads to dry on his hot stove and went home for supper. With no further need of encouragement, the great mysteries of chemistry and matter set about to do their work. Poor Schönbein never saw his laboratory again, but the world had guncotton.

We might say that guncotton was the type of invention that mothered its own necessity, inaugurating the world of vertical propulsion, space travel, remote warfare, and so on. But in keeping with the Reiser + Umemoto position, it is best not to bury novelty too deeply in the murky mysticism of “invention” but to raise it affirmatively as a product of a spontaneous—or deliberate—migration. The migration I am referring to here is the migration of what current philosophical parlance calls the diagram. But what exactly, after all, is a diagram? The diagram is an invisible matrix, a set of instructions, that underlies—and most importantly, organizes—the expression of features in any material construct. The diagram is the reservoir of potential that lies at once active and stored within an object or an environment (or in every aggregate or section of these).
THE JUDO OF COLD COMBUSTION

13

It determines which features (or affects) are expressed and which are saved. It is, in short, the motor of matter, the modulus that controls what it does.

Reiser + Umemoto operates less like architects and much more like chemical engineers. Its profound identification with the invention of guncotton is also an affirmation of the glory and violence of novelty, a thing that can only be prepared for and which scrupulously reserves the mode and pattern of its appearance for itself. In the absence of cotton, the acids form solvents, not detonators or propellants. The cotton effectively slows them down, opens them up, and, by forming complex nitrates with its cellulose, structures the pattern of their interactions and subjects them to the discipline of space and time. Guncotton, in a word, is geometry in action. It represents the migration of a diagram from one ensemble (the textile mill) to another, and the production (selection) of new properties, potentials, and effects. This is the design ethos of Reiser + Umemoto.

When a tree is configured to function as a wood column or beam, it is one set of properties of cellulose that is selected for expression; or more properly, it is the geometry of vascular bundling that selects the properties of cellulose and conveys their felicitous rigidities and flexibilities to the macroscopic scale of the building itself. On the other hand, when a tree is configured into a log for burning, it is the fire itself—that exists already inside of the wood, only dormant or infinitely slowed—that is selected for expression or release. These two forms of expression, chemical and tectonic, are of exactly the same order of physical reality. It is a testimony to the diagram s action that such diverse properties can be called up and released. And it is no small revolution in design to have apprehended this simple but critical fraternity.
14

SANFORD KWINTER

With guncotton came the infinite, and infinitely suggestive, potential of cold combustion. Cold combustion suggests the slowing down of the unfolding of geometry that previously was either held in exquisite or frozen suspense or was subject to the instantaneous and uncontrolled unfolding that we know as explosion. Anyone who discovers a middle ground, a rhythm of unfolding that delivers the geometries of matter to the senses in the form of properties, qualities, or affects in real time, endows the world with novelty. Reiser + Umemoto is, in this sense, a research project that aims to discover architecture as a rhythmic pattern that is embedded everywhere in matter but that can be harvested only by subjecting matter ,to the action of a structuring diagram. The diagram serves here retroactively, as a ‘reading device,’ or as a cumbusting engine that extracts information and energy from the environment by making it flow at an intermediate rate. Wood is at once an infinitely arrested but still smoldering fire that can be speeded up and a set of organized strata in whose pattern of contours and lines the atmospheric, meteorological, and geological history of a region can be read. And those who work with wood at this level do nothing but transmit this ‘flow’ of information and time to the sensations by submitting it to diagrammatic modulation and control.

The era in which we live can be characterized as one in which knowledge is increasingly derived from the structure of flow (contours and rates of change in data, patterns of material action, etc.). But flow itself has, over the pastyears and especially in design milieus, too often been allowed to serve as a mere aesthetic marker—a simple conno-tator of dynamical knowledge alleged to exist but rarely actually engaged—and not a truly epistemological one. The ethos of combustion, with its habit of subjecting matter to a slowed or accelerated pattern and then deploying or harvesting what is physically and aesthetically released, is critical to the new materialism that is emerging everywhere today.
THE JUDO OF COLD COMBUSTION

15

What follows is the first design manual that reflects the foundational shift that took place seventy years ago in physics, when life was first understood to represent a pattern in time that could no longer be amenable to explanation in purely physical and chemical terms. Here, tectonics is similarly placed at the heart of matter as the liberator of the knowledge embedded within it, but only as a form of action (gone forever, the myth of statics !) that it is architecture’s duty to deliver to human sensation.

The new materialism may well be a new expressionism.
INTRODUCTION
Introduction

The most attentive study of the most homogenous milieu, of the most closely woven concatenation of circumstances, will not serve to give us the design of the towers ofLaon.

-vHenri Focillon, The Life of Forms in Art

It may seem a strange contradiction in a book devoted to concepts to put forward a call for the specific, but all the concepts, all the models presented here, are meaningless to the architect if the specific reality of the project is absent. For unlike planning, the success or failure of architecture rests finally on its specificity, and no account of circumstances will ever account for the work as such.

In a time so obsessed with establishing the value of works as the products of contexts and conditions, the architect may take solace in the fact that the corrosive relativism that plagues the historian will not plague the architect who curiously traffics in products that, if not permanently fixed, and however formed around the flux of matter, nevertheless rest on the side of persistence. They are never reducible to the fleeting interpretations—or, for that matter, practices—projected onto them. Thus, architecture is the substrate for the accidents of history rather than its embodiment.

This persistence gives us pleasure precisely because of the other developments that go with it.

CALIFORNIA COLLEGC " " 'HE AT SAN FRANCISCO. CA 94107

20

INTRODUCTION

The historian, and the critic, bear an imperative to contextualize and establish meaning, which stands them in opposition to the practice of architectural design. History, merely as a form of consciousness, is not sufficient to give rise to the architectural project. This is not to deny the importance of histories, texts, and conditions but to point out a property of the architectural artifact. The history, conditions, and time of formation of any project are distinct from the effects of the project itself, which has its own particular way of influencing histories as it mobilizes effects. Indeed, as Friedrich Nietzsche points out in his 1874 essay “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History for Life,” there is always an elerpent of the unhistorical in any act of creation.1 This is not only a vital precondition to creating anything new but also adheres to the object of architecture itself, which, after all, will always exceed the words that order architectural programs. Just as Jorge Luis Borges suggests that an author creates his own precursors, new architecture fundamentally reorganizes the canon. Architecture makes a new history; history doesn’t make a new architecture.

The primary and necessary conceit of this work is that beneficial novelty is the preferred condition to stability and the driving agenda behind architectural practice. This in no way requires us to reject ' traditional practices or the pragmatics of architecture. In fact, we consider it doubly incumbent upon those pursuing the novel to embrace these fields.

The naturalist polymath D’Arcy Thompson modestly states in his 1917 On Growth and Form, “This book of mine has little need of preface for it is indeed all preface from beginning to end.”2 Like Thompson’s work, ours is prefatory. Our treatment deals in a qualitative fashion with issues that ultimately require quantitative treatment: the province of our collaborators, engineers.
INTRODUCTION

21

Like Anthelme Brillat-Savarin’s 1825 Physiology of Taste, this is not a book of recipes, but in its specificity, it suggests a way of operating within the discipline. Each argument develops around a specific condition or case, but its value lies in its wider application. We see architectural design as a series of specific problem situations that, contrary to the discursive disciplines, cannot be argued away. The architectural design process allows openings and advances to occur before the problem’s sheer recalcitrance shuts down development. Thusly, design practice becomes agile enough to avoid getting stuck.

POTENTIAL

In his 1981 book A Scientific Autobiography, Aldo Rossi makes the relationship of matter and energy a fundamental precondition of architecture. He describes the physicist Max Planck’s account of a schoolmaster’s story about a mason who with great effort heaved a block of stone up on the roof of a house:

The mason was struck by the fact that expended energy does not get lost; it remains stored for many years, never diminished, latent in the block of stone, until one day it happens that the block slides off the roof and falls on the head of a passerby, killing him...in architecture this search is also undoubtedly bound up with the material and with energy; and if one fails to take note of this, it is not possible to comprehend any building, either from a technical point of view or from a compositional one. In the use of every material there must be an anticipation of the construction of a place and its transformation.3
22

INTRODUCTION

Rossi’s observations are more pertinent today than ever. While matter and energy constitute the vital components of Rossi’s formulation, they exist within an essentialist universe of fixed typologies, the potential of which is understood as the anima that surrounds objects of perfect stillness. And yet, the same actors are in play: energy, matter, and potential, but their roles have been reversed. Rossi delights in “the double meaning of the Italian word tempo, which signifies both atmosphere and chronology.”4 The mist that daily glides into the galleria animates its vast silent form with the life that has animated architecture since the advent of classicism. But we have other ambitions for this vitality, which now must epter and find expression in the fabric of matter itself. Let’s be clear: it is not the vulgar misconception that architecture must be literally animate, nor that processes illustrated by animation software guarantee dynamic architecture. It need not move, but its substance, its scale, its transitions and measurement will be marked by the dilations and contractions of the energy field.

Galleria of Fog
INTRODUCTION

2Z

A universe defined by a fixed field and unchanging essences has been superceded by a matter field that is defined locally only in and through its own interactions. This architecture is about speeds rather than movements. Speed is understood as an absolute, therefore this architecture’s fabric may register speeds from very fast to very slow while remaining essentially in place. Architecture thus is no longer the brooding and silent witness to the flux of tempo but is as much matter and structure as it is atmosphere and effects. We’ve gone from seeing temporal work in contrast to permanent architecture to seeing the temporal entering into the very fabric of the architecture itself, rendering it ambient.

In contrast to Rem Koolhaas’s notion that freedom is an absence of architecture—as, for example, when he describes the open space of a town square as embodying the greatest possible freedom—we side with Rossi’s belief that freedom in Koolhaas’s sense is vacuous; that, in fact, it is the constraints of architecture, its formal particularity and persistence beyond any functionalist determination, that truly embodies freedom. For in being neither uniformly open nor uniformly closed, it lies open to the unforeseen as it works on our changing activities over time.

We assert the primacy of material and formal specificity over myth and interpretation. In fact, while all myth and interpretation derives from the immediacy of material phenomena, this equation is not reversible. When you try to make fact out of myth language only begets more language, with architecture assuming the role of illustration or allegory. This is true not only of the initial condition of architecture but actually plays out during the design process in a similar way. Material practice is the shift from asking “what does this mean?” to “what does this do?”
24

INTRODUCTION

FROM EXTENSIVE FIELD/iNTENSIVE OBJECT TO INTENSIVE FIELD-OBJECT

In response to the perceived sterility and homogeneity of modern architecture, figures of the last generation as varied as Robert Venturi and John Hejduk selected and developed highly specific elements of the movement. This extraction of (generally figurative) motifs from the more systematic, Cartesian field they had occupied in high modernism was seen as a promulgation of uniqueness and variety in architecture. With equal ease, it could be defined through the development of a singular volume or figure or, in more discontinuous fashion, the collage technique. But this selective approach carried liabilities as well, for it dispensed with the grand systematic ambitions of modernism in favor of an idiosyncratic approach and concentrated on a revision of modernism that foregrounded the object divested of its field.

For architects, notions of space, until recently, remained trenchantly Cartesian, whether the field was recognized or the object premiated. The big shift, in which our work participates is the removal of the fixed background, of ordinates and coordinates, in favor of a notion of space and matter as being one. This shift is not simply one in concept or belief that would leave the architecture unchanged; at a fundamental level, it changes the way architecture is thought about and designed, and the way it emerges as a material fact.

Apologists for modernism—or those who simply want to extend the modernist project by updating their arguments while leaving the architecture unchanged—are in grave error. In their minds, the shifting paradigm is simply yet another shift in discourse, it doesn’t affect the object, and the object has no effect on it. Discourse alone merely becomes a more fashionable view of the same universe, thus implying that the early model is but a failure of interpretation.
INTRODUCTION

25

top John Hejduk, Bye House (Wall House II) middle PeterEisenman, House II (Frank House) bottom Robert Venturi/VSBA, Gordon Wu Hall
26

INTRODUCTION

The Cartesian paradigm, long discredited in the sciences, has lost its hold on architectural thinking. In fact, it was always a special case of a larger universe, the potential of which lay untapped and unrealizable before the advent of new paradigms. You need the new model to think the new work. And so we are not denying the existence of universal space, we are suggesting that the universal is not coordinates without qualities but rather a material field of ubiquitous difference.

Any serious project today must nevertheless contend with the force of the modernist canon and its outgrowths. We see our project not as a completion of universal models such as those devised by the modernists, nor as a counter-model to them, but rather as an excursion into new territory. Some baggage must be dropped along the way, or like the Argo, become a vehicle transfigured by the

left Cartesian Grid right Unstructured Grid
INTRODUCTION

2 7

journey. This book is part of the critical project, but it aspires to an affirmative criticality. We seek to dispel the essentialist assumptions about universality, solidified notions about historical models, and even the irreducibility of the authors themselves. For it becomes surprisingly evident that the canonical works display a profound impersonality; they are, in fact, the most comprehensive confrontations with a problematic that only later acquire an authorial stamp.

This tension among classical models, structural honesty, and compositional formalism constitutes a “both-and” argument in the Venturian sense.5 But in contrast to Venturi’s formulation, our project understands this dynamic not as a play of signifiers to be “read” (and thus, fixed in issues of meaning) but as a properly material contest in material logics. We would postulate an “and and and” argument— neither pure classical models, nor pure structural honesty nor pure compositional formalism, implying a more open-ended process.

Venturi’s “both-and” is a mannerist hierarchy that attempts to regulate complexity and contradiction as a comprehensive whole as a legible dimension of the building. “And and and” pushes multiplicity to a level of depth that isn’t present in the purely semiotic arguments of Venturi. For while all architecture can be read, it is only the postmodernists who reduce both process and reception to a semiotic game. This architecture of multiplicities operates as much with the visible conditions of architecture as the invisible processes of, for example, structure and program. This is, in a sense, more closely connected to a modernist depth than a mere play of surfaces and signifiers.
28

INTRODUCTION

For example, the Miesian project in its most impersonal and “universal” sense may thus be resituated. As a special case within a much larger and more varied universe. We see a systematicity to endeavors such as Mies’s which can be exponentially expanded through modes that allow for emergence rather than merely extension.

This therefore is not yet another plea for eclecticism but a shift for modernism into new and unforeseen territories. This is a critical stance that can only be worked out architecturally. Taking the specific problematic as a starting point, how does one produce multiplicities in formal arrangements? How does one produce multiplicity in structure? How does one produce multiplicity in function? This is the content of this book!

Perhaps the most problematic of Mies van der Rohe’s clearspan projects, Mannheim must contend with a large scale inclusion—a theater, within the box—an irreconcilable conjunction revealing the limits of the model.

Mannheim National Theater
Structure

INTRODUCTION

29

Miesian Clearspan

Neoplastic Field

Miesian Poise and Contemporary Poise
30

INTRODUCTION

Truss:

Reduction to Structure

Vierendel Truss:

Between Structure and Form

Shaped Truss:

Reduction to Form

Between Form and Structure
INTRODUCTION

31

CONSTRAINTS

It will be remembered that the principle of exclusion is a very simple, not to say primitive, principle that denies the values it opposes. The principle of sacrifice admits and indeed implies the existence of a multiplicity of values. What is sacrificed is acknowledged to be a value even though it has to yield to another value which commands priority.

—SirE. H. Gombrich, “Norm and Form”

Sir E. H. Gomrich’s 1966 essay “Norm and Form” serves as an instructive way to navigate both our attraction to Mies’s classical solutions and the desire for the resolution, or adjudication, of competing and conflicting demands. Gombrich first makes the claim that there are indeed classical solutions. For example, the resolution of the conflict in painting between balance and symmetry—once symmetry is challenged—is arrived at through “an ideal compromise between two conflicting demands.”6 This compromise is thought to be classical in the sense of presenting an unsurpassed solution that could only be repeated, not improved upon. Deviation on the one side would threaten the correctness of design; on the other, the feeling of order.

Seen from this point of view, the “classical” solution is indeed a technical rather than a psychological achievement.

The classical is what Sir Gombrich calls a “norm,” which embodies an “essence” that “permits us to plot other works of art at a variable distance from this central point.”7 The art historian distinguishes such genealogies as classicism and its descendents from mere series of morphological distinctions. It is only when distinction is defined by its correspondence with and deviation from certain norms that is, its response to human aims and human instruments that, to use polymath Gregory Bateson’s term, they embody a difference that makes a difference.”8
Z2

INTRODUCTION

Architecture is like the sea, or money: it falls into an intermediate category between matter and events. It is a modulator.
INTRODUCTION

33

There is a kind of paradox in that, one could argue, there is a greater stability to something like painting, where aside from the developments of interpretation and practice, the form and program of any particular painting remain fixed forever in their time, whereas in architecture, ever-changing demands and uses are either accommodated or resisted by the building. But the very instability of the temporal inhabitation of buildings, per se, is a part of the force that drives the discipline as a whole to novelty, in that it is constantly being asked to address new and changing problems. And while such demands can never be finally addressed, they serve as a heuristic device to invention.

What is of interest to us is distinguishing between the place of the norm in the perpetuation model of the classical and the novelty that emerges when architecture addresses evolving demands. This issue of the norm, in some sense, is related to the issue of difference, as for example when a normative model is so elaborated upon and it departs so much from the model from which it was derived that it shifts from being a difference in degree to a difference in kind. Such extreme elaboration, in the minds of conservative critics and architects, has the unfortunate effect of shutting down highly profitable areas of invention in a call for a return to order.

They, in effect, operate under what Gombrich characterizes as an exclusionary principle—a reductive operation, as common in criticism as it is in manifestoes. Under exclusionism, the specificity of what is being excluded is not engaged but rather_dismiss£d_QuLof hand. In functionalism, for instance, anY.d_ement_that would-be deemed ornamental is systema^ally.exclujdedA9.
34

INTRODUCTION

We see that the norms themselves, in so much as they are understood as demands and necessities, are instable. They come in and out of being and change over time. Extreme elaboration can produce demands that never existed before. Thus, inventions may lay fallow for a time, until they are pulled in to the social field when a receptive context for them comes about. In this way, invention actually forms a norm (see ^Invention,’’ page 188).

Architectural solutions are never free of the categories they dismiss. There is a decorative element to functionalism that exists even when all ornament has been stripped away. Within what Gombrich calls the sacrificial mode, by contrast, conflicting demands are more gradually worked out through emphasis and exchange, leaving open such possibilities as decorative function. The principle of sacrifice “admits and indeed implies the existence of a multiplicity of values.

I What is sacrificed is acknowledged to be a value even though it has

X Ito yield to another value which commands priority.”10	—

Since what is built and inhabited often persists beyond the social practices that define its use, there nevertheless exists a hierarchy of forms and arrangements of the gross form of architecture, which indirectly work on the more temporal arrangements that go on within it. This relationship is at best probabilistic, like the continuously changing arrangements of office furniture governed by the market forces at work in high-rise buildings. We hold to the idea that architecture is not simply reducible to the container and the contained but that there exists a dynamic exchange between the life of matter and the matter of our lives.
INTRODUCTION

35

REISER + UMEMOTO

House in Sagaponac

Sagaponac, New York, 2002
GEOMETRY
1

Fineness

Fineness confronts the reality that most architecture is not resolved within the logic of a single model, a single surface, or a single material only. Rather, architecture deals with assemblies involving multiple models, surfaces, and materials.'Architecture is generally not one continuous, monolithic thing but is made of multiple parts and organizational models operating at different scales. Modern architecture in its various forms has dealt with these issues, but the rationalized system of construction it employs typically resolved itself as a whole that is no greater than the sum of its parts.

The question then is how one manages or works with these diverse organizations and elements, not merely as an accumulation of the different but as multiplicities within an emergent organization such that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. A proper manipulation and understanding of fineness is crucial to this pursuit.

Fineness is a label that defines the culmination of techniques described in this book. It encompasses an examination of architecture at all levels of scale. Fineness breaks down the gross fabric of building into finer and finer parts such that it can register small differences while maintaining an overall coherence. The fineness argument is encapsulated in the densities of a sponge: too fine and it acts like a homogenous solid; too course and it becomes constrained to its members. Architectur e must perform similarly, at just the right balance between material geometry and force.
GEOMETRY

ZS

Too Fine

Just Right

Too Coarse

top Densities of a Sponge bottom Glass Sponge: Euplectella aspergillium, also known as the Venus Flower Basket
2

Difference in Kind/Difference in Degree

We could say that classical architecture is like a game of Chess. Following Gilles Deleuze’s analogy of the games of Chess and Go,1 architectural orders are like chess pieces: they have a clear, fixed identity and a range of moves within that identity. Chess, finally, is semiotic. Any transformation beyond the prescribed moves remains in the realm of deviation, because in this system change can only be referenced in kind, by its relation to a fixed model. The manner of such deviation is limited to elaboration or deformation—in effect, mannerist or baroque versions of the original.

In contrast, our work operates at times like a game of Go, wherein each element has no intrinsic and stable meaning outside its contextual relationships. One strand in a meshwork, or one Go piece, is no different from another. Meaning is acquired in relation to the specific behavior and effects we are seeking in a given zone of a project. For example, the tension rods in a meshwork generate a column-like zone of structure that is at once structural and atmospheric. To the classicist, a column is a column and no more. Where the classical model deploys the orderly alternation of columns and intercolumnar spaces (infill ornament), we deploy a continuous rod field with degrees of greater and lesser density, the denser areas acting in a column-like manner, displaying column-like traits. These areas shade off into zones that act predominantly as ornamental screens. In this model, no clear distinction exists between ornament and structure, as neither occupies distinct zones.
GEOMETRY

41

Difference in Kind

Difference in Degree

A V

’*8.8 «I r rr?•

• 8.4: '

r k

Chess/Orders:

Stable Meaning

Go/Meshwork: Contextual Relationships
3

The Unformed Generic: Form Acquiring Content

For you must understand that if only you have hit off such an untidy composition in accordance with the subject, it will give all the more satisfaction when it is later clothed in the perfection appropriate to all its parts. I have seen shapes in clouds and on patchy wall's that have roused me to beautiful inventions of various things, and even though such shapes totally lack finish in any single part, they were yet not devoid of perfection in their gestures or other movements.

—Leonardo da Vinci, Precetti

Leonardo da Vinci’s use of the stain relies upon projecting known content and scale into an unformed field as a means of rendering visible program and composition. There is no specific content inherent in the stain; in fact, many programs and compositions can be projected into and emerge from the same stain using this method. As such, the stain represents a specific form of the generic that is at once both general and specific. That is, while able to accept a wide range of projections, the stain is nevertheless highly differentiated by features that guide the emergence of content specifically.

This is a precise diagram of the vague, it is a foretaste not only of the general composition but of precise details as well. In contrast to diagrams that plot one quantity against another, these diagrams plot a multiplicity of axes, both qualitative and quantitative, against each other. Such diagrams allow for the emergence of all levels of a work at once, from the most general to the most particular. They occupy the space between the abstract and the concrete. Like Leonardo, we start from the middle, projecting material into a diagrammatic field.
GEOMETRY

43

Storm

Stain

Soldiers

The Potential of the Unformed
4

Similarity and Difference

You can’t have similarity without difference, and you can’t have difference without similarity.

—Claude Lévi-Strauss

There are two general developments within the issue of similarity and difference which are not mutually exclusive. Beyond simple accumulations of the different, similarity can emerge out of difference and difference can emerge out of similarity. Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari give the analogy of a racehorse being closer to a greyhound, and a draft horse being closer to an ox, than each is to the other. Even though they look different they are similar at the level of performance.

At the formal and organizational levels, we are moving away from an understanding of the discrete, which in recent history has meant the unique, toward the continuous—that is, toward an understanding of discrete elements as part of a self-similar structure. Even though they look similar, they behave differently.
GEOMETRY

45

Greyhound

Oxen

Racehorse

Drafthorse
5

Variety (Difference) vs. Variation (Self-similarity)

Quantity is a precondition to fineness.

Repetition in multiple models is necessary to make selections.

Repetition within a single model is necessary to register differentiation. Difference, or the possibility for difference, is produced as an answer to program.

Mere quantity allows only for the quality of mere quantity. But intensive quantity generates a whole irreducible to the sum of its parts: in other words, whole-whole relationships.

The logic of repetition, like the logic of statistics or the logic of information, can be applied regardless of content. This is the crux of Edgar Allan Poe’s theory of composition.2 (See “Refrain,” page too.)

What becomes deeply interesting out of this method is pattern. When tied to information (and not semantics), pattern becomes the fundamental quantity of the diagram. A system of differential repetition becomes a means of handling a variety of material within the same organization.

Just as a single hair is not sufficient to make a hair-do, so too a single element in architecture will never reveal the rich organizational possibilities inherent when greater quantities come to play.
GEOMETRY

47

‘Quantity has a quality all its own.” —Joseph Stalin
REISER + UMEMOTO

Flux Room Installation

Graz, Austria, 2002

6

Part-to-Whole Relationships

From the general scheme to the particular detail, the modernist project deals methodologically and architecturally almost exclusively with top-down hierarchy. We do not reject the concept of hierarchy, but rather use it in a new way. We work within a hierarchy that is not simply nested in scale and distinct from the orders that lie above and below it. Rather, we are using organizational principles that promote communication across scales, in which the particular is able to affect the general and vice versa.

This requires a methodology that involves both top-down and bottom-up logics operating in a feedback loop. (Thus, hierarchy, in this case, has nothing to do with power structures and everything to do with material organization). This methodology, in contrast to the reductive models of modernism, enables the emergence of new organizations and new architectural effects out of wholes that are not reducible to their parts. These emergent organizations become legible not as parts to a whole but as whole-whole relationships.
GEOMETRY

51

left Simple Nested Hierarchy: Whole Reducible to its Parts right Complex Hierarchy: Whole More than the Sum of its Parts
7

After Collage: Two Conditions of the Generic

In pursuit of this new conception of the universal, we work with two conditions beyond the modernist model of simple repetition of an unchanging unit. After first rejecting the juxtapositional techniques of collage as accumulations of the mefely different, we posit either an unchanging unit deployed along a variable trajectory or the simple repetition of a variable unit. In both cases transformation is a quality perceived through deployment in quantity. In this way we understand the universal as the space of ubiquitous difference rather than of a fixed and unchanging background. In this universe difference is not fundamentally a property of particular units but of a transformation, or set of transformations, to the group—what Manuel DeLanda calls “progressive differentiation.”5
GEOMETRY

53

REPETITION OF HETEROGENEITY/HOMOGENEITY

Accumulation of the Merely Different

Simple Unit Repeated along Variable Trajectory

Variable Unit Repeated along Simple Trajectory

top Collage Architecture middle Brick Paving Pattern bottom Variable Three-Hinged Arch
REISER + UMEMOTO

New York, New York
3
8

Coherence vs. Incoherence

Internally consistent systems are inherently different from systems of collage. To illustrate this, one could take a radio and either condense its form until it is very small or distribute it, spreading it out over a wide area. As long as no wires are cut the radio would still function, it would still be a radio. This is because a radio operates within an internal logic that doesn’t change with scale but rather relies on ratios. It maintains its systemic coherence. A collage does not behave that way. The collage as a technique relies on elements being recognizably out of context, or recontextualized. It is inherently juxtapositional. Simply collaging the elements of a radio would not produce a functioning device.

This is not to say that collage lacks systematicity; in fact, collage, in order to be converted into anything constructible at all, must be represented in the form of an assembly of building components such as studs, drywall, etc. The tectonics of collage architecture is not collage but comprises the same subsystems one would find in any other construction.
GEOMETRY

57

left Constituent Parts of a Radio Arranged as Fragments RIGHT Constituent Parts of a Radio Arranged in a Coherent System
58

COHERENCE VS. INCOHERENCE

Behind even the most incoherent architecture lies the coherence of building systems. The relationship between the formal motives and these systems may range from radical incoherence at the volumetric level rendered in a flexible system such as platform framing to an intermediate level, as, for example, in the Gehry House, where collage at the overall level of organization is modulated by the systems of construction.

Still another process unfolds when two apparently indifferent yet coherent systems come together and imprint on one another to form a third, coherent system. This is the case in the Bordeaux house where indifferent and frankly structural and building systems are enlisted in domestic service. The example given by Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari is the wasp and the orchid. The wasp’s body is formed on the shape of the orchid as the orchid is formed on the shape of the wasp. While both are engaged in completely independent activities, the one actually augments the other. The wasp pollinates the orchid, but its interests lie somewhere else entirely; pollination is merely a consequence of unrelated actions.3 It is an example of the effects of profound indifference. Architectural systems are not human relationships; like nature, they are impersonal, yet habitation is augmnted by the pressures of their indifference.
GEOMETRY

59

TOP Michael Rotondi/RoTo, Dorland Mountain Dwelling middle Frank Gehry/FOGA, Gehry House bottom Rem Koolhaas/OMA, Bordeaux House
REISER + UMEMOTO

West Side Convergence Competition Entry

New York, New York, 1999

9

A New Understanding of Difference

Looking at many trees we find that some have structural features in common and form a genus or species. This species manifests itself in every individual tree as far as resistant matter allows, and though individual trees may therefore differ, their differences ar'e merely “accidental” compared to the essence they share.

—SirE. H. Gombrich, “Norm and Form”

If idealist difference is understood as deviation from a transcendental model, then essentialist difference is understood as serial accident, like the variations in blush in a crate of peaches. If you buy one thousand tiles, or one thousand mass-produced custom teapots, you will see this kind of variation in the form or patina of each.

Sanford Kwinter introduces a third idea in his example of how one reads facial expressions.4 The smile is not a deviation from a straight face but a whole in and of its own. Neither do we see the face in a nominalist way, entirely unique and disconnected from other faces, nor is its expression accidental and thus referred back to an essence.

It is instructive to look at how variation enters the social field for an analogy. Mass-customization is most successful when mobilized in some larger construct rather than as individualized units marketed and released into society in isolation from the rest of the series.
GEOMETRY

6Z

7. Seed: Sum of all previous qualities

6. Fruit: Expansion

5. Sexual Organs: Contraction

4. Corolla: Expansion

3. Calyx: Contraction (Stem contracts toward calyx)

2. Stem: Expansion

(Cotyledons: Duality appears)

I. Seed: Contraction

Goethe’s Essential Plant:

Essential Features Described in Terms of Potentials
64

A NEW UNDERSTANDING OF DIFFERENCE

In the latter case their differences only bear an abstract relationship to the whole. Whereas when you start to look at variations in a field, difference is no longer isolated but forms emergent wholes not reducible to the sum of their parts. That is their abstract status, but it is their deployment that is the crucial issue. Granted, such variation can be deployed at any scale, but there is a range outside of which the system becomes invisible. At micro scales they merely act as decorative texture; conversely, at an extreme macro scale such difference becomes imperceptible and in that sense meaningless. It would, for example, be absurd to suggest continuous variation in the joints of superhighways. It is at the middle to large scale—the space of mass reception—that there seems to be both an economy and a need for variation.

This notion of difference applies across a range of scales, from the very small to the very large. The proper use of continuous variation consists in taking a molecular population and deploying it as a molar or large-scale aggregate, thus making the statistical variation compre hensible and visible for a certain quantity. In this way it becomes a living datascape.
GEOMETRY

65

A Teenager’s Mouth
10

Selection vs. Classification

Besides the avoidance of essentialist thinking, Deleuze’s speculation about virtuality is guided by the closely related constraint of avoiding typological thinking, that style of thought in which individualism is achieved through the creation of classifications and of formal criteria for membership in those classifications.

—Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy

Typology plays a significant role within material practice. It allows for a clear selection of architectural organization from among the almost limitless possibilities available today. By selecting a particular typological model we are able to make a correlation, as a modernist would, between a crude typology and functional or structural criteria. We see typology as extending beyond Manuel DeLanda’s parsing of Gilles Deleuze. Typology is not only useful as a form of classifying something at the end of a process but also as a crude device for use in the design process.

Cumulus

Stratus

Cirrus

Cloud Types
GEOMETRY

67

This requires a reevaluation of each type within a range of flexibility and transformative possibilities. Indeed in this model rather than transcendent type, types transcend themselves. In contrast to Jean-Nicolas-Louis Durand’s conception that type is a limited combinatorial set of classical elements chosen with respect to their civic propriety, our deployment of type allows for the selection of a range, not a fixed model. Without precluding mutability and nuance, we limit the model working within by selecting certain parameters.

The selection of a typology now leads to a process within a limited range of constraints roughly set by type. DeLanda calls these “proscriptive constraints.” Based on assumptions of what a type cannot— or will not—do, they leave open limits on what it necessarily can do or will do: “not what to do, but what to avoid doing.”6 Typology is, thus, less a classification or codification than it is the basis for a process of constrained material expressions. Selection is an element of the generative, of the field of forces that contribute to the instantiation of architecture. Once the artifact is complete, there is another selective process based on the performative—the constellation of programs and activities that play out in the architecture. This classification of properties involves grouping figures “by their response to events that occur to them.”7 Such selection has more to do with the establishment of a bias or tendency than of a category.

Planar

Linear

Punctual

Crude Types
68

SELECTION VS. CLASSIFICATION

RUNNING ALL THE HORSES AT ONCE: A CASE STUDY IN DESIGNING FROM A CRUDE TYPE

The complex form of this geodetic footbridge is the result of a simple manipulation of a planar type. From plane, it is first rolled into a tube. Slits are then cut in the top of the tube from the edge to points nearly meeting in the center and flaps are unfolded down from these slits. Once the planar form is developed, it is still merely a surface, a featureless primitive with no thickness or dimension. This is the crux of the fineness argument and what distinguishes our practice from those concerned merely with the manipulation of geometry. We assume that there is a threshold point at which scale and material become wed to geometry. This requires that we consider not simply the geometrical primitive but that there exists, embedded in the primitive, other orders

Geodetic Footbridge
GEOMETRY

69

and levels of geometry that are necessary to a final materialization. Deleuze refers to this as the “analogical modulator.”0 It is therefore not enough to stop at the geometry obtained through the manipulation of a single type; rather, moving beyond the generalizing geometric primitive requires working with embedded, finer patterns of organization within the overall primitive that both enable and make visible the connection between geometry and matter. This process, however, does not inevitably lead to one material outcome but instead offers the possibility of different material instantiations.

The olanar type, in this case, is rendered materially as a linear network deployed along a surface, resulting in a geodetic mesh. However, once the geodetica are determined, the final instantiation could be carried out in a range of materials, each feeding back into the geometry according to their specific properties.
MATTER
11

Intensive and Extensive

If we divide a volume of matter into two equal halves we end up with two volumes, each half the extent of the original one. Intensive properties on the other hand are properties such as temperature or pressure, which cannot be so divided.

—Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy

The most important distinction in our changed notions of architectural design is the shift from geometry as an abstract regulator of the materials of construction to a notion that matter and material behaviors must be implicated in geometry itself. In the older models, the sovereign role of geometry was to regulate or impress itself upon the irrational and accidental condition of matter, thus measurement, proportion, and all of the elements of pure extension maintain a priority over that which they regulate; The new model must be understood not as a supercession of measuring but as the interplay between intensive and extensive differences.

Intensive differences, also known as gradients, are properties of matter with indivisible difference, such as weight, elasticity, pressure, heat, density, color, and duration. Any intensive property that is halved maintains an equal property in each half. In other words, a pot of boiling water, when split in half, is just as hot as it was when it was whole. In contrast, extensive properties are properties of matter with divisible differences, such as measurement, constraints, limits, codes/ rules, modulation, mass, total volume, and time. If a pot of boiling water is split in half, each half has half the mass of the whole.
MATTER

73

left Intensive Difference: Gradient Field right Extensive Difference: Scalar System
74

INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE

We must not fall into the trap of saying that the extensive is quantitative and the intensive, qualitative. In fact, the one is simply quantitative, and the other, since it is inherently embedded in a material field, exists always as quantitative and qualitative. Of course, the poets will say that there absolutely is an intensive dimension to 5:00 pm, just as the artist will say that certain extensive measurements, such as human proportions or the golden section, resonate with the soul. But in both cases, one might argue that the effective aspects of the number arise as a result of their context and for material reasons. In the first case the number is not merely clock time but a time of day, with material dimensions, and ip the second there is an immediacy to that thing which acquires a proportion as material, without recourse to a transcendent system.

The relationship between the intensive and the extensive has always underlayed the minor arts and craft practices and a dimension of certain specialized forms of architectural design, such as medieval stone masonry. But it wasn’t possible to fit it into the economy of all but the most specialized building production. Nineteenth-century technology and the mechanization process marginalized that dimension of practice at the scale of architecture because it couldn’t be easily systematized, nor was it susceptible to standardization—two prevailing processes of modernization. Above all, philosophically, it didn’t seem to fit into essentialist notions of rationality that governed not only the fabric of building but its organization as well.

The legacy of the essentialist approach to architecture, which elevates rationality (mainly in the lineaments of geometry) above matter, precludes the productive and rich capacity of matter to define or influence geometry. Allowing this dynamic to operate is especially important not so much in the realm of new materials for architecture but as a way of reconceiving tectonics and organization.
MATTER

75

Potted Plant: Intensive Proliferation, Extensive Limit
76

INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE

If a quantity of matter is divided into two equal parts, each part will have the same value of the original, and half the value of the extensive properties....

Heat

Elasticity

Pressure

Density

Color

Pleasure/Pain

Duration Speed/Slowness

Intensive (Gradients): Behaviors of Matter, Indivisible Difference
MATTER

77

Two extensive properties add up in a simple way, intensive properties do not add up, but rather average.

—Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy

SPEED LIMIT

Measurement Constraints Codes L Rules

Modulation

Mass

Weight

Time

Total Volume

Movement

Extensive:

System of Measurement, Divisible Difference
12

Geometry and Matter

His journeyman, the monk-mason Garin de Troyes, speaks of an operative logic of movement enabling the “initiate” to draw, then hew the volumes “in penetration in space,” to make it so that “the cutting line propels the equation” (le trait pousse le chiffre). One does not represent, one engenders and traverses. This science is characterized less by the absence of equations than by the very different role they play: instead of being good forms absolutely that organize matter, they are “generated” as “forces of thrust” (poussees) by the material, in a qualitative calculus of the optimum.... Royal, or State, science only tolerates and appropriates stone cutting by means of templates (the opposite of squaring), under conditions that restore the primacy of the fixed model of form, mathematical figures, and measurement. Royal science only tolerates and appropriates perspective if it is static, subjected to a central black hole divesting it of its heuristic and ambulatory capacities.

—Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus

The management of intensive and extensive difference establishes the motives and the limits for a materialist approach to architecture. To what degree one model is used and at what stage and where it gives over to the other are the questions for the art today. Extensive models define limits, but they are not generative. Conversely, models of pure difference without the limits that extensive models provide will never acquire the stable definition that architecture, however dynamic, demands.
MATTER

79

Squaring employs the code as limit and system of transfer.

' I

.1

Projection here is a generative instrument.
8o

GEOMETRY AND MATTER

The logic of nomad science recognizes the creative capacities of the matter field and harnesses intensive variability. This has historically been the engine for the unforeseen to emerge in the design process. Codified systems of templating, or even the use of drawing conventions like plan, section, and elevation, are, in contrast, self-limiting techniques. Nomad and State geometries correlate with the two complementary roles for geometry in architectural practice—the intensive and extensive. One sees geometry as a generative tool; the other sees geometry as a way of domesticating matter within metrical space. In working drawings, for example, forms are translated to coordinate space for the purpose of invariant communication, even if the coordinate system was not used as a generative tool. This is a process that goes back as far as the conventions of architectural drafting and projection. Plan, section, and elevation were originally formulated as a system for measuring archeological ruins; only later did they get turned into projective instruments.1

Geometry derived from fields of intensive difference in matter can be used generatively. These gradient fields are understood as transscalar and flexible but in order to operate architecturally must be scaled precisely by being brought into relationship with extensive models. The creative tendency of intensive fields and the codifying tendency of extensive fields do not merely work in succession. Like working drawings following creative sketches, there must be reciprocity between the two. Extensive units form limits, tympanum against which the creative forces in the intensive space resound. While such limits are not creative in and of themselves, they make novelty possible through the function of their constraints.
MATTER

81

The most radical surface/space implications of Meissonier’s architecture are realized in his metalsmithing, a rococo space freed from the classical imperative to domesticate rocaille as decoration.

top The Thyssen Meissonier Tureen bottom Signature on the Tureen, Reading “Made by I. A. Meissonier, Architect”
13

Folly of the Mean

First then we must consider this fact: that it is in the nature of moral qualities that they are destroyed by deficiency and excess.

—Aristotle, Nicomachian Ethics

For a variety of reasons, architecture and engineering have inherited the mean, as described in Aristotelian Ethics, as a virtue. In our work, we are looking instead at conditions that are both too fast or too slow, too small or too large to be described by the average or the mean. Indeed, it seems that the extremes have a way of working together to produce new possibilities. Indeed, architecture considered materially acquires a dynamic balance not through the mean but through poise. There is a kind of degree zero essentialism, not unlike the essential-ism of the modernist project, in Aristotle’s argument regarding the concept of the mean: first, that things can have the quality of being too small or too large, and second, that there is a certain virtue to inhabiting the mean. The mean is justified initially in terms of human conduct and then gets transferred to the world of matter as matter in turn is anthropomorphized. This is a kind of magic. As an extension of the argument that classicism is linked to cosmology, or world-building, in which man occupies a privileged position, the analogy is clear. Proportional systems and orders formed upon the mean—the basis of classical architecture—purport to carry a magical connection between the human and the universe. But as abstractions, these proportional systems have only the most distant relationship to their referents. Fixated on ideas, by the idea, the architect becomes blinded to the thing itself.
MATTER

8Z

ARISTOTLE’S CONCEPT OF THE MEAN

EXCESS 'IMPROPERSPHERE OF ACTION

FEAR AND CONFIDENCE —	RASHNESS

PLEASURE AND PAIN	LICENTIOUSNESS

MINOR GETTING AND SPENDING - — ~ PRODIGALITY MAJOR GETTING AND SPENDING	~ VULGARITY

MINOR HONOR AND DISHONOR-------	VANITY

MAJOR HONOR AND DISHONOR -	AMBITION

ANGER ------------------------------- IRASCIBILITY

SEFL EXPRESSION --------------------- BOASTFULNESS

CONVERSATION —	BUFFOONERY

SOCIAL CONDUCT---------------------- OBSEQUIOUSNESS

SHAME --------------------------------     SHYNESS

INDIGNATION ------------------------------ ENVY	-

MEAN ► DEFICIENCY

"PROPER"	"IMPROPER"

COURAGE

TEMPERANCE —

LIBERALITY -------

MAGNIFICENCE —

MAGNANIMITY

PROPER AMBITION

PATIENCE -------

TRUTHFULNESS -------

WITTNESS -

FRIEDNLINESS -------

---- MODESTY ----------- RIGHTOUS INDIGNATION -

COWARDICE INSENSIBILITY ILLIBERALITY PETTINESS PUSILANIMITY UNAMBITIOUSNESS LACK OF SPIRIT UNDERSTATEMENT BOORISHNESS CANTANKEROUSNESS SHAMELESSNESS MALICIOUS ENJOYMENT

OPERATING IN A STATE OF POISE

CONVENTION

SIMPLE

POISE

AMBIGUOUS

CONVENTION

SIMPLE

SPHERE OF ACTION

FEAR AND CONFIDENCE ------

PLEASURE AND PAIN —'------

MINOR GETTING AND SPENDING MAJOR GETTING AND SPENDING

- RASHNESS

LICENTIOUSNESS

PRODIGALITY

VULGARITY -

RASH COWARDICE -LICENTIOUS TEMPERANCE PRODIGAL ILLIBERALITY

PETTY VULGARITY

MINOR HONOR AND DISHONOR--------------VANITY	VAIN PUSILANIMITY

MAJOR HONOR AND DISHONOR------	AMBITION	AMBITIOUS UNAMBITIOUSNESS

ANGER —	---------------------IRASCIBILITY	IRRASCIBLE PATIENCE —

SEFL EXPRESSION--------------------BOASTFULNESS	UNDERSTATED BOASTFULNESS

CONVERSATION----------------------- BUFFOONERY ---------------- BOORISH WIT---------

SOCIAL CONDUCT----	---------- OBSEQUIOUSNESS - OBSEQUIOUS CANTANKEROUSNESS

SHAME------------ SHYNESS ----------------------------------- SHAMELESS SHYNESS -

INDIGNATION

INDIGNANT ENVY ------

COWARDICE

INSENSIBILITY ILLIBERALITY PETTINESS

PUSILANIMITY UNAMBITIOUSNESS - LACK OF SPIRIT UNDERSTATEMENT

BOORISHNESS CANTANKEROUSNESS SHAMELESSNESS MALICIOUS ENJOYMENT



A state of poise is not an average or a mean in the Aristotelian sense, and while operating in a state of poise may incorporate extremes, it does not seek equilibrium through weakening of excess or deficiency. Rather, it seeks a dynamic tension between them. If the first chart refers to classically heroic virtues (or lack thereof), the second refers to a more modern conception of the anti-heroic, in which contradictory attributes coexist within the same subject.

top Heroic bottom Anti-heroic
14

Classical Body/Impersonal Individuation

Instead of relying on analogy and proportion, sublimating the body to measurement and abstract geometry, our work aims to exceed the definition of the body as an organism and likewise an organism’s experiential field. In fact, that kind of abstraction is simply not abstract enough. Ours is therefore not an argument about phenomenology but an organizational principle of architecture that understands architecture as a great body, or an assemblage of bodies, that cut across a wide range of scalar and material regimes. While the phenomenological could be understood as a special case of this work, it is impossible to simply use embodied experience, or phenomena, as a generative model. There is no organizational principle in architecture directly linked to phenomenology. In fact, all architecture can be understood phenomenologically. As a result, phenomenological architecture typically lapses into some form of modernism for the purpose of organizing space. Such a phenomenological practice could never propose a new architecture, only a projection upon existing systems.

One of the great claims of phenomenology is its return to the human, or more precisely, its capacity as an antidote to the dehumanizing effects of positivism and modernization. We are concerned less with whether the broad sweep of humanism is effective against inhumanity than with identifying particular concepts associated with a humanistic outlook as being ineffective in general. We question whether there is a connection between the humanism of classical models and human
MATTER

85

behavior at all. We contend that humanism was never terribly humane to begin with. Architecture should seek less to be an abstraction of the lineaments of the body and more to engage the body’s effective and affective spectrum. It is a faulty assumption that patterning architecture on the body makes it human. Just as it is a faulty assumption that the body is the pattern of the universe.

Making architecture anthropocentric in order to deal with movement or change in fact makes it much more limiting. Architecture acquires the images or proportions of a body when the architect is working through a sublimated representation of a body rather than the body itself. Such practice is analogous to creating an architecture around a Fordist model, in which analyses of movement create an envelope that in turn becomes building or infrastructure. The logic of this practice fails as soon as you make the envelope of the building the same as that of the body.

Anthropocentrism is representational and is the most limiting when it is applied at the scale of the body. We prefer architecture to engage what a body can actually do. A skateboarding ramp, for instance, is not patterned on a human. Rather, it is an intervening technology that belongs to a totally different pattern of order upon which the human works. The ramp augments the body; it is an extension of the body via the vehicle of the skateboard, but it does not represent it.

Such an extension of performance belongs to a larger class of singularities known as impersonal individuations. Like the sunset or a time of day, these intense and unique conditions emerge out of the material world. They have manifold meanings projected onto them, but they are not the product of meaning. Architecture belongs to this class of individuality. It hosts the highly specific but is open and general at the same time.
REISER + UMEMOTO

National Diet Library Competition Entry

Kansai, Japan, 1996

15

Material Organizations

Mies’s constraint of matter by ideal geometry is based on an essen-tialist notion: that matter is formless and geometry regulates it, that geometry is transcendental and in some sense indifferent to the material that substantiates it.

When freed from such essentializing conceptions, matter proves to have its own capacity for self-organization. As an analog computer, it can perform optimizing computations that have been shown to be trans-scalar; as for example, when stretched stockings are used to calculate the geometry and form of full-scale tensile structures.

This logic, however, can be expanded to more complex situations, as, for example, when a magnetized ferrofluid calculates in a dynamic balance the forces of magnetism, gravity, and surface tension.

In this state, matter is much more dynamic and pregnant with the possibility of its own constraints and leniencies than any projected geometry or simple optimizing principle could render. It becomes a model not only for dealing with structure but for dealing with the feedback that occurs between multiple forces at work on a building, encompassing program, use, organization, and form.
MATTER

89

Miesian Essentialism:

Matter as an Accident to Geometry

Simple Optimization: Material as an Analog Computer

Direct Index of Matter/Force: Material Behavior in a Multidimensional Force Field

Water Garden of Micro-gradients:

Incarnated Material Diagram
16

Matter/Force Relationships

A genealogy of emerging matter/force relationships may be charted from the simple to the complex. In the simplest case, forces are hidden within the post and beam assembly. Through the device of entasis, the forces that are hidden in post-and-beam construction are represented. This representation, however, never expands beyond the single member, and it remains semantic, merely a sign of weight.

In the ribbed concrete slab of Pier Luigi Nervi’s Gatti Wool Mill in Rome, of 1951, the matter/force relationship is expressed through the materialization of isostatic lines in the waffle to represent simply supported plates under uniform loads.2 Nervi, an engineer, represents the ideal situation by putting material where the theoretical force lines lie. This is a self-fulfilling prophesy, as forces flow where the matter goes. If Nervi had configured the waffle otherwise, the forces would flow otherwise. Despite the appearance of an optimizing logic, this design by Nervi is architectural, as much an act of will as a solution to a problem of statics.

Nonetheless, Nervi was unwilling to overcome the disciplinary boundary beyond structure to influence other levels of organization and program. Indeed, the imperative to optimize toward structural efficiency inherent in the ethic of modernist engineering precludes these possibilities. From structure, to program, to effects, we seek to proliferate this relationship between matter and force across all elements of a building.
MATTER

91

Post-and-Beam:

Forces Hidden in the Assembly

Entasis:

Forces Represented in a

Discrete Member

Waffle Slab Following Isostatic Lines: Forces Expressed in Discrete Zones

Voronoi Waffle:

Forces Expressed across Systems from Structure to Space to Program

Genealogy of Matter/Force
17

From a Static to an Oscillatory Model (and Back Again)

The process of moving out of a nested hierarchy involves increasing communication between the once discrete domains of structure and ornament. This can be illustrated through an examination of emerging structure/infill structure/omament relations (see diagram, pages 94-95). The modernist pair establishes a clear distinction between regions. Structure and infill are discrete entities, with structure acting to define zones of infill. In the nascent emergent, limited oscillations develop within which structure and infill remain discrete yet perturbations in the structure act to inflect the zones of infill.

In the emergent pair intense oscillation results in emergent singularities or features that are not reducible to constituent elements.

Finally, in the neo-modernist pair, a threshold of scale and intensity is crossed. Beyond it, difference becomes overabundant and produces similarity. Such white noise is consistent with a high-level homogeneity, as, for example, in structural glass, in which structure and infill are assimilated to the point that they become one and the same. This pairing is an abstract synthesis, like an argument. It requires no material experimentation, only external logic. In contrast, the emergent pair shows a moment of poise. A phase transition only possible through experimentation in a material field.
MATTER

93

In order for this kind of process to be effective, an element of fineness is necessary; a delicate attentiveness to precision and scale. A gross figure-ground distinction, showing structure and infill, for instance, is insufficient. The transmission of effects across a field is impossible when a dialectical relationship occurs from the start. The different zones of structure and infill have first to be described as a field of similarity in order for them to register difference. This establishes them as densities in a common field gradient.
94

FROM A STATIC TO AN OSCILLATORY MODEL

Nested Hierarchy

Difference Expressed within a Defined Region

Uniformity within

Each Region

Initial Vibration Established

Post and Beam

Isostatic Slab

Orthodox:

Modernist

Heterodox:

Nascent Emergent
MATTER

95

White Noise

Communication across

Vibration Generates Singularities

An Overabundance of Difference

Produces Similarity

Voronoi Slab

Heterodox: Emergent

Structural Glass

Orthodox: Neo-modemist
18

Operating in a State of Poise

The most pregnant tectonics may be found in that intermediate state between two forms of optimization. For example, on one extreme we might encounter a classical modernist infill structure, where there is a clear articulation of structure-infdl/structure-omament. Here structure, guided by standardization and efficiency, delimits and constrains what is in between. At the other extreme, this dialectic is materially and semantically synthesized. Over-optimized technology, in solving the problem by erasing it, advances the early modernist ambition for architecture to become “almost nothing.” In becoming too smooth, in reducing difference to total homogeny, the model actually loses qualities.

The middle condition occupies a moment of dynamic poise, where systems on their way toward optimization display singular features that are, by varying degrees, structural and ornamental. The resulting structure/ornament gradient is less autonomous than in the other two models. The virtue of the middle condition lies in the range of its ambient effects, its reciprocity to program, and its channeling of movement within the spaces it encloses. In contrast, a system like structural glass creates a completely homogenous spatial effect. Its only logic lies in resisting structural forces with the least amount of material difference.
MATTER

97

Nested Hierarchy..

on Its Way to...

Homogenized Hierarchy

Coherent, Linear

Orthodox System

Coherent, Non-linear

Heterodox System

Coherent, Linear

Orthodox System

left Infill Structure middle Rod Truss right Structural Glass
19

Poise in an Allied Discipline

The desire for a pure structural skin, an optimal condition for aircraft, becomes a limiting factor for architecture. Where the contradictions of structure and skin are resolved too smoothly they lose architectural potential. In aviation technology, geodetics geometrically and structurally registers the transition from a skeleton model, derived from the technology of boat-building, to a pure structural skin model. While the ultimate resolution of this technologically is monocoque construction, we find that the geodetic moment displays greater capacity for structural variation and adaptability. The monocoque shell skin, in contrast, optimizes toward a single function—structural economy.
MATTER

99

top Formers and Stringers middle The Geodetic Moment bottom Monocoque Construction
20

Refrain

A salient architecture requires, first, the consideration of effects over history and narrative.

There is a radical error, I think, in the usual mode of constructing a story. Either history affords a thesis—or one is suggested by an incident of the day....I prefer commencing with the consideration of an effect. Keeping originality always in view—for he is false to himself who ventures to dispense with so obvious and so easily attainable a source of interest—I say to myself, in the first place, “Of the innumerable effects, or impressions, of which the heart, the intellect, or (more generally) the soul, what one shall I, on the present occasion, select ?

—Edgar Allan Poe, On Composition
MATTER

1O1

And second, the establishment of complex repetition.

As commonly used the refrain, or burden, not only limited to lyric verse, but depends for its impression upon the force of monotone—both in sound and thought. The pleasure is deduced solely from the sense of identity—of repetition. I resolved to diversify, and so vastly heighten, the effect, by adhering, in general, to the monotone of sound, while I continually varied that of thought: that is to say, I determined to produce continuously novel effects, by the variation of the application of the refrain—the refrain itself remaining, for the most part, unvaried.

—Edgar Allan Poe, On Composition
102

REFRAIN

Edgar Allan Poe’s discussion of composition begins with a mood, rhythm, or refrain that only later acquires a narrative. Indeed, the refrain from “The Raven,” “nevermore” went into the poem before the raven did, in order to generate a certain tonal effect. The narrative came only later, at the end. Continuous variation within a homogenous refrain is also a means of modulating the possible duration of an effect. Variations in thought are generated around the same sound, changing its tone. “Nevermore” is like a zero and a one, it is objectively meaningless repetition read through in various narratives. It is an expression of a certain tone and intensity with variable emotional resonances projecting from it, including humor. Nevermore is the migration of a diagram.

Just as in Sigmund Freud’s account of nightmares, or in the comic repetition of slapstick, the content of the narrative is arbitrary; it can in fact be something utterly banal. It is the speed or slowness of its repetition which causes the fear or the laughter.

21

Exchanges among Systems

A systemic ecology is established in the relationships of exchanges among structure, effects, ornament, and program. As compared to twentieth-century expressionism, which foregrounds the formal and emotive characteristics of architecture as the product of a purely personal sensibility, we regard expression as the properly impersonal capacity of matter and material systems, in which human will and intentionality play a part but are not the sole determinants. The architect is, in effect, neither a passive observer of determined systems nor a determined manipulator of passive material, but rather, the manager of an unfolding process.

For example, shifting the placement of the chimney in the density of the rod truss as it accomodates the change in the stress field of the facade. The consequences of this shift are twofold: First in the ambient effects related to the density of the “skin” and consequently in the locations of the partitions and live load (i.e., people and furniture) within the space.
MATTER

105

COMPONENTS

ARRANGEMENTS

Slab Plate

Column

Changing density in a rod truss responds to shifting location of internal support and programs: a play between structure, program, and effects.
22

Intensive and Extensive II

How the components that comprise an automobile engine mix is conditioned by an array of competing limits both intensive and extensive. Theoretically, given unlimited space to expand, the engine’s parts might very well develop as an expanded grid consisting of linked yet distinct entities. But this is a distant abstraction, divorced from material realities. Given the very real limits exerted on the one hand by the envelope of the car (the extensive limit) and on the other hand, by the necessary proximity of mechanical, chemical, and electrical components of propulsion (the intensive limits), a mediating assembly such as an engine block must accommodate and incorporate these functions and influences within limited space. In doing so it molds tightly around cylinders and crank shafts, while sprouting numerous appendages and attachment points for the systems that feed its organs, all the while growing within a highly defined limit of the body shell.

The same relationships are present at the scale of architectural organization. Under a purely extensive model, compression would lead to a simple rescaling of the organizational system, a shrinking of the ordinates and the coordinates. In an intensive model, however, performance and proportion enter new relationships as scale changes.
MATTER

io 7

Process Diagram of an Internal Combustion Engine

The Material Artifact

Intensive- The Engine
1O8	INTENSIVE AND EXTENSIVE II

Looking at the process in reverse, when intensive limits are loosened, extensive controls increase. For example, as information technologies become dematerialized (paradoxically, by becoming more intense), the typical office program ceases to have a one-to-one relationship with the technologies that function within it. Paraphernalia and function, in taking up space, simultaneously force the workplace to represent what it does. With the dematerialization of function, hardware shrinks, and the fit between program and space becomes looser. This opens up the possibility for two very different conceptions of the function and atmosphere of the workplace. The first, an extrapolation of the modernist model, would ordain a featureless whitebox container for dematerialized technology. The second recognizes the opportunity for an entirely different ambient space—one that may very well have functions that, by having nothing to do with the business at hand, actually augment it.
Old Office Space: Paraphernalia and Function Take Up Space and Represent What They Do

Intensive

Model

Space of Qualities

Extensive

Shrinkage

New Office Space: Dematerialization of Function Shrinks Hardware and Expands Soft Spaces, an Extrapolation without Qualities

Extensive: The Office Space
2Z

Machinic Phylum

Gilles Deleuze and Fedix Guattari have suggested that [the] abstract reservoir of machinelike solutions common to physical systems as diverse as clouds,fames, rivers, and even phylogenic lineages of living creatures, he called the “machinicphylum”—a term that would indicate how nonlinear flows of matter and energy spontaneously generate machinelike assemblages when internal or external pressures reach a critical level, which only a few abstract mechanisms can account for. In short, there is a single machinic phylum for all the different living and nonliving phylogenetic lineages.

—Manuel DeLanda, Non-organic Life

The “machinic phylum” of Deleuze and Guattari describes the same non nested hierarchy as the continuum theorized by the engineer Robert Le Ricolais. Le Ricolais suggests that matter, material, constructional systems, structural configurations, space, and place comprise a continuous spectrum rather than isolated domains. Such an understanding provides a model for organizing forces and their effects that is communicative, reverberating across scales and regimes.3

Le Ricolais’s studies of column failure are a specific instance of this model in operation. Transcending the purely geometric generation of a structure, Le Ricolais is interested in the new geometries that arise as a consequence of the column’s deformation on the way to
MATTER

111

Le Ricolais’s Automorphic Tube Structure
112

MACHINIC PHYLUM

failure. Thus, material behavior takes an active role in the genesis of new structural forms. Moreover, the forces that act on the component model behave diagrammatically, in that they can be rescaled to those of an entire tower.4

Like the relationship between intensive and extensive logics, or the relationship between matter force logics and codification systems, architects are inevitably implicated in the tension between the generative and limiting poles of both. The potentials that flow off of this tension inevitably find their expression within multiple levels, from the non-human stuff of construction to the character of a building’s occupation. This burgeoning machinic reservoir is tapped through the agency of the diagram.
MATTER

«3

First Order of Failure

Second Order of Failure

Third Order of Failure

The Beauty of Failure

The Beauty of Failure:

From Le Ricolais’s Experiments with Automorphic Tubes
24

The Diagram

In short, it often happens that of the forces in action in a system some vary as one power and some as another, of the masses, distances or other magnitudes involved; the “dimensions” remain the same in our equations of equilibrium, but the relative values alter with scale. This is known as the “Principle of Similitude,” or of dynamical similarity, and it and its consequences are of great importance. In a handful of matter cohesion, capillarity, chemical affinity, electric charge are all potent; across the solar system gravitation rules supreme; in the mysterious region of the nebulae, it may haply be that gravitation grows negligible again.... [T] he effect of scale depends not on a thing in itself, but in relation to its whole environment or milieu; it is in conformity with the thing’s “place in Nature,” its field of action and reaction in the Universe.

—D’Arcy Thompson, On Magnitude

Material organizations at the macro scale must of necessity be modelled in order to predict or track changes to their behavior. Thus an analog connection must be made to micro scale. Macroorganizations of material behavior can be approximated at smaller scales, but adjustments are necessary as the system becomes rendered in a more intensive or more extensive model. For instance, a model airplane cannot be exactly scaled down and expected to operate in flight, because the behavior of airflow and lift is not consistent at the smaller scale. For this reason, operable model airplanes must undergo deformation in the wing according to a coefficient of scale dictated by a dimensionless parameter known as the Reynold’s Number.
MATTER

115

top Charting Ground Water Flows over a Particular Territory bottom Scaling Down the Landscape: Capacitors and Resistors Emulate Facility and Resistance of Water Flow
116

THE DIAGRAM

A igöos-era model of a water table approximated by networks of resistors and transistors, is an example of an analog model at a small scale of larger scale properties. First pump tests at square mile intervals calculate average values of capacity and flow for the water table. These values are represented by resistors and transistors in an electrical field. The behavior of material at one scale allows scientists to predict its behavior at another.

The implications of this scalability of material behaviors has far-reaching implications for architecture.

The medium of these implications is the diagram, which provides an abstract model of materiality. Such a diagram can be derived from any dynamic system at any scale. A close tracking of a certain dynamic (temperature, pressure, wind speed, etc.) can be mapped as a gradient field that can be abstracted from its origins or its material source. A diagram of relationships, not of scale, emerges. Or, more precisely, the diagram is a field of relationships awaiting a scale and a materiality. This elastic yet precise diagram thus can acquire other material systems such as architecture and have the capacity to affect those systems in ways specific only to architecture.

Representation always ties its meaning to an origin, while in a trans-scalar diagram origins are irrelevant; it is how they are finally instantiated that matters.
MATTER

117

GRADIENT FIELD WORKING ACROSS SCALES

GRADIENT FIELD WORKING ACROSS REGIMES

Fields Working across Regimes and Scales
Diagram Deployment

Using the same diagram at different scales can produce drastically different effects. Diagrams considered conventional at the large end of the spectrum—the scale of the city or the neighborhood—or at the small end—the scale of clothing—rare regarded as radical at the middle scales of architecture. They resist traditional architectural arrangement and tectonics at these scales. These territorial infringements on scale are among the most difficult to operate well within, but they can be most rewarding when successfully negotiated.

CONVENTIONAL/ LESS INTERESTING

UNCONVENTIONAL/ INTERESTING

CONVENTIONAL/

LESS INTERESTING
MATTER

119

At the scale of clothing and furniture, the form appears natural.

The Human Scale
120

DIAGRAM DEPLOYMENT

Beyond the Scale of Furniture but Smaller than a House

At this intermediate scale (that of the interior), the form is indeterminately furniture and partition.

Larger than a House and Smaller than a Building

The form approaches the scale of a small landscape feature but runs the risk of being mimetic. At this scale domestic networks may interact with the form in a non-normative way.
MATTER

121

Larger than a Building and Smaller than a City

At this scale the form, while alien as a building type, begins to become coextensive with urban networks, the natural/artificial geography of the city.

At the Scale of the Landscape, the Form Appears Natural Again

At this scale both the form and the network have slipped back into conventional relationships: folds appear in cloth and rock alike.
2 6

Fineness and the Macroscale

In his paper “On Being the Right Size,” the Marxist geneticist and biometrist J. B. S. Haldane, famous for self-experimentation under extreme conditions, systematically illustrates why it would be impossible to linearly re-scale a small animal into a large one or vice versa. Bones begin to fail under their own weight; the grip of surface tension becomes impossible to sustain with a shift in scale from the small to the large. Likewise in architecture, the inherent scalability of the material diagram does not directly correlate to the scalability of material behavior. Rather, there is a particular material and scale, for instance, to the behavior of the dew drop that is lost when the dew drop’s morphology is formalized in a different material at a different scale. Haldane identifies the same problems in biology when gravity overcomes forces of surface tension: a fly dropped down a well would not be harmed in the least, while “a fly once wetted by water or any other liquid is in a very serious position indeed.”5 Assuming that the scalability of behaviors relates directly to the scalability of the diagram is a logical fallacy that leads to cumbersome formal models.

When a diagram—be it the Cartesian geometry of modernism or the geometry of material behavior—overcomes the matter it is being projected into, the result becomes representational. Whenever matter is sublimated to geometry it loses qualities—and is reduced to its most basic reading. A mere rescaling of a microscopic process, such as surface tension, or macroscopic process, such as a storm, will inevitably be read as an enlarged dewdrop or thunderhead in miniature.
MATTFR

123

Dew Drop

o

Dew Drop House

This type of error becomes even more egregious as a result of software inertia, where the governing algorithm becomes so insistant that it forces the same expression at all levels of the project, independent of the architect’s will for or against it.

We are concerned with scale not as a tool for the representation of something small or large at another size but rather as the transposition of the real relationships between matter and force at one scale into another.
27

Fineness in Allied Fields

The collaboration of organizational models within the same object at the extremes of scale promise to yield new possibilities. An example of this comes from the allied field of aeronautics, where, innovations in metallurgy, in modeling aerodynamic behavior, and in laser fabrication have opened up a new horizon in aeronautical design. Increasingly, engineers have realized that diminishing returns are to be expected from the simple manipulation of gross form. The very large is synthesized with the very small; the very slow with the very fast. The ability to fabricate the metal skins of air foils with literally millions of laser-cut pores have radically extended the low-speed performance of aircraft to such a degree that their actions appear completely counterintuitive and unnatural. The capacity to radically extend maneuverability in that strange, instable region at the edge of a stall, like the microgrooves in fabric that reduce water drag on competitive swimwear, suggests an analogous possibility in architecture, allowing for the incorporation of extreme yet codependent regimes of scale and organization. Confronting such a model would, among other things, serve to address the apparent paradox of the global and the local occupying the same space.
MATTER

125

Microscopic organization affects performance without necessarily affecting form.

Laser cutting microperforations on wing material radically enhances wing performance.

top Swimwear Fabric with Microgrooves bottom left Microscopic Material Manipulation bottom right Macroscopic Performance Enhancement
28

Interdisciplinaiy Exchange

Science is not always the source of transdisciplinary exchanges; sometimes there is a flip. Henri Bergson’s work in philosophy, for instance, prefigures Bernhard Riemann’s work in mathematics. Theoretical physicist Lee Smolin givps the example that solving the structure of amorphic geodesic pool covers led him to tensor calculus, and then into the physics of gravity.6 Tensegrity structures are now serving as the model for cell membranes themselves. Our modes of thought in architecture might indeed influence ways of understanding the universal.7

This opens a tremendous opportunity for growth within the discipline of architecture. Architecture will always be a defective representation of other disciplines, hence the exhaustion of architecture that based itself, for example, on cinema and literature. But there are models that exist that are as useful to the film director in the discipline of film-making as to the architect in the discipline of architecture.

This suggests that the same conceptual models can migrate between disciplines, where they are instantiated within the conditions and limits inherent in those disciplines.
MATTER

127

top Structural Tensegrity bottom Biological Tensegrity
REISER + UMEMOTO

West Side Convergence Competition Entry

New York, New York, 1999

130

INTERDISCIPLINARY EXCHANGE

STRUCTURAL GLASS

RHIZOMATIC SPACE FRAME
MATTER

131
29

New Possibilities for Spatial Structures: The Case of Geodesics/Geodetics

The current discussion regarding the tactics of achieving formal and programmatic heterogeneity in the realm of architecture and planning has occasioned a reassessment of spatial models and technologies heretofore relegated to the scrapheap of utopian modernism. Such modernist systems have come to be associated with the structures of a totalizing spatial ideology and an attempt to produce homogeneous and unified architectural languages.

With the advent of new models for organization, changed conceptions of geometry and geometry’s relation to matter, and new conceptions of universal space, a thoroughgoing reevaluation of the modernist models for structuring space and the execution and delivery of such systems is possible. Non-repetitive tiling, fractal geometries, branching systems, and unstructured grids are among the new geometries available for use.

The geometric and structural system known as geodetics is one such direction we have explored. Popularized by R. Buckminster Fuller and his followers as an architectural and urbanistic panacea, it is presently encountered in the occasional fairground structure or military installation, usually in the form of a dome. Fuller’s geodetics have become detached from their utopian projections, but this history has unfortunately obscured a prior and, ironically, more open set of possibilities in the field of descriptive morphology and aeronautics.
MATTER

133

An idealist use of geodesics (Fuller’s special case use of the geodetic) insists on two things: an ideal global geometry in the form of a hemisphere, and self-similarity of all modules. The result: extreme exclusion and homogeneity—even a door is difficult to accomodate.

This geodetic structure modifies in two different ways: the taper causes regular reticulations to compress at the wing tips while remaining strictly geodetic geometries, and local branchingallows the reticulations at the leading and trailing edge of the wing to close around the geometry.

top Essentialized Diagram of Geodesics: The Fuller Dome bottom Differentiating Geodetic Structure: Wing of the Wellington Bomber
134

NEW POSSIBILITIES FOR SPATIAL STRUCTURES

Geodetics was developed by the English engineer Sir Barnes Wallis. First used in the R-ioo Airship and later in the Vickers Wellesley, its most famous employment was as the structure of the Wellington Bomber.8 Geodetics derives from the Greek term geodesis, the imaginary geographical lines following the curvature of the Earth along straight paths. The property of a geodetic system is to carry all loads along the shortest possible paths, hence producing a crisscross pattern of self-stabilizing members by means of which loads in any direction are automatically equalized by forces in the intersecting set of frames. This results in a structure that is extremely light and strong. Its durability is due, in part, to the inherent characteristic of extreme redundancy: if some portion of the structure is lost, the stresses are simply rerouted to the remaining members. Therefore, one can say that, in distinction to most conventional spatial-structural systems, geodetics is structurally diffuse or nonessential.

As an aviation technology, geodetics represents something of an anomaly—a short-lived tributary from the mainstream technology that tended increasingly toward stressed-skin construction. Though geodetics was a versatile system that could conform to the intricacies of aircraft configuration, it was typically cost prohibitive due to its inherent complexity. In effect, each airplane became a highly crafted object that required special dies and hand-bending jigs for each strut.

In an architectural context, however, with the interest in structural systems that could engender complexity through flexibility, geodetics becomes interesting precisely because, as a system, it is capable of adapting to complex spatial formations without a corresponding increase in the complexity of the system. In geodetics exact geometries such as the dome are no more ideal than any number of other
MATTER

135

volumetric configurations. Moreover, the advent of non-standard design and fabrication has obviated the technical difficulties encountered in earlier employments.

In a supple employment of geodetics one finds many properties and possibilities. Historically and operationally, geodetics falls between two totalizing systems: the skeletal model (structure and skin) and the structural skin model as a monocoque construction. In an expanded reading, however, geodetics acts as a structural tissue or flesh—an intermediate structure that would assemble heterogeneous agglomerations of space, program, and path. Moreover, geodetics is protean in the sense that the structure has the capability of changing and adapting to the space that it develops in a number of ways: by changing the fineness or coarseness of its reticulations; by growing or multiplying the number of struts or crossovers; by mimicking the surfaces of, for example, conventional structures into or onto which it is projected; or by changing by degrees the type of infill or skinning that it carries.

A changed conception of space as a material field has thus occasioned a reevaluation, and a new flexibility in employment, of these once regular and exclusive systems. No longer, for example, must a long-span space be homogenous in its program, density, character, or structure.
30

MaRer and Context

The elimination of the extraneous, in both experiment and theory, has been the veritable basis of all scientific advance since the seventeenth century, and has led us to a point where practically everything above the atom is understood “in principle.” Sooner or later,'however, science in its advance will have exhausted the supply of problems that involve only those aspects of nature that can be freshly studied in simple isolation. The great need now is for concern with systems of greater complexity, for methods of dealing with complicated nature as it exists. The artist has long been making meaningful and communicable statements, if not always precise ones, about complex things. If new methods, which will surely owe something to aesthetics, should enable the scientist to move into more complex fields, his area of interest will approach that of the humanist, and science may even once more blend smoothly into the whole range of human activity.

—Cyril Stanley Smith, A Search for Structure

An architect operating under essentialism would extract from a natural system such as a honeycomb all that is invariant, an essential hexagonal cell, seeing all that departs from it in the model as error or accident. We recognize those preserved errors as inherently systematic as any pure geometry, the result of influences from the context or from within the system itself.

From a standpoint of natural systems, pure form is an abstraction, or at best a special case within a wide range of variation.
MATTER

137

top Essential Diagram bottom Actual Crystal Lattice with Singularities
ZI

Essentialized Systems vs. Systems with Singularities

What I want to emphasize is simply that many pattern-generating processes share with developing organisms the characteristic that spatial detail unfolds progressively simply as a result of the laws of the process. In the hydrodynamic example we see how an initially smoothßuidßow past a barrier goes through a symmetry breaking event to give a spatially periodic pattern, followed by the elaboration of a local nonlinear detail which develops out of the periodicity.

—Brian Goodwin, in Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy

The least action principle as described by Manuel DeLanda relates to the geometry of the geodetic, in that, defined by the shortest distance over a curve, geodetics will allow for the most efficient transference of forces with the minimal amount of material. There are two ways of moving within this logic. The first is by essentializing the geometry, as R. Buckminster Fuller did in his deployment of geodesic domes.

This is a way of optimizing the system. It precludes any possible deviation or swerve from the system, any novelty or expression emerging out of the system, or indeed any inclusion into the system from the outside. It results in a static conception of geodetics as preordained and inextricably linked to pure forms with the attendant regularized and optimized geometry.
MATTER

139

The Great Red Spot, Jupiter
140 ESSENTIALIZED SYSTEMS VS. SYSTEMS WITH SINGULARITIES

The other way to move within this logic recognizes first that these geometries need not be developed within the featureless space of ideality but must be conceived as enmeshed within a universe of difference. In this model, quantitative and qualitative difference is an inherent attribute of matter and space, with the two being inextricably linked. Most importantly for architects, this model allows for the consideration of many levels of order at once within a coherent system. Here too the least action principle governs the development of the system. However, in contrast to the optimizing ethos of Fuller, an entirely different conception of the minimal comes into play.

Deviations from the geodetic, for example, are not failures in engineering logic or irrational expression under this model but rather represent emergent patterns of order that are the result of many different material traits operating in the system at once—the resolution of forces at different scales of matter. Thus, in the dynamic interplay of geometry, materials, and forces at multiple scales, the least-action principle governs even the deviation.

It is a common trait of all matter and material systems to resolve themselves at the lowest energy state they can acquire. Thus, at the material level there are forces moving equally in a pastiche post modern facade and a suspension bridge. The critical issue then becomes how to set up those conditions in the architecture that will be minimal enough to index force yet maximal enough to enable emergent organizations to arise. It should be neither as reductive as the suspension bridge nor as over-coded and materially sclerotic as the postmodern facade.
MATTER

141

Generic Geodesic Dome: Diagram of an Ideal Geometry

Differentiated Geodetic Space Frame: Geometry Forming a Real Matter Field
142 ESS ENTI ALI ZED SYSTEMS VS. SYSTEMS WITH SINGULARITIES

TYPOLOGIES OF SINGULARITIES

The phenomenon of the singularity, as compared to a merely additive architecture, assumes that local difference emerges out of changes to regions of a continuous field of similar elements. As such it is an excellent model for dealing with repetitive systems like spaceframes. An associated model is the inclusion/singularity. Here a foreign organization is “included’’ in the field, but in contrast to a mere juxtaposition, its presence, like a stone in a flow of water, creates a local disturbance pattern. This boundary organization at once mimics the organization and incorporates it into the field, such that even if the foreign element were removed, its effects, both locally as a mould and as reverberations across larger regions, would remain.

UNILATERAL

Disturbance Zones around a F oreign Object

AUTOINCLUSIONS

Differentiation Achieved through Intensive Transformation of a System at a Local Level
MATTER

143

The regular field of structural elements established in a long-span space frame is interrupted by the inclusion of programs (theaters, museums) below. The resulting boundary organizations in the flow of the structures comprise the lobby and public spaces.
Z2

Exact/Anexact-yet-Rigorous

Gilles Deleuze defines three types of geometry: the exact, which correlates with the regular, or royal, science; the inexact, an accidental or worldly approximation of exact geometry; and the anexact, which correlates with the vague or nomad science.

Edmund Husserl speaks of a protogeometry that addresses vague, in other words vagabond or nomadic, morphological essences. These essences are distinct from sensible things as well as from ideal, royal, or imperial essences. Protogeometry, the science dealing with them, is itself vague, in the etymological sense of “vagabond”: it is neither inexact like sensitive things nor exact like ideal essences, but anexact yet rigorous (“essentially but not accidentally inexact”). The circle is an organic, ideal, fixed essence, but roundness is a vague andfiuent essence, distinct both from the circle and things that are round (a vase, a wheel, the sun). A theorematicfigure is a fixed essence, but its transformations, distortions, ablations, and augmentations, all of its variations,from problematic figures that are vague yet rigorous, “lens-shaped,” “umbelliform” or “indented.” It could be said that vague essences extract from things a determination that is more than thinghood (choséité), which is that of corporeality (corporéité), and which perhaps even implies an esprit de corps.9

What makes the anexact different is that its geometry is assumed to play out in real space rather than in the ideal space of abstract geometry.
MATTER

»45

Local deviations in isolation appear to be erroneous or accidents.

Seen together, they produce emergent optical effects.

Facade Development, New Museum of Contemporary Art
146

exact/anexact-yet-rigorous

The anexact is thus the result of forces on matter, whereas the exact and the inexact are only assessments relative to a purely geometrical model. In the anexact, the matter/force index is precisely that which establishes its rigor and distinguishes it from the inexact, which is merely a less precise form of the exact. The anexact is therefore intimately tied to a material field, the expressions of which are the direct index of forces and the energetic of which is manifest through intensity. Rather than seeing, for example, a catenary either as a correct (exact) or incorrect (inexact) parabola, the anexact sees it as a calculus of forces on matter. In contrast to the dichotomy of inexact and exact, the essences of which are read and interpreted for meaning, the anexact field is asignifying and delivers up expressions based upon intensity and consequent effects rather than signification.

Institutionalizing this behavior then becomes a problem in societal organization, since it does not lend itself to fixed laws and codes. A state of flux runs up against all of the systems society has in place to see construction through. The anexact thus emerges as a category as a consequence of the shift away from both idealist and essentialist conceptions of matter and geometry toward a geometry that is inextricably linked to a spatial field that is material. It is interesting that the classical form/matter duality persists in the architecture of modernism both as a fundamental philosophical concept of design, per se, and in the way design arrives in the social field. For the same duality that stipulates a hard division between sovereign form and passive matter enforces a corresponding division of labor between conception and construction. It is not surprising, therefore, that lacking any paradigm beyond form/matter the modernists would view as, at best, a temporary if necessary evil and at worst, unethical, practices that navigate the singularities and variations of matter, i.e. craft. Such work would be viewed as excessive: formally, structurally (ornament), and economically, traditional craft resists standardization and generalization both quantitatively and qualitatively.
EBB
148

EXACT/äNEXA CT-YET-RIG OROUS

While the new models of production cannot make any undue claims for their socially liberating effects, they nevertheless have increased the degrees of freedom available to the designer and, by extension, to their productions. Virtually every facet of the design process, including the spectrum of material properties and effects, are actors in this parametric field. Moreover, this new pattern of organization operates not only at the scale of the matter field from which it was derived but can migrate into radically different scales and material regimes. In effect, this means that for architecture a vast spectrum of organizational models become available, from the microscopic to the macroscopic, and will operate not as representations in architecture but as organizing principles for architecture.
MATTER

149

LIMOGES FACTORY REJECTS

Differences such as those in a Limoges cup, which are not catastrophic yet stray from perfection, impart a certain animus to the object that perfect geometries simply do not contain. Three-star restaurants in Paris would send these straight to the trash bin, if they ever made it that far. We seek them out.

The Inexact
33

Material Computation: The Case of the Catenary

The argument for poise in geometry can be equated to an argument for poise in matter. This relates to the historical development of maxima and minima problems in mathematics and physics. The isolation of a minimal or maximal principle appears in the works of the Ancients through the development of modern physics and calculus as the solution to physical problems, as, for example, when the minimum energy is extended to perform a given action, or the minimal path is taken by a particle or wave. The pure minima and the pure maxima are brought together in states of economy, as, for example, in the engineering problem solved by a maximum span with minimum materials. The calculus of variations is the branch of mathematics that deals with these kinds of relationships, the method devised by Joseph-Louis Lagrange to find the change caused in an expression containing any number of variables when one lets all or any of the variables change. While such solutions are resolved through the definition and interaction of variables fed into an equation, our procedures often follow an inverse logic that employs physical modeling in advance of any definitive quantitative determination. We are working with calculus in the tradition of the boot strap method, which includes Joseph Plateau s mid-nineteenth-century discovery of soap film structures in physical models that predated the system of partial differential equations involved in calculating the surface of smallest area with a given boundary that weren’t solved mathematically until 1931- Within this way of thinking, the physical experiment is often
MATTER

151

PURE ENGINEERING

PURE ARCHITECTURE

EXTRINSIC

CATENARY AS PRINCIPLE As long as the geometry of the catenary falls inside the arch, the structure is sound. The ideal form of the architecture exceeds the physical principle.

INTRINSIC PRODUCTIVE

ARCH AS SIGNAGE

CATENARY AS MATERIAL The arch is equivalent to its principle: an optimizing logic, overly reductive.

GAU DIS GRAVITY FIELD The catenary principle is used to determine stone vaulting.

This kind of calculation accounts for the dominant force of gravity, which is scalable, but does not take into account lateral forces in materials, which are not.

I

LINKED MULTI-DIMENSIONAL GRAVITY FIELD The emergent form of the architecture exceeds the optimized form of the catenary principle.
152

MATERIAL COMPUTATION

regarded as the only means of obtaining a resolution to situations in which variables are so numerous and intractable that they cannot be defined in advance. Whereas Plateau’s example deals with a single minimum principle, we would pursue a resolution among multiple optima. In this sense the physical model acts generatively. While the general parameters of the model are given, the interaction among the elements produces something new and unforeseen.10

The resolution of multiple optima is no less clearly defined than that of the single optima of minmax principles: in fact, the same family of calculus curves populates both environments. It is in the inverse deployment of these diagrams that the opportunity for multiplicities arises. For example, where properties of speed and time in minmax define a cycloid curve, a cycloid curve, like any diagram, could be used itself to define properties of speed and time, or of weight and mass, or of potential energy, etc. The possibilities of this invertability of the diagram are most fruitful when complex inversions, combinations and alterations are introduced in order to achieve specific effects within the general range of optimization sought in the properties the diagram defines.

Our interest in flexible systems led us to an experiment with an analog model for structure: the mitigated catenary model. A single catenary will only display gravity loads. It is necessary to cross a threshold of quantity and interconnection in multiple dimensions in order to register more complex forces. The three dimensional catenary model is effected not only by gravity but by a whole series of forces, linked to one another.

In our design for a music theater in Graz, we utilized animation software that emulated the effects of a multidimensional force field on geometry. It was hoped that that emulation would be precise enough
MATTER

153

to index structural forces, however, when we presented this model to our engineer he suggested a physical model would be more precise.

We proceeded to build a model similar to the catenary models developed by Antoni Gaudi for Colonia Güell, where catenaries and funiculars were hung to establish the centerlines for vaulting. We perceived that this form-finding technique could be adapted not only to a simple gravity field but could be extended to a multi dimensional field, where forces move in directions other than the pure direction of gravity. We then hung closely spaced groups of chains to establish a rough approximation of the vaulting and systematically began to link those catenaries together and to pull them in directions that deviated from the straight gravity field. What was fascinating was that at a certain threshold of quantity and force the linked catenary model snapped into a form that closely resembled the earlier computer model. There was, however, a decided difference between the emulation and the indexical model: Not only was it a rigorous index of structural logics in play but the actual force field on the model displayed a coordinated elegance, a beauty, that the emulation lacked. By comparison the emulation model appeared lax and lifeless, not unlike inelegant auto bodies we see today designed with the same software. The catenary model is an example of material computation, essentially self-calculating, resolving through feedback multidmen-sional forces acting on the linked field of strands and weights. It computes the forces as a calculus of multiple influences.

Indeed, there is structural analysis software that will, for all intents and purposes, replicate this process. However, as any scientist dealing with the dynamics of material systems will tell you, the material field will always generate richer and more singular expressions than the programs derived from them will produce. Thus, there will always be a place for the analog in structural experimentation.
REISER + UMEMOTO

BMW Event and Delivery Center Competition Entry Munich, Germany, 2001

34

Systems Becoming Other Systems

While our engineers utilize many of the structural systems inherited from modernist practice, we contend that they have a broader range of application than modernism leant them, inherent in their untapped capacity to be transformed. We work oh structural and typological models like a material that can be stretched, warped, and otherwise subjected to formal and organizational transformation. The consequences of this is that received systems, such as the space frame, rather than being subject to systemic purity, can be transformed through a series of intermediate steps into other systems altogether. With such mutable models, it is now possible to conceive of a diverse field of structural types operating locally within the same structure while maintaining systemic coherence throughout. It is through practice that this work operates as a form of critical history, because it opens up once solidified models to broader interpretation and, even more importantly, application.

The insight in our BMW Munich project was that structural systems are in fact not discrete models but can be grouped along a continuum. The initial condition of the design postulated the transformation of a space frame system that could be manipulated much like a piece of fabric, with the upper cords oriented 45 degrees to the lower cords and manipulated on the bias. What became evident was that, given the changing parameters of span, depth, and boundary, the space frame maintained its modernist purity in the zones of longest span but could be moved into an intermediate state between space frame and two-way
MATTER

ZONE OF TRANSITION

One-Way System	Two-Way System of

becomes...	Unequal Depth becomes...

157

Space Frame Two-Way System of Equal Depth
i58

SYSTEMS BECOMING OTHER SYSTEMS

system in regions of shorter span. Likewise, zones of two-way structure could be transformed into one-way systems (structural bents for roadways) as boundaries and spans narrowed. It became evident that the pure system—a received structural definition—was only a moment of purity within a continuum of change.

Although possessing unique structural characteristics, the space frame is traditionally lumped together with other large-scale structures that historically have been associated with the more monofunctional programs of urbanization: bridges, stadiums, train stations. Further, the traditional role of the structural system has been to merely establish the span (or the clearing) within which space would be contained. Now it has become possible to conceive of the space frame’s potential within a new paradigm of continuous variation. Thus employed, a structure, while large in scale, has the capacity to absorb and to promulgate local and global organizations within its intricate matrices. Although the space frame is technically precise and large, it neither promotes structural homogeneity nor imposes universalizing spatial qualities. More than a proposal for extending an uninflected matrix throughout the world, it is the comprehension of the fullness of the world as a field of ubiquitous difference.

At the level of a literal fabric—a piece of Issey Miyake clothing, for instance—new qualities flow out of the interaction between a geometric model and the behavior of materials on the geometry. The fabric is woven on a grid with uniform tension on the warp and the woof and then removed from the geometrical frame to produce novel irruptions in the field.
35

Post-Fordist Implementations

One of the consequences of working with a variable space frame geometry is that every element in the structure—every node, every strut—is unique, or better yet, is both similar and different, from every neighboring strut and node. Building such an assembly requires a very different conception of production and delivery than the modernist models 61 mass-production. Narrow space frame systems conceived around the variability of a thick set of parametric designs' are defined bv the angle of drilling of the nodes, the diameter of the node, and the length of the strut. The task of constructing these elements is facilitated by mass-customizing the fabrication process and utilizing a sophisticated parcel tracking system, which allows unique pieces to be delivered to the right place at the right time.

Systemic Deployment
16O

POST-FORDIST IMPLEMENTATIONS

The technology of mass customization is already a well-established process. In as much as most architecture is not built monolithically, but is comprised of repetitive elements, we take the position that mass customization is only relevant when the custom elements are massed together, rather than deployed as discrete elements, because they release an unprecedented richness in assemblies that even traditionally have required thousands of pieces. The sheer quantitative variation of such assemblies releases vast qualitative wealth.

This distinguishes mass-customization of architectural elements from the mass-customization of consumer elements, which are deployed and spread individually as discrete products. Massassemblies, rather, are not geared toward a single user or group of users but gain their meaning through universality.
MATTER

161

WWW

Just-in-Time Delivery:

Parcel tracking system directs each component to the right place at the right time.

Geco

Variables of the Ball Node System:

Length of strut, angle between struts, size of node.

The Mero Space Frame System: An Example of Mass Custom Fabrication
OPERATING
Z6

Mount Sinai

Many people prowl round Mount Sinai. Their speech is blurred, either they are garrulous or they shout or they are taciturn. But none of them comes straight down a broad, newly made, smooth road that does its own part in making one’s strides long and swifter. '

—Franz Kafka, Mount Sinai

The ambient dimension of architecture, of which atmosphere and effect are aspects, has always been within the architect’s control in as much as those aspects flow directly from the fabric of building. In contrast, such perceived stabilities as program—in addition to being generally out of the architect’s sphere of control—are actually much more transient.

The ambient, like any material effect, influences meaning and interpretation but does not determine it and is not affected by it. A rabbi once gave the example of the Israelites coming to Mt. Sinai in advance of receiving the Ten Commandments. Seeing the mountain ablaze with signs and wonders, they knew that something was imminent but were not clear as to what. All that was for certain was that something elemental and intense was happening. Some expressed fear, others expressed confusion, and still others waited in joyful expectation. People expressed contradictory emotions within themselves and among each other. The only common factor was that of intensity. Architecture, too, seems to operate on this level. As a material system,
OPERATING

165

its fabric and effects can be determined to great precision and can be modulated to create highly specific environments. This is arguably the most permanent feature of architecture and that which is achievable with the highest degree of precision. It is no accident that the history of religious architecture is replete with examples of the same building housing different religions, over time and even at the same time, that held very different outlooks.

Mount Sinai
37

Program: Architecture :: Lyrics: Music

Only architects think that there exists a tight relationship between how spaces are labeled and what happens inside them. We, on the other hand, operate under the assumption that a tenuous relationship exists between architecture and program. This relationship is equivalent to that between lyrics and music. The same musical sequence that provides the structure for one patriotic song, “God Save Our Gracious Queen,” becomes “My Country ‘tis of Thee” when the lyrics are changed. The music is able to communicate diametrically opposed content with exactly the same musical structure and the same ability to affect.

Notably, lyrics do correlate to music in certain ways, as sonic material, rhythm, rhyme, etc., but not at the level of meaning. Similarly, programs correlate to architecture only imprecisely: approximate square footages, relative locations and relationships, etc. If there is a precise fit, it is between certain programs and building systems such as plumbing, electricity, and gas. You don’t always eat at the table, but you always cook at the stove.

Programming can indeed alter the narrative of a space, but it is also true that despite or even because of those narratives, people are capable of doing almost anything anywhere.
OPERATING

167

My coun- try ‘tis of thee sweet land of lib- er- ty of thee I sing

God save our gra- cious Queen, long live our no- ble Queen, God save the Queen!

America and England: Two Songs Separated by Common Music
38

Operating under a Surfeit of Information

Architects work with matter like a chef who manages the complex unfoldings of food chemistry very precisely but without necessarily knowing the science of chemistry itself. One does not, for instance, need to know how an ovalbumen protein coagulates in order to make a superior omelet. Architects, too, are in large part the managers of processes they do not, and cannot, fully comprehend. Ignorance of science does not necessarily mean ignorance of material processes; centuries of sophisticated material practices that predate exact science bear this out.

A material practice like cooking requires operating in an environment with a surfeit of information. Coordination of this information takes place at a speed and quantity beyond that of comprehension, yet it can be managed with exquisite precision. Much like the way we perform in our own bodies and (thankfully) have no need to constantly regulate their physiology, knowledge of exact science is irrelevant and, arguably, uncertain. The management of material processes occurs at an entirely different level.
Raw Egg

Denatured Ovalbumin

Cooking Egg

Food Science: Food Preparation
170	OPERATING UNDER A SURFEIT OF INFORMATION

The history of architecture is replete with successful projects that are the result of novelty found within false history and, more recently, outmoded science.

Historian Rudolf Wittkower, in Architectural Principles in the Age of Humanism, gives as an example Andrea Palladio’s historical error attributing superimposed pediments to the Pantheon giving erroneous historical legitimacy to his unsurpassed Venetian churches. In the realm of painting, Georges Seurat’s use of a subsequently disproven theory of the physiology of color established Pointillism.

Palladio’s Reconstruction of the Pantheon

Il Redentore

8. Giorgio Maggiore

S. Francesco della Vigna

Faulty History, Great Architecture

39

A signifying Signs

With an understanding of asignifying signs, the semiotic acquires a new role and set of possibilities for architecture. The semiotic in post modern architecture foregrounded a meaning-based model in which architecture was understood as a language to be read or decoded. Mario Gandelsonas makes the distinction between the semantic work of Robert Venturi and Michael Graves, a presentation of historical signifiers, and the syntactic work of Peter Eisenman, a complex manipulation of signifiers divested of stable content. Modernism’s contemporary legacy, “modern post modern” architecture, carries forward this linguistic model and simply sheds both historical reference and syntactic play in favor of a play of material signifiers, with elements of the building coded in different materials typically to signify use. A subset of the modern post modern is “material realism,”a term coined by Jeffrey Kipnis. Here the dominant signification is the phenomenal quality of a material. While we are not against this pursuit, we find it a very limited deployment of material logics. All systems of signification, whether based on history or material, treat architecture at its base as a language.

The rainbow of oxidation that blooms on the heated surface of a polished steel bar is an example of an asignifying sign. Essentially an outward symptom of an underlying process or condition, it is distinguished from signifying signs in the way it is used. For rather than being linguistic—an object to be read and interpreted—and thus having meaning, its symptoms suggest becomings—the locus for the projection of performative functions, that is, for what it can do.
OPERATING

m

In the steel bar, for example, the toolmaker understands that the spectrum of colors from light straw to deep purple is an index of properties: light straw indicates hard and brittle, good for cutting edges; deep purple indicates flexible and resilient, good for springs. Thus, the changing oxidation color is an indicator of hardness and of the steel’s changing crystalline structure: it is a display of properties and tendencies. The possibility of becoming a knife or a spring is immanent but requires the action of the toolmaker to come about.

In an architectural context, asignifying signs operate in two ways: in process and in product or effect. In some sense these modalities are already evident in the above example of the steel. The bloom of color may be used as an end in itself, in which case it is operating effectively, or may be used as a guide for further material unfoldings, in which case it is taken up in process. This is in itself a type of reading, but rather than passing judgment and asking what a thing is, which has been the dominant mode of questioning in contemporary practice from approaches as divergent as historicist postmodernism, deconstructionism and critical practice, the use of the asignifying sign doesn’t immediately fix the process in terms of a definition but rather leaves it open. Their tracking guides an unfolding. The use of asignifying signs also makes possible a richer product, a vastly expanded set of material outcomes and effects, as it promotes the production of the unforeseen rather than representing the known.

A meaning-based practice actually stops process because it is judgmental, concerned with stability rather than unfolding, and relies on outside semantic criteria that are generally separate from material processes. An architecture that has to explain itself, or be explained, has failed to present its own qualities. It sets up a conventional relationship between material organization and reference. There is a certain similarity in the gap between essentialist geometries,matter and matter’s relationship to signification.
174

ASIGNIFYING SIGNS

Intense architectural effects, rather than carrying a single meaning, may be freely interpreted, even in contradictory ways. Our criticism of historical or material signification comes out of how it stops the process of architectural becoming by moving away from matter and into transcendent language. We espouse a highly specific material organization, a poignant architecture that displays certain qualities but does not mean any one thing.

PLAY OF SIGNIFIERS: POST MODERN

PLAY OF MATERIAL SIGNIFIERS: MODERN POST MODERN
40

Moving in the Gradient Field

[T] he notion of logic in architecture is applicable to several different functions, which sometimes coincide and sometimes do not. The logic of the eye, with its need for balance and symmetry, is not necessarily in agreement with the logic of structure, which in turn is not the logic of pure intellect.

—Henri Focillon, The Life of Forms in Art

Gradient fields, such as the oxidation bloom on steel mentioned previously, or, even more pertinent to the architect, the force fields shown in structural analysis programs, have conventionally been used by engineers to track stresses with the goal of optimizing structural economy and efficiency. This has been characterized as the drive to get the forces out of the building as quickly as possible. We, in contrast, are interested in force delay, detour, and propagation—in short, an architectural elaboration of the force field.

This elaboration foregoes the optimal path predicted in classical statics in favor of the burgeoning, searching line of variation of forces in the matter-field. Seeking the maximum span with minimum material, the optimizing logic that engineering is based upon is teleological, oriented toward solving only one problem.

A pure engineering logic corresponds perhaps too closely to the reasoning of an argument. This indifferent synthesis ignores the whole range of transformations of which matter is capable and to
176

MOVING IN THE GRADIENT FIELD

which pure logic is oblivious. This is a crucial point. When you optimize to one set of attractors, all the forces takes the path of least resistance, and the structure succumbs to a reductive rationalization.

There is an underlying assumption that optimized forms represent universal truths, when in fact they are isolated, reduced concepts, in no way indicative of a complex universe. We look instead to productive deviations from the minimal path, the clinamen of Lucretian physics. This approaches the efficiency of the optimum, but is not reducible to it. A probabilistic relationship to the minimal must be maintained. However, the straight path that is solely the result of an abstract connection in void space is replaced in our schema by space understood as an energetic material field that engenders deviation. Therefore, a resolution is sought through a field of multiple influences approaching equilibrium instead of a single influence, to navigate and to incline through a constellation of attractors instead of optimizing to a single one. The result will be as minimal as it can be given that rich field.

In an environment so saturated, any vector, however much it seeks the minimum path, will provoke a cascade of effects as the forces propagate through the field. Thus, when one projects geometry into such a material field, it is less a question of the imposition of a preset limit or an external optimization than the interplay between the projection and the material field that calculates an optimum. Here the line between structure and decoration becomes indistinct. Like the sparks that come out of a Van de Graaff generator, these are not straight lines but searching lines. In the transition from one configuration to another, there is a point just before a stable form is reached that is the most poignant.
OPERATING

177

Since most architecture deals with assembled materials rather than simple matter, it must be prepared in such a way to maximize the propagation of effects. This requires that the field operate under three criteria: sufficient quantity of elements, connectivity, and a relatively close range of scale. These are the constituents of fineness.
FOLLOWING THE RAINBOW: A CASE STUDY IN ASIGNIFYING SIGNS

Where the Matter Goes, the Forces Flow

Assuming that structural meshwork will find a balance between homogeneity and heterogeneity, it must be configured first so that its “weave" is not homogenous. It should not be so dense as to be overstructured, nor so sparse as to over-stress any area. Rather, it should acquire sufficient density so that forces spread and descend into the field and are not attracted to the edge. At that point the meshwork would cease to perform as a global structure and simply act as a link between an essential arch and an essential deck.

Therefore, the meshwork has to be not too thin and not too thick, but just right. Too thick and it would cease to have the fineness necessary to show difference. Too thin and it would either collapse or force necessary essentialized elements to thicken and carry loads.

Having set up the field to register the most clear effects of density, we then jump to the overall scale of the very fine edged arches. We bring intensity to its highest pitch by changing the cant of the arches as they lean toward each other. Intensity in the field increases to the point where, if they met, the forces would then snap into another form of equilibrium, a phase transition, in which all the forces would run through the edges, erasing the necessity for the densification of the body of the bridge. Like the elements in a supersaturated solution changing from a gas to a liquid or a liquid to a coagulation, the object of this architecture is to arrest this process at the point of greatest intensity, the moment just prior to a phase transition, when a dynamic equilibrium is reached.


Essentialist Expression Forces Constrained Bridge Reduced to Discrete Components

JGMT BLUE

YELLOWISH BROWN

DEEP STRAW

YELLOWISH WHITE

SPRINGS

CHISELS ANO PUNCHES

HOMEMADE TAPS«

SCRIBERS ANO THE LIKE

MACHINING MILO STEEuS/ LOW RESISTANCE TO FRACTURE

BRITTLE BUT VERY HARO

Material Practice:	Material Sign: Correlating Effects

Heat Tempered Metal	to a Certain Symptom

Polyvalent Expresion Forces Bleed: A Fusion of Arch and Shell Thickening/Thinning Members, Densifying/Loosening the Weave Increasing/Decreasing Layers
41

Accidental Animism

A certain French critic once characterized our Yokohama Port Terminal proposal as appearing to be centipede or crustacean. We agree that the project shares certain organizational traits with these creatures: namely, it is segmented, axial, and locally differentiated. The first two characteristics, axiality and segmentation, are characteristics of all shed buildings of this type. Had we been looking at representing insects in architecture, the project would have remained at the level of an image and none of the precise issues of the architecture would have been confronted.

Of course, it is inevitable that this work will be, like all things, read semiotically. Like a person under the influence of an antipsychotic drug, we accept that our work may at times display animistic qualities or traits: we may continue tn have the hallucinations of meaning but they no longer bother us. We feel it is imperative not to succumb to animism and, above all, not to interpret the work during the design process on these terms. That would be the fastest way to shut down development, foregrounding how a project looks, not how it behaves. In fact, we find the greatest animus is achieved through a strict adherence to objective factors.
OPERATING

181

REISER + UMEMOTO

Port Terminal Competition Entry Yokohama, Japan, 1995
42

Migration of a Pattern

Our project for a lattice canopy for a synagogue began as a historical pattern of non-representational (vegetal, rather than anthropomorphic) decoration, which conformed to biblical prohibitions against the worship of graven images. It emerged'in descriptions of Solomon’s Temple in the book of Ezekiel and entered architecture as a trait in such treatises as the Ezechielem Explanations by Juan Bautista Villalpando of 1596 and 1604. In our design the latticework acts at once structurally and decoratively. Embedded in the crude type, a barrel vault, our pattern carries forward traits open to variation and change rather than simply repeating the historical model. As a trait, the decorative is revealed to be a set that includes the structural. Before decoration or structure, however, the wider importance of pattern as a precondition for order becomes evident.

Traits, while they reference past models, are not wed to any particular historical example. Any historical architecture is the product of a temporally specific constellation of forces, conditions, and will. In confronting a new design, we put aside the history and regard the project as a special case of geometrical and material traits that are worked on by a new constellation of forces defined by evolving material and social realities. Considering lineages as traits leaves them open to expansion; it keeps models active rather than solidifying them as historical forms that are resistant to change. Traits allow one to talk about and connect to precedents without being tyrannized by them.
OPERATING

183

Reconstruction of Solomon’s Temple, from

Juan Bautista Villalpando’s Ezechielem Explanations
184

MIGRATION OF A PATTERN

LINGUISTIC PLANE

INSTITUTION

Post-911

Security

CONGREGATION

House Committee

Small Crowd

SELECTION

DECORATION

FUNCTION: Shelter

TRAIT Historical Pattern

WW

Large Crowd

Historic Preservation

Friends of the Upper West Side

Community Board

Dept, of Buildings )

CODES Canopy" vs. 'Marquee

STRUCTURE
OPERATING

185

Topological /Material Correlation

Failed Phylogenetic Departure: Scale/Function/Classification

Training/Academy

•

Failed Phylogenetic Departure: Material

MATERIAL PLANE
43

Emergent Structures

Traits can be seen as working in between the fixity of historical codification and the variability of materials and forces. Architecture must negotiate between the project of matter-force design, which follows the logic of continuous variation and deals inherently with specific cases, and the legal constraints of material-form design, which conform to the limiting force of codes. Interestingly, when we run up against a code in practice what we use to get around it is called a variance. Indeed, a form of variability is structured into most systems of codification, though its tendency is always toward maintaining limits rather than allowing for novelty. We do not advocate the rejection of codes. Rather, we propose a working model in which codes are more open to variance, in which they become ranges rather than determinants.
OPERATING

18 7

The critical dimension of architecture challenges the code not through transgression but through effectively operating between definitions within the code itself. Codes are created for stable models of architecture, designed around the idea, for example, that a canopy is a canopy and a marquee is a marquee. Codes are essentially separate from generative design processes of materialist practice. While codes may serve as an invisible limit, they are not in themselves generative. In certain special cases, the generative capacity of architecture has a critical effect in that it breaks down the stable definitions prescribed by the codes. This is accomplished when design practice extends the range of a legal definition, changing the code such that it comes to include new variations.
44

Invention

In his book Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, the geographer and physiologist Jared Diamond reverses the traditional assertion that necessity is the mother of invention. Invention, we too find, is often the catalyst for its own necessity. Just as Jorge Borges suggests that authors create their own history by drawing together previously unconnected genres and works, inventions such as the phonograph came to fulfill needs that did not exit prior to its own invention. We see design practice as existing in a similar relationship with history and effect. Rather than responding in a critical manner to existing norms, we prefer an architecture that, while precise, is open enough to be generative of unforeseen material outcomes both in its form and the way it is taken up in use.
OPERATING

189

Recording the Last Words of the Dying?

Recording Books for Blind People to Hear?

Announcing Clock Time?

Teaching Spelling?



Mass Distribution of Popular Music

Edison’s Phonograph: Invention Awaiting Application
45

Style:

Impersonal Individuations, Material Expressions

While modernism strives to express process and to foreground difficulty, a material practice is in many ways more traditional. Architecture should neither express the difficulty of its production nor lack difficulty. Architecture should make the difficult look easy. This stand is distinguished from a process-based endeavor which fetishizes the difficult and from Pop, which is simply not difficult.

Style is the expression of the overcoming of difficulty, of making the difficult appear easy. Material processes and unfoldings express an impersonal style through the interaction of their inherent resistances and tendencies. We pursue a management of this territory of material expression rather than a style linked only to personal expression of the psyche.

This amounts to an anti-process argument.

This way of understanding style is also associated with various traditional practices. When Japanese priests go searching for stones to include in their gardens, they sort through hundreds of pieces formed by the same impersonal processes of folding and mixing but displaying different characteristics. All stones are formed by a consistent and rigorous process, but that process alone in no way guarantees the significance of any one stone. While stones are not formed by explicit human will, impersonal individuations like folded rocks also have a style. The gardeners, not satisfied by just any
OPERATING

191

stone, search for the most salient or intense piece. In the choosing of rocks—an act of will—the style of these impersonal individuations is made manifest.

Talent and intuition, interestingly, remain a dimension central to the expression of style. In poetry, for instance, the structures and rules, say, of a sonnet, guarantee nothing: there are innumerable bad sonnets, just as there are innumerable bad rocks. Selection and discrimination are crucial to working within any material system.

Even some rocks have a style.
REISER + UMEMOTO

Central Building, BMW Factory

Leipzig, Germany, 2002

46

Panglossian Paradigm: Origins and Consequences

The fact that something is secondary in its origin doesn’t mean it’s unimportant in its consequences. Those are entirely different subjects.

—Stephen Jay Gould, The Pattern of Life’s History

In his “The Pattern of Life’s History,” evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould introduces exaptation, an alternate theory that describes the emergence of novelty not as error but as a byproduct. Exapted features fulfill Jared Diamond’s inversion of invention as the mother of necessity: they were neither adapted nor invented to serve any specific purpose, but rather, as the byproduct of the interaction of larger systems, they have created new ground unintentionally. There is no teleology toward improvement; there is simply difference that may be selected or rejected. Exaptation overturns the assumption that the origin ensures an indelible trait.1

Conventional design methodologies will typically be based on a top-down logic; concepts and goals will be established at the outset, even before actual design starts. The emergence of secondary elements to the design project under this regime can only be seen either as faults of the concept or mistakes to be eliminated from the final product.

Like the excessive “functionality” of Pierre Chareau’s Maison de Verre, these emergent features move away from considerations of the optimal toward a celebration of their own mechanisms.
OPERATING

*95

We are unconcerned with process as a justification for the product. Architecture should capitalize, rather, on successful byproducts as much as it seeks overall coherence. That geodetics was first developed in the context of a weapon of war is irrelevant to its potential effects. Rather than considering such systems as tainted by their origins, they should be exploited for their active material potential.

The Geodetic Basket Weave of the Wellington Bomber
47

Devolutionary Architecture

In Vers une Architecture, Le Corbusier presents a lineage of vehicles as models raised to a standard through the selection pressures that would tend to optimize function. A vehicle is considered a typology defined by increasingly optimal performance. In fact, Le Corbusier is not being completely honest about his interests, because a pure interest in performance would side-step, or at least be indifferent to, questions of form and aesthetics.

Refinement, or elaboration of the type, provides its own qualities, but these are not always performance based. Formal byproducts of the selection, rather than the performance, are what are ultimately most interesting and, in a way, more applicable and more open to an architectural conception of performance, which is rarely tied to a single optimizing logic. Purposes in architecture are manifold; they depend on a wide range of practices of the users, which is completely different from the position of the pilot or driver of a vehicle, who arguably, as the speed increases, loses sight of the issues of form and aesthetics and comes closer and closer to participating in issues of pure performance.

Our relationship to architecture is less that of a driver to a vehicle than of a consumer to a meal. The consumer is concerned not with the evolutionary process and pressures that lead an animal to take a certain form but with what tastes and textures result from that process.
OPERATING

197

Shark Becomes Kamaboko.

Goose Becomes Foie Gras.

left Domesticated in Death right Domesticated in Life
198

DEVOLUTION ARY ARCHITECTURE

Le Corbusier makes the argument that posing a problem correctly results in a successful solution, even within an already accepted standard. Rather than seeking a final solution, architecture, in so far as use is concerned, bears a probabilistic relationship to those intentions.

Selection pressures indeed work on the animals that become food and provide a greater or lesser degree of articulation of the product. So a shark, which is 90 percent muscle, and a goose, which is 90 percent fat, represent two very different types of articulation. The shark is wild, constantly swimming until it dies. The goose is domesticated to the extreme, immobilized and force fed. The shark is an eating machine; the goose is machine-fed. Yet both undergo a process of domestication before they can be consumed; the goose, before it is slaughtered, and the shark, afterward.

Le Corbusier’s evolution argument assumes the constant refining of a type as the consequence of the selection pressures of design. In fact, in architecture, the opposite may be said to be true. To take another example from aviation: The optimal typically arrives fairly early in the evolution of a type and is generally associated with doing or performing a single function well. Selection pressures in reality not only involve refinement but typically must contend with production inertia. Once in production, an aircraft is rarely taken out of production as a consequence of changing demands, simply because it is too costly to break the production cycle. Instead, modifications are made to the existing line. The effect of these multiple small demands, however, has large consequences. In wartime, the cumulative effects of variation may turn the once optimal aircraft into a performatively ponderous monstrosity, i.e. a sitting duck. As the plane devolves relative to optimal performance responding to multiple conflicting demands, it becomes divorced from pure function. Paradoxically, the devolved type is a more open, “architectural,” object.
OPERATING

199

Evolution / Devolution
200

DE VOLUTION ARY ARCHITECTURE

In a curious way, the devolution of the glass nose of the Heinkel 111 bomber parallels certain contemporary issues of transparency. While Allied air crews were distributed throughout their aircraft in isolation, Luftwaffe command insisted that their crews be tightly clustered within the nose of the aircraft, so that they would not be isolated from one another and perhaps begin to think for themselves. So it was within this transparent glass house that battles were fought.

As with glass architecture, however, the issues attending a desire for transparency were far from clear at the outset. Test pilot Captain Eric Brown’s account of flight testing a captured Heinkel 111 illustrates this issue. He notes that the extensive glazing of the nose section did indeed provide “superlative views for the crew,” however this extreme transparency was only possible under very specific lighting conditions. In darkness, or when the sunlight entered the nose from the rear of the aircraft, the glazing became a tunnel of mirrors, making outward visibility nearly impossible. During rainstorms the situation became even more dire, thus necessitating the development of a sliding roof hatch. The pilot would crank up his seat so that his head would protrude from the top of the bomber, thus reducing the performance of a WWII-era aircraft to that of a WWI-era aircraft, with all the attendant reductions of speed and maneuverability that pilot exposure produced. Additionally, rain would pour into the cockpit area, pooling at the bottom of the airplane and wreaking havoc with the electrical system and the radio.2

The comprehensive program of transparency from the political to the social to the formal and finally phenomenal in architecture had similar goals and met with a similar history of successes.
OPERATING

201

The Successes of the Heinkel 111
48

Optimization

Optimization is all about gaining an objective. It is analogous to a baseball game that only takes into account those who cross home plate; the individual dramas, the feints, the plays, the actual concentration of players and the forces and strategies that they embody are nowhere considered. The concepts that sustain structural intuition must be seen in an active dance with architectural concepts. There are many paths to equilibrium, not just minimal or direct ones.

When Frank Gehry piles on the steel in order to achieve the form he wants, ignoring the behavior of forces within the project, he is optimizing toward pure form. A work of engineering purity, such as a suspension bridge, optimizes toward the behavior of force only. We work with a process of optimization to navigate a range between the minimizing athletics of pure forces and the maximizing of structures required by the unrestrained aesthetics of form, keeping both in play rather than extending into one at the expense of the other.

A manufactured material like steel can be standardized, resulting in an invariably uniform product, whereas wood develops out of a natural process that makes each piece vary. Wood design codes therefore include safety factors that take into account the weakest behaviors and design for the worst case, thus eliminating any intensive difference in specific pieces. This codification of matter contrasts with an expert selection of individual pieces, whereby the relative strength and performance of each is made on a case-by-case basis.
OPERATING

203

A notorious example of such individual selection is the Hughes-Kaiser HK-i, better known as the Spruce Goose. Teams were dispatched into the woods of the United States and Canada to find specific trees for specific parts of the plane.3 The HK-i was designed not with the invariant codes of aluminum but with the variant performance of specific and unique traits in actual material. Such a design cannot be looked at in general. Though the Spruce Goose achieved notoriety as a sitter rather than as a flier in aviation, it was an unmitigated tectonic success.

Material science promises to bridge the gap between natural variation and standardization through non-standard materials, the traits and performance of which can be manipulated even within a single member according to specific requirements. This will liberate the traits of steel from modernity’s homogeneity and paradoxically return them to the heterogeneity of traditional practices such as sword-making.

left Frank Gehry/FOGA, Walt Disney Concert Hall right Wood, a Non-standard Material, Used in the Construction of the Hughes-Kaiser HK-i, or Spruce Goose
COMPETITION MODEL The concept produces an ideal geometry. We presume it could be built in wood, as stipulated by the Taiwanese government.

FORM FOUND MODEL

Our engineers run the form of the bridge as a minimal surface in order to optimize for shell action. Works fine, looks terrible.

OPTIMIZED STRUCTURAL MODEL IN WOOD An interpretation of the optimized model in wood looks even worse.

WOOD MODEL WITH TRANSVERSE ELEMENTS In an effort to improve the appearance of the model, transverse members are introduced. Thinner members are added, but at the expense of the original basket weave concept.

Alishan Bridge: A Case Study in Iterative Process
STEEL VERSION WITH TRANSVERSE ELEMENTS Phylogenetic Shift: Our client indicates that the lifespan of wooden bridge under the environmental conditions on site would only be six years. Fruitless effort! We suggest a change in materials. A formal improvement, but members are still too heavy.

STEEL VERSION WITH NO TRANSVERSE ELEMENTS A formal improvement, but members are still too heavy.

STEEL EGG CRATE MODEL As a remedy we suggest turning all members 90 degrees. Our engineers compliment us on a rational move. Bridge becomes transparent in elevation, yes, but incredibly solid from a longitudinal perspective. Unacceptable!

CRAFTED MODEL: DOUBLE LAYER GRID SHELL

Visual lightness is achieved by pairing two lighter members rather than a single heavy member. Paradoxical return to the spirit of the original competition model is achieved.
49

Classicism without Models

The historian and the critic look at sets of examples and then seek to define a lineage from them. The designer seeks not so much to categorize as to drive a project toward an essential solution for which there may be no prior model. Typically the designer confronts a constellation of demands and conditions with the goal of achieving a taught economy. The designer’s intuition operates not in terms of a pre-conscious retrieval, but rather through the active coordination of factors that cannot be held in the mind simultaneously. A great tennis player considers neither the history nor the mechanics of every swing. When confronted with something new, he or she can already see if something is wrong or right without comparing it to a prior model or elements of a series. The object’s values are immediately intelligible and, moreover, not merely the idiosyncratic or subjective responses.

The Campagnolo Delta Brake provides an example of a designed object pushed beyond the balance between function and form that characterizes a classical formulation and snaps into a Michelangelo-esque moment. The brake mechanism becomes literally an overdeveloped muscle, supersaturated, like that of a bodybuilder. The muscular poise of the athlete has been pushed to an extreme and moves to the brink of coherence, threatening to devolve from a coordinated body into an assembly of fetishized zones. In fact, Campagnolo bicycle components have developed an avid collectors’ market, the parts acquiring an independent life from the bicycle as a functioning whole.
OPERATING

207

The Campagnolo Delta Brake
50

Projecting Force

In his “On Painting,” the poet and critic Paul Valéry writes,

Man lives and moves in what he sees, but he only sees what he wants to see. Try different types of people in the midst of any landscape. A philosopher will only vaguely see phenomena; a geologist, crystallized, confused, ruined and pulverized epochs; a soldier, opportunities and obstacles; and for a peasant it will only represent acres, and perspiration and profits but all of them will have this in common, that they will see nothing as simply a view.4

Like the reversibility of the light ray, landscapes are as much the product of projection as they are of interpretation. The individuals mentioned by Valéry project not only their own particular techniques of seeing but also the technologies their professions onto the landscape. Each employs their own techniques and technologies instrumentally on the landscape while the landscape in turn reveals the precise limits of those technologies. Indeed, it can be argued that there is nothing to the landscape beyond those technologies, that both are only made visible by their mutual projections.

Beyond landscapes, technologies define their operational limits by the territories they are projected into. Their envelopes of performance are thus a function of their own inherent limits made manifest by the environment they encounter. When a system of roads defined by standard specifications and material limits encounters the non-standard
OPERATING

209

slopes of a mountainside, switchbacks occur in order to maintain a gradient necessary for certain types of vehicles to travel safely. In war planning, theaters of operations are defined by systems in a similar way. Weapons systems with a certain operational envelope are projected into an environment with its own limits and resistances. There is an equal imminence in territories and in architecture, a potential that is only met when different kinds of negotiations are entered into, when systems, projected onto other systems, produce a third. It is in the release of new potentials in the interaction of the two at the edge of performance that novelty emerges.

Projecting Force on Territories: The Switchback
51

Architecture vs. War

The theater of war, like that of politics or physics, comprises a tension between forces that erode coherence (entropy) and forces that are seeking to maintain it. The forces that prevail in wartime are those that stay in order the longest. It is within the unfolding relationship between order and disorder that the battle itself takes place. A parallel to this unfolding balance between order and disorder exists in architecture, a theater that does not consider battle to be a means to an end but considers the battle, and specifically the field of battle, as an end in itself.

Modernism, in resisting difference, pushes forward the military model of coherence to a homogenous regimen. In challenging modernism, we do not advocate disorder. Rather, we recognize that order can emerge out of different elements acting with a similar purpose, or out of similar elements acting differently.

52

The Nomad is the One Standing Still

The surfer stays in the same place (summer) by moving in sequence with climatic progression. Locally, the surfer is engaged in another pursuit of stasis in a dynamic field, riding the wave. Similarly, the nomad on the steppes stays still relative to the greening of the landscape, by moving at the speed of annual climatic fluctuation they are riding a wave of green. The endless summer is a global pursuit.

In pursuit of endless summer, the surfer moves across the globe in order to stay in the same temperature year round.

Global Migration Patterns of Surfers (Pro Surfing Circuit Shown as Dotted Line)
OPERATING

213

Why the nomad doesn’t move: The nomad remains stationary with respect to the gradient of greening.

Serengeti Nomad Migratory Patterns
COMMON ERRORS

TO AVOID
53

The Abuse of the Accident: Conventional vs. Indexical Relationships

Justification for architectures that claim a link between data and a graphic representation of data are in error. Such relationships are not indexical but are based, like all semantics, on relationships of convention. An example of this occurs in phonic alphabets, between a given sound and a given letter. Just as data can and does correlate to any number of graphs, and vice versa, the same sound could be and, in fact, is—represented by any number of symbols. There is no indexical relationship between the symbol and the sound in the way that material expressions of phonics, such as Chladni plates, index resonance as a specific material diagram. The accidental relationships of convention should not be abused as indices.

Letter Forms: Conventional

Chladni Pattern: Indexical

‘Ahhh’
54

The Abuse of Data: Map/Territory Confusion

Let us go back to the map and the territory and ask: “what is it in the territory that gets onto the map?” We know the territory does not get onto the map. That is the central point about which we here are all agreed. Now, if the territory were uniform, nothing would get onto the map except its boundaries, which are the points at which it ceases to be uniform against some larger matrix. What gets onto the map, in fact, is difference, be it a difference of altitude, a difference of vegetation, a difference in population structure, difference of surface, or whatever. Differences are the things that get onto the map....A difference, then, is an abstract matter.

—Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind

Under pressure to justify themselves, the datascapists lapse into the error of false concreteness and thus confuse process with product. To suggest that the data that informs, for instance, a diagram of weather dynamics is relevant to the structural diagram of the roof of a weather station, simply by virtue of their mutual but conventional association to weather, is an unfortunate consequence of design in the semantic mode.

A typical misuse of the datascape is as a form generating device. Essentially, the content that is being graphed justifies the use of the graph’s form as a means of producing architectural form. In fact, the graph bears only a conventional relationship to the content that it is
218

THE ABUSE OF DATA

graphing and could take any number of forms, none of which would have any necessary formal relationship with the architecture. Such lapses in logic derive from anxiety to provide thematic justification for the use of form.

Writing on information theory, Gregory Bateson defines a map itself not as a territory but as the establishment of difference that defines territories. The diagram, when used properly and productively, behaves in a similar way, as an abstract gradient defining a range of difference. Like the projection of various systems of content onto the same map, there is a potential in “the difference that makes a difference.”1 This difference is not automatically produced as an inherent feature of the map but is the result of value judgments.
COMMON ERRORS TO AVOID

219

Average Annual Rainfall in Successive Years

Roof Form of the Weather Station

The Liability of the Datascape: Breathtaking Lapses in Logic
55

The Abuse of Histoiy:

Critical Proscription vs. Historic Justification

I do not think that there is anything that is functionally—by its very nature— absolutely liberating. Liberty is a practice....If one were to find aplace, and perhaps there are some, where liberty is effectively practiced, one would find that it is not owing to the order of objects, but once again, owing to the practice of liberty.

—Michel Foucault, Interview with P. Rabinow

It is irresponsible to assume that architecture can affect such things as freedom and liberty. These are practices and are only achievable at the level of legislation and behavior.2 Once architecture is separated from convention this must hold true. The agreement we share as a society that when we walk into the office we will work is a convention; there is certainly no power within the realm of architecture to compel such allegiance. When we create institutions for positive effects, they are certainly augmented and amplified by architecture, but architecture will never ensure their success or failure.

Michel Foucault asks whether architecture can generate greater freedom, and he finds the answer to be no. If liberty is an issue of practice of human conduct, then matter is indifferent to it, and as Foucault demonstrates, a monastery can be turned into a prison, or a school. Indeed we believe it would be impossible to propose a school that was so specific to the program of “school” that it would be impossible to use as a prison.
COMMON ERRORS TO AVOID

221

top Leftist Court bottom Rightist Court
222

THE ABUSE OF HISTORY

The politics related to the creation of buildings, the institutions and the actors that are necessary to bring buildings about, are projected into buildings from their inception and will bias the way they are used. But a building cannot be reduced to politics, any more than matter can be held responsible for freedom. All that can be said is that at one moment, politics is a force that works on design, but the artifact, once formed, has no less tenuous a relationship to further, future uses because of it. Just as program is no guarantee of freedom, neither is the nature of the space. As Gilles Deleuze points out in his discussion of smooth space: The submarine’s operational dynamic taps into the tefnperature and flow gradients of the ocean, the ultimate smooth space, yet it is a weapon of war. Conversely, and contrary to the stance of critical historians, the military origins of the technology in no way colors or condemns the technology as essentially or irrevocably military when the technologies of navigating smooth space are applied to benign uses.

A corollary to the confusion between process and product in the data-scape exists in the confusion between historical or political conditions and architectural production. The relationship, for example, between classical architecture and political values is conventional, or language based. Republican virtues and representative democracy developed more or less in parallel with classical architecture. Now, out of an accidental relationship, classical architecture has come to represent these virtues, though it could have—and later on did—represent other values that are entirely opposed, such as totalitarianism.

The historicist impulse is to use origins to either justify or attack the selection of a certain architecture. But using history to either justify or dismantle material reality amounts at best to a form of magic.
56

The Abuse of the Diagram: Exhaustion

Any one organizational model has limits. The ambition to carry a diagram through all levels of a single architectural project is exhaustive and reductive. To have one model determine all aspects of design is to simplify what is in reality a richer, more heterogeneous, complexity. A true multiplicity requires that many different models be coordinated. A single model relentlessly deployed at all scales emerges as merely formal.

In conventional practice, for example, the overall spatial diagram doesn’t dictate the layout of the toilets. The application of less conventional models doubly requires that the appropriate limits of functionality be observed. It is in the interest of neither the overall diagram nor the organization of specific functions that a single model would be adequate to both. The use of several models within a single project is a more nuanced and productive mode of operation, fosters necessitating and incorporating transitions and the novelty that they promote.

Building

Structure

t <

Furniture	Fixture

Relentless use of the same form at all scales without a value judgement leads to exhaustion.
57

The Abuse of Logic: Confusing Time and Effect

The generating processes of architecture are commonly confused with its eventual product and effects. This is in fact a logical fallacy, what Bateson calls an error in logical typing.

Time of formation must not be confused with the time of effects. Mountains work on the weather to create microclimates and influence larger patterns, but this work is done on a different time scale than the geological forces that effect mountain building. While the forces that generate a mountain range do indeed influence the patterns of weather that move over them indirectly, the one does not provide any justification for or meaning to the other. The form of the mountain, not its formation, is what is relevant to the atmosphere.

Consider confusion between levels of processes that take place in the same temporality. No one giving a party would ever make the mistake of confusing the cake recipe with the steps of a dance. At schools of architecture, however, a similar confusion is common, when data at one level is used as representation at another.
COMMON ERRORS TO AVOID

225

Atmospheric Process

Atmospheric Effects

Material flows are continuous, but their speeds can be radically different.
58

The Typologist’s Error

[For the typologist, there] are a limited number of fixed, unchangeable “ideas” underlying the observed variability [in nature], with the eidos (idea) being the only thing that is fixed and real, while the observed variability has no more reality than the shadows of an object on a cave wall.... [In contrast], the populationist stresses the uniqueness of everything in the organic world.... [A]ll organisms and organic phenomena are composed of unique features and can be described collectively only in statistical terms. Individuals, or any kind of organic entities, form populations of which we can determine the arithmetic mean and the statistics of variation. Averages are merely statistical abstractions, only the individuals of which the populations are composed have reality. The ultimate conclusions of the population thinker and the typologist are precisely the opposite. For the typologist the type (eidos) is real and the variation an illusion, while for the populationist, the type (the average) is an abstraction and only the variation is real. No two ways of looking at nature could be more different.

—Ernst Mayer, in Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy
COMMON ERRORS TO AVOID

r-7

top TheViewoftheTypologist bottom The View of the Populationist
THE WORLD
59

A Parable for Our Time

In a society within which everything has been reduced to media-driven representation, the only thing left to believe in is physical pain. The protagonists of Fight Club have to meet in small groups and be beaten to a pulp in order to feel alive. Pain is the only thing that is real, and the only medium through which to exercise free will. The return to material effects in architecture parallels this thirst for the real. Effectiveness sidesteps the interpretive space of history, context, and representation in an effort to see and feel things for what they do rather than what they mean.

The lye sequence: In order to endure pain the narrator is being urged by his alter ego to go out of his body in order to get closer into it. One could parallel the desires in Fight Club with phenomenology—the desire to have everything grounded within the body and within experience. Such an understanding holds that architecture is rooted in irreducible notions of the body and identity. The end of the movie, in fact, splits this notion open again to reveal that identity is ambiguous. There is finally no clear boundary between the narrator and his alter ego, yet their acts, and the consequences of those, are decidedly unambiguous.

2Z2

A PARABLE OF OUR TIME

These acts culminate in a mission by the members of Fight Club (here dubbed Project Mayhem”) that goes beyond battle among themselves to engage society. Beginning with the destruction of a piece of “corporate art,” the attempt to destroy the corporate body is accomplished by taking artwork out of its representational state and turning it into a giant bowling ball, a thing with weight, mass, and inertia, leading to the destruction of a “franchised coffee bar.” This is, of course, a futile effort. When one of the members of the operation is shot and killed, Project Mayhem tries to make the body “go away” by burying it anonymously in the garden. The narrator insists on returning identity to the corpse and establishing its singularity, insisting on the name “Robert Paulson.” Project Mayhem immediately seizes upon the mark of individuality and turns it into a mantra, which horrifies the narrator by rending the name from its singular identity. A name, once it becomes repeated, ceases to become semantic and takes on the characteristics and properties of a rhythm, or refrain.

The refrain accomplishes the charge of effectiveness by severing the semantic from its links to meaning. First by exhausting meaning through repetition, and second by imparting a rhythmic structure to the repetition, which serves as a diagrammatic armature that can acquire meanings but is not reducible to any particular meanings. Like the tenuous relationship between lyrics and music, or program and architecture, the connection between narrative and structure is not fixed. The materiality of the language, its musicality, its capacity for rhyme, is ultimately what adheres to the structure of rhythm, while its semantic dimension bears only a conventional relationship to that structure.
6o

Foamy Realities

The foaminess of our built world is a direct expression of late capitalism—of junk bonds, etc., a celebration of all that is insubstantial. A return to materials, like a return to the “authentic” gold standard, is beyond us. We advocate neither a material realism, nor a return to phenomenology, nor a Pop representational use of materials that hysterically celebrates—like after-dinner chit-chat—the simulacrum (i.e., dryvit masquerading as stone). Rather, we are looking paradoxically at greater levels of artifice like puts and calls for matter. This does not simply mean material innovation that is, if left by itself, simply an extension of the modernism we already know.

What you draw is what you get: The true horror is not the gap in representation (left) but the inexorable drift of our world toward it (right).
61

Pop Iconography as Myth

The enjoyment of Pop art and its persistance in architecture is a categorical enjoyment. No one takes any particular interest in one Campbell’s Soup can over another Campbell’s Soup can. Aside from its status as a secondary representation (a problem that painting doesn’t have to confront), architecture is built up of things that have a constructed logic indifferent to their representational status. The interchangeability of any Pop object with any other Pop object, in contrast, derives from its critical promotion as a categorical ideological object, a sign of late capitalist production, rather than as an object of intrinsic merit in and of itself. It exists solely as an object of critical discourse. Having been invented once, it could very well have been repeated endlessly and it would not make any difference. It is this arbitrary relationship to content (and to form, for that matter) that is its undoing. For it is arbitrariness—the same kind of arbitrariness that connects the grassy knoll to John E Kennedy’s assassination—that finally reveals Pop for what it is: an art of sentiment. It is not the work, per se, but the free-floating nostalgia that is associated with the Pop object that provokes this less-than-demanding interest.

Indeed, valorizing Pop production as a naive or natural sign of society in general is belied by the fact that when one looks carefully at any instance of Pop one finds it is the work of very deliberate specialist planning and is the farthest thing from a popular creation: as authentic as the notion of corporate soul.
THE WORLD

2Z5

Betty Willis, Designer of the “Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas Nevada” Sign
6 2

Migration of Practices

Only the organic can adapt to the organic.

—Sigfried Giedion . Mechanization Takes Command

The mechanization of various practices across the full spectrum of production, processing, and eventually dissemination and consumption is open to migration rather than fixed in supercession. We note Sigfried Giedion’s observation that certain organic tasks, such as the plucking of chickens, are retained as handwork within an otherwise automated system. But a larger argument can be made that rather than falling into obsolescence, the practices of the nineteenth century migrate into modernity as luxuries. Hobbies become indistinguishable from work in as much as they comprise the same practices of work (such as the complex handwork of model making, or the careful acquisition and scrupulous filing of collecting).

Craft, therefore, does comprise a natural response to material necessity, be it the organic moments in mechanized process, the rapid prototyping of mass-produced components that takes place in auto production, or the customized, one-off at Lockheed’s SkunkWorks program. Rejection of craft, therefore, is reactionary and cannot be justified by an ideological platform that purports to reinvent production without recognizing the distribution of craft practices.
THE WORLD

2Z7

Necessity

Luxury

Avocation

Vocation
6Z

Migration of Ethics

“I promise you a 20th century without child labor or infectious diseases”

fr/V/ffr/ //r/w
6 4

Desire’s Rainbow: Migration of Products

If you like eating...

Special K Cereal...

we know you’ll like...

Braun Electric Shavers...

and you enjoy watching...

Seinfeld Reruns...

and spending $250 on...

an Armani sport coat...

or maybe just splurging for that...

Land Rover SUV.
REISER + UMEMOTO

Fenqihu Station Infrastructure

Alishan Mountain, Taiwan, 2005
[«»■tìtF

'M
65

Continuity and Discontinuity

Only nature is truly continuous. The builders of buildings must contend with construction in parts. Operating thusly, under original sin, the will to continuity and discontinuity is the source of pleasure and pain, virtue and vice. Man is finite and so are his products.

Man is finite and so are his works.
66

A Materialist Argument of Culture

Insofar as culture is itself material, it is susceptible to the same forces of change that work on matter in general. Thus, metamorphoses in culture are worked on by the same objective structures and phenomena,...In exactly the same way for instance as ancient medicine explained all biological phenomena by the action of a vital “principle.” But if we no longer try to separate what is fundamentally united, and instead try simply to classify and conjoin phenomena, we see that technique is in truth the result of growth and destruction, and that, inasmuch as it is equally remote from syntax and from metaphysics, it may without exaggeration be linked to physiology.

—Henri Focillon, The Life of Forms in Art

Instead of seeing regionalism emerge out of distinct cultures as was once the case, a universal regionalism assumes a global culture in which material logics engender regions rather than the other way around. In fact, territories are no longer only defined by physical locale. One realm in which this is found increasingly to be the case is that of global tourism.

Tourism today cannot be separated from ecological, political, and social issues. In fact, given the positive goals for tourism in all these categories, the traditional understanding of a tourist economy is replaced by a model that is integrated into a larger continuum of not only economic but cultural forces as well. New tourist infrastructure
244

A MATERIALIST ARGUMENT OF CULTURE

is being designed with national and international goals that range from renewing interests in the natural landscape among a primarily urban population to encouraging international investment by establishing a culture of business amenity, to fostering recognition through new institutions. As such, tourism no longer comprises people as spectators to a past history or to static natural conditions but involves the tourist in the creation of something entirely new. In some sense this has always been the case. The presence of tourists, especially in quantity, do fundamentally change the places they visit. But the tourist has historically been seen as foreign to this system and detrimental to a perceived authenticity, contributing to the dilution or eradication of traditional cultural practices. This has rendered the act of tourism purely in its negative effects, rather than recognizing its potential to act positively through fusion.

Rather than fetishizing flows of capital and production as a formal device, architecture affirms this new touristic mode through active intervention with material practices as a substrate to culture.

Neither a superficial or invasive overlay of uses on the site nor a nostalgic postulation of an imagined past but rather a positive projection for the future, the possibilities of this work emerge from a coherent utilization of the inherent ecological structure for a series of transplanted regionalisms.
67

Neo-regionalism

Traditional regionalism, like any fundamentalism, is the true international style. All regionalisms are structurally the same; only the semantics of their local narrative differs. More homogenous, structurally, than globalism, regionalism is a reactionary formation that only becomes recognizable as an ideology when its opposite emerges.

Where the global market relies on imposing transnational products onto often hostile markets, introducing sameness and repetition as means of establishing hegemony, a materialist notion of culture and technique establishes an ultra-regionalism that manifests regional difference as an inherent structure. It is a new kind of universality that rests on ubiquitous difference constituting a larger whole. As such, it neither proposes imposition of a homogenous universalizing system nor does it seek to fix or circumscribe traditional regional differences. It is an erroneous assumption that global capital is always in a one-to-one correspondence with global trends. Rather, ultra-regionalism proposes working within existing transnational systems where they intersect local practices but understands the local as two fold: first, that changed conceptions of universalizing systems hold that they are not homogenous but can create their own internal regions and logics, and second, that fixed notions of cultural and national regions belong more to ideology than reality and in fact with very few exceptions are constantly changing. So the task is not to resist the global but to seek out the most creative ways to develop richer regions within it.
246

NEO-REGIONALISM

Why must everywhere be like everywhere else?
THE WORLD

247

The universal no longer means that all categorical difference can be erased, that everything is exchangeable with everything else. In fact, the opposite is true. Capitalism assumes this logic at the level of economics, but material and cultural systems resist such simplification. Within a material or cultural framework, everything has a range and a capacity; therefore, their limits are in some sense concrete. The difference is, categorical assumptions are regarded differently; they are not based upon what things are, but rather, what they do.

While not entirely interchangeable—following certain pathways and logics—regionalisms can be manifest artificially in the creation of material networks of all kinds. The accidents of place no longer codify regions but instead serve as a range, much as structural and legal systems are no longer maintained in a universal exclusivity. This requires another level of artifice. The melting pot and its attending anxieties about homogeneity can now give way to a new sense of the alloy; not a mixture that erases difference, but a compound that creates new kinds of difference.
248

Notes

INTRODUCTION

1	Friedrich Nietzsche, “On the Uses and Disadvantages of History,” in Untimely Meditations, ed. Daniel Breazeale, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (Cambridge, Mass.: Cambridge University Press, 1997), 57-124.

2	D’Arcy Thompson, On Growth and Form, rev. ed. (New York: Dover, 1992), prefatory note.

3	Aldo Rossi, A Scientific Autobiography, trans. Lawrence Venuti (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981), 1.

4	Ibid.

5	Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York: Museum of Modem Art, 1966), 30.

6	E II. Combrich, “Norm and Form,” in Studies in the Art of the Renaissance, second ed. (New York: Phaidon, 1971), 95.

7	Ibid., 96.

8	Gregory Bateson, Steps to Ecology of Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 459.

9	Gombrich, “Norm and Form,” 97.

10	Ibid.

GEOMETRY

1	Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 352-53.

2	Edgar Allan Poe. “On Composition,” in Great Short Works of Edgar Allan Poe: Poems, Tales, Criticism, ed. G. R. Thompson (New York: Harper and Row, 1970), 528-41.

3	Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 10.

4	Sanford Kwinter, cited in Jesse Reiser and Nanako Umemoto, Tokyo Bay Project, Emerging Complexities Symposium (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986).

5	Manuel DeLanda, Intensive Science and Virtual Philosophy (New York: Continuum, 2002), 17.

6	Ibid., 28.

7	Ibid., 18.

8	Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 352-53.

MATTER

1	See Werner Oechslin, “Geometry and Line: The Vitruvian Science of the Architectural Drawing,” Daidalos 1 (1981): 20-35.
NOTES

249

2	Mario Salvador! and Robert Heller, Structure in Architecture: The Building of Buildings, 2nd ed. (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall, 1975), 272.

3	Peter McCleary, “Robert Le Ricolais’ Search for the ‘Indestructible Idea,’” Lotus International 99 (1998): 102-31.

4	See, for example, the proposal by Foreign Office Architects for the new World Trade Center towers in New York. The towers are a direct rescaling of Le Ricolais’s column experiments.

5	J. B. S. Haldane, “On Being the Right Size,“ in The World of Mathematics, ed. James R. Newman (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1956). 953-

6	Lee Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), 7.

7	Donald E. Ingber, “The Architecture of Life,” Scientific American 278, no. 1 (Jan. 1998): 48-57.

8	Martin Bowman, Wellington: The Geodetic Giant (Washington, D.C.;. Smithsonian Institution Press, 1989).

9	Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 367. Our reading of this text is a specific departure from how it has been previously used by Greg Lynn to emphasize the geometrical dimension of the inexact and anexact over a materialist understanding.

10	See James R. Newman, “Commentary on Queen Dido, Soap Bubbles, and a Blind Mathematician,” in The World of Mathematics, ed. Newman, 882-85.

OPERATING

1	Stephen J. Gould, “The Pattern of Life’s History,” in The Third Culture: Beyond the Scientific Revolution,

ed. John Brockman (New York: Touchstone, 1996), 51-73.

2	Capt. Eric Brown, cited in Wings of the Luftwaffe, ed. G. William Green (London: MacDonald, 1977).

3	Bill Yenne, The World’s Worst Aircraft, ed. John Kirk (Greenwich, Conn.: Brompton Books, 1990), 100.

4	Paul Valery, “On Painting,” in Selected Writings of Paul Valéry, trans. Anthony Bower (New York: New Direction, 1964), 222.

COMMON ERRORS TO AVOID

1	Gregory Bateson, Steps to an Ecology of Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2000), 459.

2	This argument is made by Stan Allen in his Points and Lines (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1999), 102.
ISBN 1-56898-554-1 $29.95

Princeton Architecturd Press

A