MODERN ARCHITECTURE 
MODERN ARCHITECTURE
BEING THE KAHN LECTURES FOR 1930
BY FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT
SOUTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY PRESS CARBONDALE AND EDWARDSVILLE
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT
DEDICATED TO YOUNG MEN IN ARCHITECTURE—F.L.W.
A NOTE ON THE FACSIMILE EDITION
/n 1930 Frank Lloyd Wright delivered a series of six lectures at Princeton University, published a year later by Princeton University Press as Modern Architecture: Being the Kahn Lectures for 1930. Long out of print, this book is finally available again in this facsimile edition.
In these lectures Mr. Wright discusses the benefits conferred on us by the machine; the need for an indigenous American architecture; the need for simplicity; and the need for an entirely new architectural philosophy. More than fifty years later, the same precepts can benefit today’s architects.
The insights developed in these lectures should remind architects of the larger obligations they accept when they accept an architectural commission, for they are not merely designing buildings, but creating an environment for human life. Mr. Wright understood all that this entails and set it forth in these lectures with great strength and clarity.
Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer
Director of Archives
Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation
JD REFACES, like all introductions, are usually unnecessary but courteous JL formalities. They are too often a transition between nothing that has gone before and something worthwhile that is to follow. Yet it was not so long ago that Frank Lloyd Wright, a man whom most Europeans consider America’s leading architect and designer, a man whose originality has influenced the trend of modern architecture in Europe, needed an introduction to most of his fellow-countrymen. As early as 1903, at Hull House in Chicago, Frank Lloyd Wright challenged all Romantic efforts to escape from the realities of a modern machine world when he objected to the formation of a Society of Arts and Crafts to perpetuate the pseudo-medieval dreams of Morris and Ruskin, and read a paper on “The Art and Craft of the Machine.” He was voted down and has continued to be voted down in America, except for a relatively small following, until it has become uncomfortably evident from the books published about him in Europe that his ideas and buildings have raised him to the position of a prophet without honor in his own country.
When he was invited to deliver the lectures which form the basis of this book before those Princeton undergraduates interested in architecture, I do not believe he felt, as a recent article about him implies, that he was being honored like one already dead. It was neither to honor nor to bury him that the undergraduates, always over-lectured, came in increasing numbers to his lectures, bought illustrations of his work, and sought conferences with him. At first they came because it is youth in America which has discovered to what extent and for how long Wright has been insisting upon the living present against the dead past. They stayed because they were impressed by the pioneer spirit of the man; they felt that something greater than a desire for novelty, an ennui with tradition, and a longing for publicity had impelled him to cut his architectural trail through a new age and a new country. In his lectures and conferences these students found not forms but fire, not formulas but ideas, not formality but vitality.
It is against the tradition of time-honored formalities that Wright has built and preached. Some people may buy this book thinking that it will offer an easy formula for understanding and designing so-called modern architecture. I, at first, made the mistake of wishing that he had been more explicit, had told more about
his methods and less about his theory of life. As I listened to his lectures and talked with the man I saw my mistake, and realized that Wright did not want to give to his public merely his particular forms, developed by him to meet specific conditions. Instead, fearful lest his buildings be copied and repeated as an easy ritual for unimaginative moderns, he wanted only to stir others with his dreams of the possibilities open to architecture in our present age.
His lectures, then, are not didactic rules and architectural short-cuts for making the possibilities of living expression into a new academic tradition. Rather are they the sermons of an engaging, self-confident and enthusiastic artist fired with a faith, not in the machine itself, but in the power of man to master his creation, the machine, and to make it fashion a new manifestation of beauty. It does not matter that long isolation and lack of recognition, to name but a small part of what Wright has suffered, have made him belligerent in his attack on those outworn architectural conventions whose perfunctory use today retard, in his mind, the creation of a twentieth century American style of architecture. The marvel is that life has not burnt him out and left him bitter and suspicious.
It matters still less that he is not strictly logical in his artistic convictions: that he admires Egyptian temples as the expression of a great stone tradition, and condemns Greek temples as mere wooden forms translated into stone; that he insists on a modern architecture freed from the whole stereotyped paraphernalia of the past and yet at the same time believes that it should pay unstinted tribute to the wooden forms of Japanese architecture. Whose likes and dislikes are logical? We are now finding that logic, as a convention of human thinking, will not confine within its premises art and life as creative activities. When asked to write on “The Logic of Modern Architecture” Wright replied, “Is the rising sun logical? It is natural and that is better.”
In architecture, as in life itself today, we are burdened with our knowledge of and respect for the past; we still think with Aristotelian logic based upon the belief in types and standards of absolute good and beauty. Hence this faith in the natural is perhaps what we need. At least it is what youth wants. Before we can have a thrilling joy in living and can remake our world today so that its realities, like the machine, have beauty and satisfaction for us, we must develop something approaching the naturalness and enthusiastic self-confidence which made the Greek of the fifth century look upon everything non-Greek as barbaric. We are in danger, as moderns, of becoming tolerant to the point of being uninterested in art. In
painting we can tolerate anything from, Dutch realism to abstractions, in architecture anything from Egyptian pylons to a smokestack. Therefore there is a stimulating value in Wright’s intolerance of the cornice as a symbol of the past. It is an essential part of the naturalness and directness of the man, and fundamental to the faith which he has stated in the following chapters.
His style in writing is as individual as the man himself. Some critics may overemphasize his unconscious disregard of usage and, at times, his disregard of logic; they may dwell unfairly, if they will, upon his lack of a simple, functional directness in words and his tendency to overdecorate ideas with verbiage; but such critics will have missed the appeal of his imagery and the sincerity of his effort. Asa creative artist whose ideas have worked not only to shape modern architecture but also to give men a new and hopeful outlook on the Machine, his philosophy of life, with his reactions, ideas and prejudices, will become a document in the history of art. Until it becomes a document it will be a challenge and an appeal.
While Wright says, “I suppose I am to suffer disadvantage, being accustomed to saying things with a hod of mortar and some bricks, or with a concrete mixer and a gang of workmen, rather than by speaking or writing,” I think he requires no apologies for his words any more than for his ideas and buildings. They are his, and in them lies something more real than conventions of thought and formulas for building. They embody his faith. This book, as he referred to it in a letter, is “his garden”; in it he nobly believes that others will see the beauty and the possibilities of beauty which have stirred him. 1 think they will.
E. Baldwin Smith
CONTENTS
1: MACHINERY, MATERIALS AND MEN 2: STYLE IN INDUSTRY 3: THE PASSING OF THE CORNICE 4: THE CARDBOARD HOUSE 5: THE TYRANNY OF THE SKYSCRAPER 6: THE CITY
1: MACHINERY, MATERIALS AND MEN
LARKIN ADMINISTRATION BUILDING BRICK MASSES. STONE WASHES AND WATER-TABLE. WROUGHT IRON FENCE.
1903-1905
AN ARCHITECTURE for these United States will be born “Modern,” as were all the Architectures of the peoples of all the world. Perhaps this is the deep-seated reason why the young man in Architecture grieves his parents, academic and familiar, by yielding to the fascination of creation, instead of persisting as the creature of ancient circumstance. This, his rational surrender to instinct, is known, I believe, as “rebellion.”
I am here to aid and comfort rebellion insofar as rebellion has this honorable instinct—even though purpose may not yet be clearly defined—nor any fruits, but only ists, isms or istics be in sight. Certainly we may now see the dawning of a deeper insight than has for the past thirty years characterized so-called American Architecture. By that length of time American Architecture has been neither American nor Architecture. We have had instead merely a bad form of surface-decoration.
This “dawn” is the essential concern of this moment and the occasion for this series of “lectures.” We, here at Princeton, are to guard this dawning insight and help to guide its courage, passion and patience into channels where depth and flow is adequate, instead of allowing youthful adventure to ground in shallows all there beneath the surface in the offing, ready to hinder and betray native progress.
In this effort I suppose I am to suffer disadvantage, being more accustomed to saying things with a hod of mortar and some bricks, or with a concrete mixer and a gang of workmen, than by speaking or writing. I like to write, but always dissatisfied, I, too, find myself often staring at the result with a kind of nausea . . . or is it nostalgia?
I dislike to lecture, feeling something like the rage of impotence. With a small audience hovering over my drawing-board, there would be better feeling on my part and a better chance for the audience. But a lecturer may, in fact must, make his own diversion, indulge his “malice” as he goes along, or get no entertainment at all out of the matter.
So here at my hand I have some gently malicious pamphlets or leaflets issued, as myth has it, by that mythical group to which careless reference is sometimes made, by the thoughtless, as the “New School of the Middle
West.” From these rare, heretical pamphlets, from time to time as I may have occasion, I shall quote. Among them are such titles as: “Palladio turns in his grave and speaks,” another, “Groans from Phidias”: the author’s original title—it would be beside our mark to mention it—was suppressed by the group as just that much too much. One solitary “New School” scholar, himself having, under painful economic pressure, degenerated to the practice of mere Architectural surgery—blaming Vitruvius for his degradation—wrote bitterly and much under the title of “Vitruviolic Disorders.”
A number of these leaflets are given over by several and sundry of the “New School” to the ravages of the “Vignola”—an academic epidemic showing itself as a creeping paralysis of the emotional nature—creeping by way of the optic nerve.
During the course of our afternoons, from among these modestly profane references we may have occasion to hear from a rudely awakened Bramante, an indignant Sansovino, a gently aggrieved Brunelleschi, perhaps even from robustious “Duomo” Buonarotti himself, all, plucked even of their shrouds, frowning up from their graves on their pretentious despoilers . . . our own American Classicists. These time-honored Italians in these wayward and flippant leaflets, are made to speak by way of a sort of motor-car Vasari. His name deserves to be lost—and as certainly will be.
Unfortunately and sad to say, because their names and individualities are unknown to us, so close were they, as men, to the soil or to Man,—we shall be unable to hear from the ancient builders of “Le Moyen Age,” those dreamers in cloisters, guild-masters, gardeners, worshipers of the tree, or the noble stone-craftsmen of still earlier Byzantium, who were much like the cathedral builders in spirit. No—we shall hear from them only as we, ourselves, are likewise dreamers, gardeners, or worshipers of the tree and by sympathetic nature, therefore, well qualified to understand the silence of these white men. And those human nature-cultures of the red man, lost in backward stretch of time, almost beyond our horizon—the Maya, the Indian—and of the black man, the African—we may learn mfro them. Last, but not least, come the men of bronze, the Chinese, the Japanese—profound builders of the Orient— imaginative demons, their Art of Earth winging its way to the skies: Dragons with wings—their fitting symbol. Of their Art—much. The ethnic eccentricity of their work makes it safe inspiration for the white man, who now needs,
it seems, aesthetic fodder that he cannot copy nor reproduce. I am not sure but there is more for us in our modern grapple with creation, in their sense of the living thing in Art, than we can find in any other culture. Profundity of feeling the men of bronze could encourage. Their forms we should have to let alone.
In order that we may not foregather here in this dignified atmosphere of Princeton without due reference to authority, we will go far back for our text on this, our first afternoon together. Go so far back that we need fear no contradiction. Go without hesitation, to Rameses the Great, to find that: “All great Architecture”—Rameses might have used the hieroglyph for Art instead of the one for Architecture—“All great Architecture is true to its Architects’ immediate 'present,” and seal it with the regal symbol. And in this connection comes the title of our discourse—the “Machinery, Materials and Men” of our immediate present.
Long ago,—yes, so long ago that the memory of it seems to join with recent echoes from Tut-Ank-Amen’s ancient tomb,—I passionately swore that the Machine was no less, rather more, an artist’s tool than any he had ever had or heard of, if only he would do himself the honor to learn to use it. Twenty-seven years old now, the then offensive heresy has been translated and published, I am told, in seven or more foreign languages, English excepted, which means said in seven or more different ways. But just what the seven different ways each exactly mean, I can have no idea. At the time, I knew no better than to make the declaration—it seemed so sensibly obvious in the vast cinderfield in which I then stood—our enormous industrial Middle West. Today, twenty-seven years later, the heresy is become truism, at least “truistic,” therefore sufficiently trite to arouse no hostility even if said in several or even seven different ways. And yet: a Pompeian recently come back and struggling for nourishment on French soil has reiterated one-quarter of the matter, made more stark, with signs of success right here in our own country. The reiteration reaches us across the Atlantic—more Machine-made than the erstwhile cry in the cinderfield, but with several important omissions—most important, at least, to us. Or perhaps, who knows, they may not really be omissions but evasions. First among these probable evasions is the Nature of Materials; Second, is that characteristic architectural element, the Third
Dimension; and Third, there is Integral Ornament. This neglected Trinity, it seems to me, constitutes the beating heart of the whole matter of Architecture so far as Art is concerned.
Surface and Mass, relatively superficial, however Machine-made or however much resembling Machinery, are subordinate to this great Trinity. Surface and Mass are a by-product, or will be when Architecture arises out of the matter. If proof is needed we shall find it as we go along together. . . . Machinery, Materials and Men—yes—these are the stuffs by means of which the so-called American Architect will get his Architecture, if there is any such Architect and America ever gets any Architecture of her own. Only by the strength of his spirit’s grasp upon all three—Machinery, Materials and Men—will the Architect be able so to build that his work may be worthy the great name “Architecture.” A great Architecture is greatest proof of human greatness.
The difference, to the Architect and his fellow Artists, between our era and others, lies simply enough in the substitution of automatic machinery for tools, and (more confusing), instead of hereditary aristocracy for patron, the Artist now relies upon automatic industrialism, conditioned upon the automatic acquiescence of Men, and conditioned not at all upon their individual handicraf tsmanship.
At first blush an appalling difference, and the more it is studied, the more important the difference becomes. And were we now to be left without prophet —that is, without interpretation—and should we among ourselves, be unable to arouse the leadership of supreme human imagination—yes, then we should be at the beginning of the end of all the great qualities we are foregathered here to cherish: namely, the Arts which are those great qualities in any civilization. This Republic has already gone far with very little of any single one of these great saving qualities, yet it goes further, faster and safer; eats more, and eats more regularly; goes softer, safer, is more comfortable and egotistic in a more universal mediocrity than ever existed on Earth before. But who knows where it is going? In this very connection, among the more flippant references referred to as at hand, there is also heavy matter and I have here serious original matter, saved several years ago from the flames by a miracle. The first pages were blackened and charred by fire, of this original manuscript, first read to a group of professors, artists, architects and manufacturers
at Hull House, Chicago. To show you how it all seemed to me, back there, twenty-seven years ago in Chicago, I shall read into the record, once more, from its pages. Should its clumsy earnestness bore you—remember that the young man who wrote, should, in that earlier day, as now, have confined himself to a hod of mortar and some bricks. But passionately he was trying to write—making ready to do battle for the life of the thing he loved. And I would remind you, too, that in consequence he has been engaged in eventually mortal combat ever since.
Here is the manuscript. We will begin, twenty-seven years later, again, at the beginning of—
THE ART AND CRAFT OF THE MACHINE No one, I hope, has come here tonight for a Sociological prescription for the cure of evils peculiar to this Machine Age. For I come to you as an Architect to say my word for the right use upon such new materials as we have, of our great substitute for tools—Machines. There is no thrift in any craft until the tools are mastered; nor will there be a worthy social order in America until the elements by which America does its work are mastered by American society. Nor can there be an Art worth the man or the name until these elements are grasped and truthfully idealized in whatever we as a people try to make. Although these elemental truths should be commonplace enough by now, as a people we do not understand them nor do we see the way to apply them. We are probably richer in raw materials for our use as workmen, citizens or artists than any other nation,—but outside mechanical genius for mere contrivance we are not good workmen, nor, beyond adventitious or propitious respect for property, are we as good citizens as we should be, nor are we artists at all. We are one and all, consciously or unconsciously, mastered by our fascinating automatic “implements,” using them as substitutes for tools. To make this assertion clear I offer you evidence I have found in the field of Architecture. It is still a field in which the pulse of the age throbs beneath much shabby finery and one broad enough (God knows) to represent the errors and possibilities common to our time-serving Time.
Architects in the past have embodied the spirit common to their own life and to the life of the society in which they lived in the most noble of all noble
records—Buildings. They wrought these valuable records with the primitive tools at their command and whatever these records have to say to us today would be utterly insignificant if not wholly illegible were tools suited to another and different condition stupidly forced to work upon them; blindly compelled to do work to which they were not fitted, work which they could only spoil.
In this age of steel and steam the tools with which civilization’s true record will be written are scientific thoughts made operative in iron and bronze and steel and in the plastic processes which characterize this age, all of which we call Machines. The Electric Lamp is in this sense a Machine. New materials in the man-Machines have made the physical body of this age what it is as distinguished from former ages. They have made our era the Machine Age— wherein locomotive engines, engines of industry, engines of light or engines of war or steamships take the place works of Art took in previous history. Today we have a Scientist or an Inventor in place of a Shakespeare or a Dante. Captains of Industry are modern substitutes, not only for Kings and Potentates, but, I am afraid, for great Artists as well. And yet—man-made environment is the truest, most characteristic of all human records. Let a man build and you have him. You may not have all he is, but certainly he is what you have. Usually you will have his outline. Though the elements may be in him to enable him to grow out of his present self-made characterization, few men are ever belied by self-made environment. Certainly no historical period was ever so misrepresented. Chicago in its ugliness today becomes as true an expression of the life lived here as is any center on earth where men come together closely to live it out or fight it out. Man is a selecting principle, gathering his like to him wherever he goes. The intensifying of his existence by close contact, too, flashes out the human record vividly in his background and his surroundings. But somewhere—somehow—in our age, although signs of the times are not wanting, beauty in this expression is forfeited—the record is illegible when not ignoble. We must walk blindfolded through the streets of this, or any great modern American city, to fail to see that all this magnificent resource of machine-power and superior material has brought to us, so far, is degradation. All of the Art forms sacred to The Art of Old are, by us, prostitute.
On every side we see evidence of inglorious quarrel between things as they were and things as they must be and are. This shame a certain merciful ignorance on our part mistakes for glorious achievement. We believe in our greatness when we have tossed up a Pantheon to the god of money in a night or two, like the Illinois Trust Building or the Chicago National Bank. And it is our glory to get together a mammoth aggregation of Roman monuments, sarcophagi and temples for a Post Office in a year or two. On Michigan Avenue Montgomery Ward presents us with a nondescript Florentine Palace with a grand campanile for a “Farmer Grocery” and it is as common with us as it is elsewhere to find the giant stone Palladian “orders” overhanging plate glass shop fronts. Show windows beneath Gothic office buildings, the office-middle topped by Parthenons, or models of any old sacrificial temple, are a common sight. Every commercial interest in any American town, in fact, is scurrying for respectability by seeking some advertising connection, at least, with the “Classic.” A commercial Renaissance is here; the Renaissance of “the ass in the lion’s skin.” This much, at least, we owe to the late Columbian Fair—that triumph of modem civilization in 1893 will go down in American Architectural history, when it is properly recorded, as a mortgage upon posterity that posterity must repudiate not only as usurious but as forged.
In our so-called “Sky-Scrapers” (latest and most famous business-building triumph), good granite or Bedford stone is cut into the fashion of the Italian followers of Phidias and his Greek slaves. Blocks so cut are cunningly arranged about a structure of steel beams and shafts (which structure secretly robs them of any real meaning), in order to make the finished building resemble the architecture bepictured by Palladio and Vitruvius—in the schoolbooks. It is quite as feasible to begin putting on this Italian trimming at the cornice, and come on down to the base as it is to work, as the less fortunate Italians were forced to do, from the base upward. Yes, “from the top down” is often the actual method employed. The keystone of a Roman or Gothic arch may now be “set”—that is to say “hung”—and the voussoirs stuck alongside or “hung” on downward to the haunches. Finally this mask, completed, takes on the features of the pure “Classic,” or any variety of “Renaissance” or whatever catches the fancy or fixes the “convictions” of the designer. Most likely, an education in Art has “fixed” both. Our Chicago University, “a seat of learning,” is just as far removed from truth. If environ-
ment is significant and indicative, what does this highly reactionary, extensive and expensive scene-painting by means of hybrid Collegiate Gothic signify? Because of Oxford it seems to be generally accepted as “appropriate for scholastic purposes.” Yet, why should an American University in a land of Democratic ideals in a Machine Age be characterized by second-hand adaptation of Gothic forms, themselves adapted previously to our own adoption by a feudalistic age with tools to use and conditions to face totally different from anything we can call our own? The Public Library is again Asinine Renaissance, bones sticking through the flesh because the interior was planned by a shrewd Library Board—while an “Art-Architect” (the term is Chicago’s, not mine) was “hired” to “put the architecture on it.” The “classical” aspect of the sham-front must be preserved at any cost to sense. Nine out of ten public buildings in almost any American city are the same.
On Michigan Avenue, too, we pass another pretentious structure, this time fashioned as inculcated by the Ecole des Beaux Arts after the ideals and methods of a Graeco-Roman, inartistic, grandly brutal civilization, a civilization that borrowed everything but its jurisprudence. Its essential tool was the slave. Here at the top of our Culture is the Chicago Art Institute, and very like other Art Institutes. Between lions—realistic—Kemyss would have them so because Barye did—-we come beneath some stone millinery into the grandly useless lobby. Here French’s noble statue of the Republic confronts us—she too, Imperial. The grand introduction over, we go further on to find amid plaster casts of antiquity, earnest students patiently gleaning a half-acre or more of archaeological dry-bones, arming here for industrial conquest, in other words to go out and try to make a living by making some valuable impression upon the Machine Age in which they live. Their fundamental tool in this business about which they will know just this much less than nothing, is—the Machine. In this acre or more not one relic has any vital relation to things as they are for these students, except for the blessed circumstance that they are more or less beautiful things in themselves— bodying forth the beauty of “once upon a time.” These students at best are to concoct from a study of the aspect of these blind reverences an extract of antiquity suited to modern needs, meanwhile knowing nothing of modern needs, permitted to care nothing for them, and knowing just as little of the needs of the ancients which made the objects they now study. The tyros are
taught in the name of John Ruskin and William Morris to shun and despise the essential tool of their Age as a matter commercial and antagonistic to Art. So in time they go forth, each armed with his little Academic extract, applying it as a sticking-plaster from without, wherever it can be made to stick, many helplessly knowing in their hearts that it should be a development from within—but how? And this is an education in Art in these United States, a.d. 1903. Climb now the grand monumental stairway to see the results of this cultural effort—we call it “education”—hanging over the walls of the Exhibition Galleries. You will find there the same empty reverences to the past at cost to the present and of doubtful value to the future, unless a curse is valuable. Here you may see fruits of the lust and pride of the patron-collector but how shamefully little to show by way of encouraging patronage by the Artist of his own day and generation. This is a Temple of the Fine Arts. A sacred place! It should be the heart-center, the emotional inspiration of a great national industrial activity, but here we find Tradition not as an inspiring spirit animating progress. No. Now more in the past than ever! No more, now, than an ancient mummy, a dead letter. A “precedent” is a “hang over” to copy, the copy to be copied for Machine reproduction, to be shamelessly reproduced until demoralized utterly or unrecognizable.
More unfortunate, however, than all this fiasco, is the Fiasco al Fresco. The suburban house-parade is more servile still. Any popular avenue or suburb will show the polyglot encampment displaying, on the neatly kept little plots, a theatrical desire on the part of fairly respectable people to live in Chateaux, Manor Houses, Venetian Palaces, Feudal Castles, and Queen Anne Cottages. Many with sufficient hardihood abide in abortions of the Carpenter-Architect, our very own General Grant Gothic perhaps, intended to beat all the “lovely periods” at their own game and succeeding. Look within all this typical monotony-in-variety and see there the machine-made copies of handicraft originals; in fact, unless you, the householder, are fortunate indeed, possessed of extraordinary taste and opportunity, all you possess is in some degree a machine-made example of vitiated handicraft, imitation antique furniture made antique by the Machine, itself of all abominations the most abominable. Everything must be curved and carved and carved and turned. The whole mass a tortured sprawl supposed artistic. And the floor-coverings? Probably machine-weavings of Oriental Rug patterns—pattern and texture mechani-
cally perfect; or worse, your walls are papered with paper-imitations of old tapestry, imitation patterns and imitation textures, stamped or printed by the Machine; imitations under foot, imitations overhead and imitations all round about you. You are sunk in “Imitation.” Your much-moulded woodwork is stained “antique.” Inevitably you have a white-and-gold “reception-room” with a few gilded chairs, an overwrought piano, and withal, about you a general cheap machine-made “profusion” of—copies of copies of original imitations. To you, proud proprietors—do these things thus degraded mean anything aside from vogue and price? Aside from your sense of quantitative ownership, do you perceive in them some fine fitness in form, line and color to the purposes which they serve? Are the chairs to sit in, the tables to use, the couch comfortable, and are all harmoniously related to each other and to your own life? Do many of the furnishings or any of the window-millinery serve any purpose at all of which you can think? Do you enjoy in “things” the least appreciation of truth in beautiful guise? If not, you are a victim of habit, a habit evidence enough of the stagnation of an outgrown Art. Here we have the curse of stupidity—a cheap substitute for ancient Art and Craft which has no vital meaning in your own life or our time. You line the box you live in as a magpie lines its nest. You need not be ashamed to confess your ignorance of the meaning of all this, because not only you, but every one else, is hopelessly ignorant concerning it; it is “impossible.” Imitations of imitations, copies of copies, cheap expedients, lack of integrity, some few blind gropings for simplicity to give hope to the picture. That is all.
Why wonder what has become of the grand spirit of Art that made, in times past, man’s reflection in his environment a godlike thing. This is what has become of it! Of all conditions, this one at home is most deplorable, for to the homes of this country we must look for any beginning of the awakening of an artistic conscience which will change this parasitic condition to independent growth. The homes of the people will change before public buildings can possibly change.
Glance now for a moment behind this adventitious scene-painting passing, at home, for Art in the Nineteenth Century. Try to sense the true conditions underlying all, and which you betray and belie in the name of Culture. Study with me for a moment the engine which produces this wreckage and builds you, thus cheapened and ridiculous, into an ignoble record.
Here is this thing we call the Machine, contrary to the principle of organic growth, but imitating it, working irresistibly the will of Man through the medium of men. All of us are drawn helplessly into its mesh as we tread our daily round. And its offices—call them “services”—have become the commonplace background of modern existence; yes, and sad to say, in too many lives the foreground, middle distance and future. At best we ourselves are already become or are becoming some cooperative part in a vast machinery. It is, with us, as though we were controlled by some great crystallizing principle going on in Nature all around us and going on, in spite of ourselves, even in our very own natures. If you would see how interwoven it is, this thing we call the Machine, with the warp and the woof of civilization, if indeed it is not now the very basis of civilization itself, go at nightfall when all is simplified and made suggestive, to the top of our newest Skyscraper, the Masonic Temple. There you may see how in the image of material man, at once his glory and his menace, is this thing we call a City. Beneath you is the monster stretching out into the far distance. High overhead hangs a stagnant pall, its fetid breath reddened with light from myriad eyes endlessly, everywhere blinking. Thousands of acres of cellular tissue outspread, enmeshed by an intricate network of veins and arteries radiating into the gloom. Circulating there with muffled ominous roar is the ceaseless activity to whose necessities it all conforms. This wondrous tissue is knit and knit again and inter-knit with a nervous system, marvellously effective and complete, with delicate filaments for hearing and knowing the pulse of its own organism, acting intelligently upon the ligaments and tendons of motive impulse, and in it all is flowing the impelling electric fluid of man’s own life. And the labored breathing, murmur, clangor, and the roar—how the voice of this monstrous force rises to proclaim the marvel of its structure! Near at hand, the ghastly warning boom from the deep throats of vessels heavily seeking inlet to the waterway below, answered by the echoing clangor of the bridge bells. A distant shriek grows nearer, more ominous, as the bells warn the living current from the swinging bridge and a vessel cuts for a moment the flow of the nearer artery. Closing then upon the great vessel’s stately passage the double bridge is just in time to receive in a rush of steam the avalanche of blood and metal hurled across it;—a streak of light gone roaring into the night on glittering bands of steel; an avalanche encircled in its flight by slen-
der magic lines, clicking faithfully from station to station—its nervous herald, its warning and its protection.
Nearer, in the building ablaze with midnight activity, a spotless paper band is streaming into the marvel of the multiple-press, receiving indelibly the impression of human hopes and fears, throbbing in the pulse of this great activity, as infallibly as the gray-matter of the human brain receives the impression of the senses. The impressions come forth as millions of neatly folded, perfected news-sheets, teeming with vivid appeals to good and evil passions;—weaving a web of intercommunication so far-reaching that distance becomes as nothing, the thought of one man in one corner of the earth on one day visible on the next to all men. The doings of all the world are reflected here as in a glass—so marvellously sensitive this simple band streaming endlessly from day to day becomes in the grasp of the multiple-press.
If the pulse of this great activity—automatons working night and day in every line of industry, to the power of which the tremor of the mammoth steel skeleton beneath your feet is but an awe-inspiring response—is thrilling, what of the prolific, silent obedience to man’s will underlying it all? If this power must be uprooted that civilization may live, then civilization is already doomed. Remain to contemplate this wonder until the twinkling lights perish in groups, or follow one by one, leaving others to live through the gloom;— fires are banked, tumult slowly dies to an echo here and there. Then the darkened pall is gradually lifted and moonlight outlines the shadowy, sullen masses of structure, structure deeply cut here and there by half-luminous channels. Huge patches of shadow in shade and darkness commingle mysteriously in the block-like plan with box-like skylines—contrasting strangely with the broad surface of the lake beside, placid and resplendent with a silver gleam. Remain, I say, to reflect that the texture of the city, this great Machine, is the warp upon which will be woven the woof and pattern of the Democracy we pray for. Realize that it has been deposited here, particle by particle, in blind obedience to law—Law no less organic so far as we are concerned than the laws of the great solar universe. That universe, too, in a sense, is but an obedient machine.
Magnificent power! And it confronts the young Architect and his Artist comrades now, with no other beauty—a lusty material giant without trace of ideality, absurdly disguised by garments long torn to tatters or contemp-
H
tuously tossed aside, outgrown. Within our own recollection we have all been horrified at the bitter cost of this ruthless development—appalled to see this great power driven by Greed over the innocent and defenseless—we have seen bread snatched from the mouths of sober and industrious men, honorable occupations going to the wall with a riot, a feeble strike, or a stifled moan, outclassed, outdone, outlived by the Machine. The workman himself has come to regard this relentless force as his Nemesis and combines against machinery in the trades with a wild despair that dashes itself to pieces, while the Artist blissfully dreaming in the halls we have just visited or walking blindly abroad in the paths of the past, berates his own people for lack-luster senses, rails against industrial conditions that neither afford him his opportunity, nor, he says, can appreciate him as he, panderer to ill-gotten luxury, folding his hands, starves to death. “Innocuous martyr upon the cross of Art!” One by one, tens by tens, soon thousands by thousands, handicraftsmen and parasitic artists succumb to the inevitable as one man at a Machine does the work of from five to fifty men in the same time, with all the Art there is meanwhile prostituting to old methods and misunderstood ideals the far greater new possibilities due to this same Machine, and doing this disgracefully in the name of the Beautiful!
American Society has the essential tool of its own age by the blade, as lacerated hands everywhere testify!
See the magnificent prowess of this unqualified power—strewing our surroundings with the mangled corpses of a happier time. We live amid ghostly relics whose pattern once stood for cultivated luxury and now stands for an ignorant matter of taste. With no regard for first principles of common sense the letter of Tradition is recklessly fed into rapacious maws of machines until the reproduction, reproduced ad nauseam, may be had for five, ten or ninety-nine cents although the worthy original cost ages of toil and patient culture. This might seem like progress, were it not for the fact that these butchered forms, the life entirely gone out of them, are now harmful parasites, belittling and falsifying any true perception of normal beauty the Creator may have seen fit to implant in us on our own account. Any idea whatever of fitness to purpose or of harmony between form and use is gone from us. It is lacking in these things one and all, because it is so sadly lacking in us. And as for making the best of our own conditions or repudiating the terms on which this vulgar
insult to Tradition is produced, thereby insuring and rectifying the industrial fabric thus wasted or enslaved by base imitation—the mere idea is abnormal, as I myself have found to my sorrow.
And among the Few, the favored chosen Few who love Art by nature and would devote their energies to it so that it may live and let them live— any training they can seek would still be a protest against the Machine as the Creator of all this iniquity, when (God knows) it is no more than the Creature.
But, I say, usurped by Greed and deserted by its natural interpreter, the Artist, the Machine is only the creature, not the Creator of this iniquity! I say the Machine has noble possibilities unwillingly forced to this degradation, degraded by the Arts themselves. Insofar as the true capacity of the Machine is concerned it is itself the crazed victim of Artist-impotence. Why will the American Artist not see that human thought in our age is stripping off its old form and donning another; why is the Artist unable to see that this is his glorious opportunity to create and reap anew?
But let us be practical—let us go now afield for evident instances of Machine abuse or abuse by the Machine. I will show you typical abuses that should serve to suggest to any mind, capable of thought, that the Machine is, to begin with, a marvellous simplifier in no merely negative sense. Come now, with me, and see examples which show that these craft-engines may be the modern emancipator of the creative mind. We may find them to be the regenerator of the creative conscience in our America, as well, so soon as a stultified “Culture” will allow them to be so used.
First—as perhaps wood is most available of home-building materials, naturally then the most abused—let us now glance at wood. Elaborate machinery has been invented for no other purpose than to imitate the wood-carving of early handicraft patterns. Result? No good joinery. None salable without some horrible glued-on botch-work meaning nothing, unless it means that “Art and Craft” (by salesmanship) has fixed in the minds of the masses the elaborate old hand-carved chair as ultimate ideal. The miserable tribute to this perversion yielded by Grand Rapids alone would mar the face of Art beyond repair, to say nothing of the weird or fussy joinery of spindles and jig-sawing, beamed, braced and elaborated to outdo in sentimentality the sentiment of some erstwhile overwrought “antique.” The beauty of wood
lies in its qualities as wood, strange as this may seem. Why does it take so much imagination—just to see that? Treatments that fail to bring out those qualities, foremost, are not 'plastic, therefore no longer appropriate. The inappropriate cannot be beautiful.
The Machine at work on wood will itself teach us—and we seem so far to have left it to the Machine to do so—that certain simple forms and handling serve to bring out the beauty of wood, and to retain its character, and that certain other forms and handling do not bring out its beauty, but spoil it. All wood-carving is apt to be a forcing of this material likely to destroy the finer possibilities of wood as we may know those possibilities now. In itself wood has beauty of marking, exquisite texture, and delicate nuances of color that carving is likely to destroy. The Machines used in woodwork will show that by unlimited power in cutting, shaping, smoothing, and by the tireless repeat, they have emancipated beauties of wood-nature, making possible, without waste, beautiful surface treatments and clean strong forms that veneers of Sheraton or Chippendale only hinted at with dire extravagance. Beauty unknown even to the Middle Ages. These machines have undoubtedly placed within reach of the designer a technique enabling him to realize the true nature of wood in his designs harmoniously with man’s sense of beauty, satisfying his material needs with such extraordinary economy as to put this beauty of wood in use within the reach of every one. But the advantages of the Machines are wasted and we suffer from a riot of aesthetic murder and everywhere live with debased handicraft.
Then, at random, let us take, say, the worker in marbles—his gang-saws, planers, pneumatic-chisels and rubbing-beds have made it possible to reduce blocks ten feet long, six feet deep, and two feet thick to sheets or thin slabs an inch in thickness within a few hours, so it is now possible to use a precious material as ordinary wall covering. The slab may be turned and matched at the edges to develop exquisite pattern, emancipating hundreds of superficial feet of characteristic drawing in pure marble colors that formerly wasted in the heart of a great expensive block in the thickness of the wall. Here again a distinctly new architectural use may bring out a beauty of marbles consistent with Nature and impossible to handicraft. But what happens? The “Artist” persists in taking dishonest advantage of this practice, building up imitations of solid piers with moulded caps and bases, cunningly uniting the slabs at the
edge until detection is difficult except to the trained eye. His method does not change to develop the beauty of a new technical possibility; no, the “Artist” is simply enabled to “fake” more architecture, make more piers and column shafts because he can now make them hollow! His architecture becomes no more worthy in itself than the cheap faker that he himself is, for his classical forms not only falsify the method which used to be and belie the method that is, but they cheat progress of its due. For convincing evidence see any Public Library or Art Institute, the Congressional Library at Washington, or the Boston Library.
In the stone-cutting trade the stone-planer has made it possible to cut upon stone any given moulded surface, or to ingrain upon that surface any lovely texture the cunning brain may devise, and do it as it never was possible to do it by hand. What is it doing? Giving us as near an imitation of hand toothchiselling as possible, imitating mouldings specially adapted to wood, making possible the lavish use of miles of meaningless moulded string courses, cornices, base courses—the giant power meanwhile sneered at by the “Artist” because it fails to render the wavering delicacy of “touch” resulting from the imperfections of hand-work.
No architect, this man! No—or he would excel that “antique” quality by the design of the contour of his sections, making a telling point of the very perfection he dreads, and so sensibly designing, for the prolific dexterity of the machine, work which it can do so well that hand-work would seem insufferably crude by comparison. The deadly facility this one machine has given “book architecture” is rivalled only by the facility given to it by galvanized iron itself. And if, incontinently, you will still have tracery in stone, you may arrive at acres of it now consistently with the economy of other features of this still fundamental “trade.” You may try to imitate the hand-carving of the ancients in this matter, baffled by the craft and tenderness of the originals, or you may give the pneumatic chisel and power-plane suitable work to do which would mean a changed style, a shift in the spiritual center of the ideal now controlling the use of stone in constructing modern stone-buildings.
You will find in studying the group of ancient materials, wood and stone foremost among them, that they have all been rendered fit for plastic use by the Machine! The Machine itself steadily making available for economic use the very quality in these things now needed to satisfy its own art equation.
Burned clay—we call it Terra Cotta—is another conspicuous instance of the advantage of the “process.” Modern machines (and a process is a machine) have rendered this material as sensitive to the creative brain as a dry plate is to the lens of the camera. A marvellous simplifier, this material, rightly used. The artist is enabled to clothe the steel structure, now becoming characteristic of this era, with modestly beautiful, plastic robes instead of five or more different kinds of material now aggregated in confused features and parts, “composed” and supposedly picturesque, but really a species of cheap millinery to be mocked and warped by the sun, eventually beaten by wind and rain into a variegated heap of trash. But when these great possibilities of simplicity, the gift of the Machine, get to us by way of the Architect, we have only a base imitation of the hand-tooled blocks—pilaster-cap and base, vous-soirs and carved spandrils of the laborious man-handled stonecrop of an ancient people’s architecture!
The modem processes of casting in metal are modern machines too, approaching perfection, capable of perpetuating the imagery of the most vividly poetic mind without hindrance—putting permanence and grace within reach of every one, heretofore forced to sit supine with the Italians at their Belshazzar-feast of “Renaissance.” Yes, without exaggeration, multitudes of processes, many new, more coming, await sympathetic interpretation, such as the galvano-plastic and its electrical brethren—a prolific horde, now cheap fakers imitating “real” bronzes and all manner of metallic antiques, secretly damning all of them in their vitals, if not openly giving them away. And there is electro-glazing, shunned because its straight lines in glasswork are too severely clean and delicate. Straight lines it seems are not so susceptible to the traditional designer’s lack of touch. Stream lines and straight lines are to him severely unbeautiful. “Curved is the line of beauty”—says he! As though Nature would not know what to do with its own rectilinear!
The familiar lithograph, too, is the prince of an entire province of new reproductive but unproductive processes. Each and every one have their individualities and therefore have possibilities of their own. See what Whistler made and the Germans are making of the lithograph:—one note sounded in the gamut of its possibilities. But that note rings true to process as the sheen of the butterfly’s wing to that wing. Yet, having fallen into disrepute, the most this particular “machine” did for us, until Whistler picked it up,
was to give us the cheap imitative effects of painting, mostly for advertising purposes. This is the use made of machinery in the abuse of materials by men. And still more important than all we have yet discussed here is the new element entering industry in this material we call steel. The structural necessity which once shaped Parthenons, Pantheons, Cathedrals, is fast being reduced by the Machine to a skeleton of steel or its equivalent, complete in itself without the Artist-Craftsman’s touch. They are now building Gothic Cathedrals in California upon a steel skeleton. Is it not easy to see that the myriad ways of satisfying ancient structural necessities known to us through the books as the art of building, vanish, become History? The mainspring of their physical existence now removed, their spiritual center has shifted and nothing remains but the impassive features of a dead face. Such is our “Classic” architecture.
For centuries this insensate or insane abuse of great opportunity in the name of Culture has made cleanly, strengthy and true simplicity impossible in Art or Architecture, whereas now we might reach the heights of creative Art. Rightly used the very curse Machinery puts upon handicraft should emancipate the artist from temptation to petty structural deceit and end this wearisome struggle to make things seem what they are not and can never be. Then the Machine itself, eventually, will satisfy the simple terms of its modern art equation as the ball of clay in the sculptor’s hand yields to his desire—ending forever this nostalgic masquerade led by a stultified Culture in the Name of Art.
Yes—though he does not know it, the Artist is now free to work his rational will with freedom unknown to structural tradition. Units of construction have enlarged, rhythms have been simplified and etherealized, space is more spacious and the sense of it may enter into every building, great or small. The Architect is no longer hampered by the stone arch of the Romans or by the stone beam of the Greeks. Why then does he cling to the grammatical phrases of those ancient methods of construction when such phrases are in his modern work empty lies, and himself an inevitable liar as well.
Already, as we stand today, the Machine has weakened the artist to the point of destruction and antiquated the craftsman altogether. Earlier forms of Art are by abuse all but destroyed. The whole matter has been reduced to mere pose. Instead of joyful creation we have all around about us poison-
ous tastes—foolish attitudes. With some little of the flame of the old love, and creditable but pitiful enthusiasm, the young artist still keeps on working, making miserable mischief with lofty motives: perhaps, because his heart has not kept in touch or in sympathy with his scientific brother’s head, being out of step with the forward marching of his own time.
Now, let us remember in forming this new Arts and Crafts Society at Hull House that every people has done its work, therefore evolved its Art as an expression of its own life, using the best tools; and that means the most economic and effective tools or contrivances it knew: the tools most successful in saving valuable human effort. The chattel slave was the essential tool of Greek civilization, therefore of its Art. We have discarded this tool and would refuse the return of the Art of the Greeks were slavery the terms of its restoration, and slavery, in some form, would be the terms. But in Grecian Art two flowers did find spiritual expression—the Acanthus and the Honeysuckle. In the Art of Egypt—similarly we see the Papyrus, the Lotus. In Japan the Chrysanthemum and many other flowers. The Art of the Occident has made no such sympathetic interpretation since that time, with due credit given to the English Rose and the French Fleur-de-Lys, and as things are now the West may never make one. But to get from some native plant an expression of its native character in terms of imperishable stone to be fitted perfectly to its place in structure, and without loss of vital significance, is one great phase of great Art. It means that Greek or Egyptian found a revelation of the inmost life and character of the Lotus and Acanthus in terms of Lotus or Acanthus Life. That was what happened when the Art of these people had done with the plants they most loved. This imaginative process is known only to the creative Artist. Conventionalization, it is called. Really it is the dramatizing of an object—truest “drama.” To enlarge upon this simple figure, as an Artist, it seems to me that this complex matter of civilization is itself at bottom some such conventionalizing process, or must be so to be successful and endure.
Just as any Artist-Craftsman, wishing to use a beloved flower for the stone capital of a column-shaft in his building must conventionalize the flower, that is, find the pattern of its life-principle in terms of stone as a material before he can rightly use it as a beautiful factor in his building, so education must take the natural man, to “civilize” him. And this great new power of
the dangerous Machine we must learn to understand and then learn to use as this valuable, “conventionalizing” agent. But in the construction of a Society as in the construction of a great building, the elemental conventionalizing process is dangerous, for without the inspiration or inner light of the true Artist—the quality of the flower—its very life—is lost, leaving a withered husk in the place of living expression.
Therefore, Society, in this conventionalizing process or Culture, has a task even more dangerous than has the Architect in creating his building forms, because instead of having a plant-leaf and a fixed material as ancient architecture had, we have a sentient man with a fluid soul. So without the inner light of a sound philosophy of Art (the Educator too, must now be Artist), the life of the man will be sacrificed and Society gain an automaton or a machine-made moron instead of a noble creative Citizen!
If education is doomed to fail in this process, utterly—then the man slips back to rudimentary animalism or goes on into decay. Society degenerates or has a mere realistic creature instead of the idealistic creator needed. The world will have to record more “great dead cities.”
To keep the Artist-figure of the flower dramatized for human purposes—the Socialist would bow his neck in altruistic submission to the “Harmonious” whole; his conventionalization or dramatization of the human being would be like a poor stone-craftsman’s attempt to conventionalize the beloved plant with the living character of leaf and flower left out. The Anarchist would pluck the flower as it grows and use it as it is for what it is—with essential reality left out.
The Hereditary Aristocrat has always justified his existence by his ability, owing to fortunate propinquity, to appropriate the flower to his own uses after the craftsman has given it life and character, and has kept the craftsman too by promising him his flower back if he behaves himself well. The Plutocrat does virtually the same thing by means of “interests.” But the true Democrat will take the human plant as it grows and—in the spirit of using the means at hand to put life into his conventionalization—preserve the individuality of the plant to protect the flower, which is its very life, getting from both a living expression of essential man-character fitted perfectly to a place in Society with no loss of vital significance. Fine Art is this flower of the Man. When Education has become creative and Art again prophetic of the natu-
ral means by which we are to grow—we call it “progress”—we will, by means of the Creative Artist, possess this monstrous tool of our civilization as it now
possesses us.
Grasp and use the power of scientific automatons in this creative sense and their terrible forces are not antagonistic to any fine individualistic quality in man. He will find their collective mechanistic forces capable of bringing to the individual a more adequate life, and the outward expression of the inner man as seen in his environment will be genuine revelation of his inner life and higher purpose. Not until then will America be free!
This new American Liberty is of the sort that declares man free only when he has found his work and effective means to achieve a life of his own. The means once found, he will find his due place. The man of our country will thus make his own way, and grow to the natural place thus due him, promised —yes, promised by our charter, the Declaration of Independence. But this place of his is not to be made over to fit him by reform, nor shall it be brought down to him by concession, but will become his by his own use of the means at hand. He must himself build a new world. The day of the individual is not over—instead, it is just about to begin. The Machine does not write the doom of Liberty, but is waiting at man’s hand as a peerless tool, for him to use to put foundations beneath a genuine Democracy. Then the Machine may conquer human drudgery to some purpose, taking it upon itself to broaden, lengthen, strengthen and deepen the life of the simplest man. What limits do we dare imagine to an Art that is organic fruit of an adequate life for the individual! Although this power is now murderous, chained to botch-work and bunglers’ ambitions, the creative Artist will take it surely into his hand and, in the name of Liberty, swiftly undo the deadly mischief it has created.
Here ends the early discourse on the Art and Craft of the Machine.
You may find comfort in the reflection that Truth and Liberty have this invincible excellence, that all man does for them or does against them eventually serves them equally well. That fact has comforted me all the intervening years between the first reading of the foregoing discourse and this reading at Princeton . . . the last reading, for I shall never read it again. Tomorrow afternoon there will be—I am afraid—heavy matter also because
the question of qualifying the “Machine-made” in American Industries by human elements of Style will be, in detail, our subject. There may be matter more subjective and difficult but I do not know what it may be.
It will be necessary for us all to give close attention and considerable thought to the subject, “Style in Industry.” We shall see that any hope of such style will mean a crusade against the Styles.
2: STYLE IN INDUSTRY
WINSLOW HOUSE
FIRST BUILDING BY FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT. BRICK WAINSCOTE. MODELLED FRIEZE. TILE ROOF. STONE WASHES AND WATER TABLE. 1893-1894.
2: STYLE IN INDUSTRY
WHERE certain remarks I have made concern Nature and Romance W on the one hand, and the Machine upon the other, I am accused of inconsistency—also in several or seven different languages. But if the word Nature, and the word Romance too, are understood in the sense that each is used we can find little to correct, although the last analysis is never to be made.
The Machine is that mathematical automaton or automatic power contrived in brass and steel by men, not only to take the place of man-power, but to multiply man-power—the brainless craftsman of a new social order. Primarily the word Nature means the principle at work in everything that lives and gives to Life its form and character. All lives, so we may refer to the Nature of Two Plus Two Equals Four, if we like, or to the Nature of Tin, or to the Nature of a Disease or of the Chromatic Seventh. The word has nothing to do with realistic or realism, but refers to the essential Reality of all things—so far as we may perceive Reality. We cannot conceive Life, we do not know what it is, but we can perceive the Nature of its consequences and effects and so enter into creation with some intelligence. If we have occasion to refer to the visible world we will use the term “External Nature.” The word “Organic” too, if taken too biologically, is a stumbling-block. The word applies to “living” structure—a structure or concept wherein features or parts are so organized in form and substance as to be, applied to purpose, integral. Everything that “lives” is therefore organic. The inorganic—the “unorganized”—cannot live.
While we are at the, perhaps unnecessary, pains of explaining, let us say also what we should understand by Romance. True Romanticism in Art is after all only Liberalism in Art, and is so understood, I believe, by all great Poets. Romance is the essential joy we have in living, as distinguished from mere pleasure; therefore we want no narrow conventions, as preventions, to rise up from small minds and selfish hands, no intolerant “modes” to grow up in the Modern World; it is to be our privilege to build up on new fertile ground. Yes, we are to build in the Arts upon this great ground fertilized by the old civilizations—a new Liberty.
We, so beset by educational advantages as are Americans, cannot say too often to ourselves or others that “Toleration and Liberty are the foundations of this great Republic.” We should keep it well in the foreground of our minds and as a hope in our hearts that Liberty in Art as well as Liberty in Society should be, and therefore must be, the offspring of political liberty.
Then to us all, so-minded, let the Artist come. He has a Public. And as we have already seen in “Machinery, Materials and Men,” the Artist now has both the “Making and the Means.” Let him arise in our Industry. For a New People a New Art!
Liberty, however, is no friend to License. So, for our text in connection with difficult “Style in Industry,” for due reference to authority suppose we again go far back in history—again to avoid all contradiction—this time to the birth of Old Japan—and there, to safeguard Liberty, take for text, simply, “An Artist’s Limitations are his best friends,” and dedicate that text to Jimmu Tenno.
At least the ancient civilization of his slowly sinking stretch of pendulous island, arising from the sea in the snows of perpetual winter and reaching all the way South to perpetual summer, affords best proof of the text anywhere to be found. “Limitations,” in this sense, were, I take it, those of materials, tools and specific purpose.
In Jimmu’s Island perfect Style in Industry was supreme and native until “Japan” was discovered within range of our own Commodore Perry’s guns. That Western contacts have destroyed this early Style—if not the industry— only enhances the value of that early Style. Certainly, the Arts and Crafts, as developed in Nippon during her many centuries of isolation in happy concentration, afford universal object lessons incomparable in Style.
Industry and Style there—before the “peaceful” commercial invasion by the West—were supremely natural. Nor in Jimmu Tenno’s time was there anywhere to be found separate and contrasted existence between Art and Nature. Nowhere else in the world can we so clearly see this nor so well inform ourselves in considering this matter of Style in our own native automatic industries. This notwithstanding the fact that our industries are conditioned upon automatic acquiescence of men instead of upon the craftsmanship of the man. By giving our attention to the ease and naturalness with which things Japanese originally achieved Style, we may learn a valuable lesson.
Our Industry must educate designers instead of making craftsmen—for our Craftsmen are Machines, craftsmen ready-made, efficient and obedient. So far as they go—mechanical power stripped clean. How to get these formidable craft-engines the work to do they may do well? Then, beyond mechanical skill, the cadences of form?
The first answer will seem generalization beyond any immediate mark, for that answer is—by means of Imagination. Imagination superior and supreme. Supreme Imagination is what makes the creative Artist now just as it made one then. And Imagination is what will make the needed designer for Industry now—no less than then or ever before. But, strange to say, it is of the true quality of great Imagination that it can see wood as wood, steel as steel, glass as glass, stone as stone, and make limitations its best friends. This is what Jimmu Tenno’s busy people proved so thoroughly well and what may be so useful to us to realize. Our Machine-Age Limitations are more severe and more cruelly enforced than limitations were in this severely disciplined Island-Empire of Japan. Nevertheless, though more difficult in important ways, in other more important directions, we have marvellously more opportunity than ever Japan had.
Principles which made the Art and Craft of Old Japan a living thing— living, that is, for Old Japan—will work as well now as then. The same principles in Art and Craft either of the East or the West, wherever similar truths of being went into effect with some force in the lives of their peoples, need no change now. Secrets of cause and effect in work and materials in relation to Life as lived are the same for the coming designer for Machines as they were for the bygone Craftsman designers. But when a man becomes a part of the machine that he moves—the man is lost.
We Americans, too, do live—in a way—do we not? But we differ. We do live and, notwithstanding all differences, our souls yet have much in common with all souls. The principles, therefore, on which we must work our modern style for ourselves will not change the while our interpretation and applications will utterly change. Results in American industry will be simpler, broader, more a matter of texture and sublimated mathematics as music is sublimated mathematics; therefore our designs will be more subjective than before. Our applications will be more generalized but our derivations not more limited than in the days of ancient handicraft.
Provided the limitations of any given problem in the Arts do not destroy each other by internal collision and so kill opportunity, limitations are no detriment to Artist endeavor. It is largely the Artist’s business—all in his day’s work-—to see that the limitations do not destroy each other. That is to say, it is up to him to get proper tools, proper materials for proper work. Speaking for myself, it would be absurd if not impossible to take advantage of the so-called “free-hand.” To “Idealize” in the fanciful sketch is a thing unknown to me. Except as I were given some well defined limitations or requirements—the more specific the better—there would be no problem, nothing to work with, nothing to work out; why then trouble the Artist? Perhaps that is why “Fairs” are so universally uncreative and harmful—the hand is too free, the quality of imagination, therefore, too insignificant.
No,—not until American industrial designers have grown up to the point where they have known and made friends with the limitations characteristic of their job, will America have any Style in Industry. What are these limitations?
Automatic industrial fabrication is not the least of them. But—to reiterate from the matter of our first chapter, “Machinery, Materials and Men” —the American designers’ hope lies in the fact that as a consequence of the automaton, already machinery can do many desirable things, “by hand” prohibited or impossible. Now, mixed up with “Machinery, Materials and Men,” in our first chapter, was the word Plasticity used as Machine-aesthetic in modern designing for wood-working, stone-work, metal-casting and reproductive processes. Some practical suggestions were made to indicate how and wherein this new “aesthetic” which the machine has given to us may enable the Artist to make new use of old materials, and new use of new materials instead of making abuse of both.
“Plasticity” is of utmost importance. The word implies total absence of constructed effects as evident in the result. This important word, “Plastic,” means that the quality and nature of materials are seen “flowing or growing” into form instead of seen as built up out of cut and joined pieces. “Composed” is the academic term for this academic process in furniture. “Plastic” forms, however, are not “composed” nor set up. They, happily, inasmuch as they are produced by a “growing” process, must be developed . . . created. And to shorten this discourse we may as well admit that if we go far enough
to find cause in any single industry like furniture for this matter of Style, we will have the secret of origin and growth of Style in any or in all industries. After getting so far, there would come only specialization in differences of materials and machinery in operation.
Repeatedly and freely too we are to use this word Style—but if intelligently, what, then, is Style? Be sure of one thing in any answer made to the question —Style has nothing to do with “the” Styles! “The Great Styles” we call them. “Styles” have been tattered, torn and scattered to the four winds and all the breezes that blow between them as a form of mechanical corruption in industry, and yet, we have no Style. The more “Styles” in fact, the less Style, unless by accident—nor anything very much resembling the stimulating quality. Our designers for various industries—still busy, unfortunately, trying to imitate “Styles” instead of studying the principles of Style intelligently— are at the moment jealously watching France as they see her products go from Wanamaker’s on down the Avenue and out along the highways of these United States as far as the Pacific Ocean. And yet, if you will take pains to compare the best of French products, say in textiles, with the products of the ancient Momoyama of Japan you will see the industrial ideas of Old Japan at work in New French Industry as direct inspiration. The French product is not Japanese and nearly all of the textiles are within the capacity of the Machine; most of the product is good. But France, in all her moments of movement in Art and Craft, and no less at this “Modern” moment in this “modernistic” particular, helps herself liberally if not literally from Japanese sources, and creditably. She it was who discovered the Japanese Print by way of the De Goncourts. That discovery bore significant fruit in French Painting. And there are more valuable brochures in the French language on the Art of Japan in all its phases available for reference than in all other languages put together, the Japanese language included. France, the inveterate discoverer, must discover “l’esprit de l’art Japonais—a la Japon,” to her great honor be it said. Holland arrived at Nagasaki first, but France is probably further along today in profitable industrial results in present arts and crafts from the revelations she found when she got to Yedo by way of Yokohama than is any other country, Austria excepted—unless our own country should soon prove formidable exception.
This does not mean that France or Austria copies Japan or that America may do so. It does mean that France is, only now, beginning to do approximately well what Japan did supremely well four centuries ago in the great Momo-yama period of her development—yes, about four hundred years ago!
Any principle is fertile, perhaps it is fertility itself! If its application is once understood in any branch of design, it will go on blooming indefinitely, co-ordinately, in as many different schools and schemes as there are insects, or in forms as varied as the flowers themselves, or for that matter be as prolific of pattern as the fishes or the flora of the sea.
We should, were we going into the matter at length, get to Nature-forms later on as the best of all references for the working of the principles we are here seeking, and I should have preferred to go to them at once as is my habit. But for the purposes of this hour I have preferred Tradition because Japan has already done, in her own perfect way, what now lies for study before us. And I believe it well to know what humanity has accomplished in the direction we must take, if we are strong enough to profit by Tradition— the spirit or principle—and leave Traditions—the letter, or form—alone, as not our own. Even so, having finished with Tradition, we will still have before us and forever, as an open book of creation, that natural appeal to the Nature-court of Last Resort.
Remember, however, that long before France rationalized and vitalized her industries, during the period when she was still sickened and helpless in the serpentine coils of L’Art Nouveau, (derived from her own deadly Rococo), youjnay find in the “Secession” of Middle Europe an application earlier than the present application by France of the vital principles we are discussing on behalf of our subject.
1 came upon the Secession during the winter of 1910. At that time Herr Professor Wagner, of Vienna, a great architect, the architect Olbrich, of Darmstadt, the remarkable painter Klimt of Austria and the sculptor Metz-ner of Berlin—great artists all—were the soul of that movement. And there was the work of Louis Sullivan and of myself in America. Many Europeans accounted for this Secession—their own early contribution to Modern Art— as a “Mohammedan Renaissance.” (It was natural by that time to believe in nothing but some kind of Renaissance.) But later, when the Secession— though frowned upon by the Royal Academies—was in full swing in the
products of the Wiener Werkstatte, seen today similarly in the products of French Art and Craft, we find the Ancient Art and Craft of Japan’s great Momoyama often approximated in effect.
Nothing at this “Modern” moment could be more ungracious nor arouse more contumacious “edge” than thus looking the “gift horse” or the “modernistic” in the teeth. Nevertheless, I believe it valuable to our future to raise this unpopular issue.
Artists, even great ones, are singularly ungrateful to sources of inspiration— among lesser artists ingratitude amounts to phobia. No sooner does the lesser artist receive a lesson or perceive an idea or even receive the Objects of Art from another source, than he soon becomes anxious to forget the suggestion, conceal the facts, or, if impossible to do this, to minimize, by detraction, the “gift.” And as Culture expands, we soon, too soon, deny outright the original sources of our inspiration as a suspected reproach to our own superiority. This you may quite generally find in the Modern Art World. At this moment in our development Japan particularly is thus the “great insulted.” Cowardly evasion seems unworthy of great artists or great causes, and certainly is no manner in which to approach great matter for the future. Ignorance of origins is no virtue—nor to keep fresh thought ill-advised concerning them. So let us pursue still further this quest as to what is Style by digging at the root of this ancient culture where I imagine there was more fertile ground and the workman had severer discipline than he ever had anywhere else in the world. Thus we may interpret a ready-made record that is unique. Let us study for a moment the Japanese dwelling, this humble dwelling that is a veritable sermon on our subject, “Style in Industry.”
It became what it is owing to a religious admonition. “Be Clean!” “Be Clean” was the soul of Shinto—Jimmu Tenno’s own ancient form of worship. Shinto spoke not of a good man, nor spoke of a moral man, but spoke of a clean man. Shinto spoke not only of clean hands, but of a clean heart. “Be Clean” was the simple cry from the austere soul of Shinto. Japanese Art heard the cry, and therefore posterity has one primitive instance where a remarkably simple religious edict or ideal made Architecture, Art and Craftsmanship the cleanest, in every sense, of all clean workmanship the world over.
This simple ideal of cleanliness, held by a whole people, came to abhor waste as matter out of place, saw it as ugly—therefore as what we call “dirt.”
Here you have a kind of spiritual ideal of natural and hence organic, simplicity. Consequently all Japanese Art with its imaginative exuberance and organic elegance (no fem-frond freshly born ever had more) was a practical study in elimination of the insignificant. All phases of Art Expression in the Momoyama period were organic. There was no great and no small Art. But there lived the profound Sotatzu, the incomparable Korin, the brilliant Kenzan and their vital schools, as, later in the Ukioyé, we find Kiyonobu, Toyonobu, Harunobu, Kiyonaga, Utamaro, Hokusai and Hiroshigé—a small student group gathered about each—all springing from the industrial soil thus fertilized by the school of the great Momoyama Masters. Instinctive sense of organic quality qualified them as Artists, all. Again, a kind of spiritual gift of significance. Here, as a saving grace in one civilization on Earth, feeling for significance, simplicity in Art was born, becoming soon an ideal naturally attained by organic means. Here, in this “Plastic-ideal” attained by organic means, we touch the secret of great Style. Wood they allowed to be wood, of course. Metal they allowed—even encouraged—to be metal. Stone was never asked to be less or more than stone. Nor did the designer of that day try to make any thing in materials or processes something other than itself. Here is a sound first principle that will go far to clear our encumbered ground for fresh growth in “Art in industry.”
Also the modern process of standardizing, as we now face it on every side, sterilized by it, prostrate to it, was in Japan known and practised with artistic perfection by freedom of choice many centuries ago, in this dwelling we are considering. The removable (for cleaning) floor mats or “tatami” of Japanese buildings were all of one size, 3' 0" by 6' 0". The shape of all the houses was determined by the size and shape of assembled mats. The Japanese speak of a nine, eleven, sixteen or thirty-four mat house. All the sliding interior partitions occur on the joint lines of the mats. The “odeau”—polished wood posts that carry ceilings and roof—all stand at intersections of the mats. The light sliding paper shoji or outside wall-screens are likewise removable—for cleaning. The plan for any Japanese dwelling was an effective study in sublimated mathematics. And the house itself was used by those who themselves made it for themselves with the same naturalness with which a turtle uses his shell. Consider too that, “Be Clean”—“the simplest way without waste”—was dignified as ceremonial in Old Japan. The ceremonies of that ancient day
were no more than the simple offices of daily life raised to the dignity of works of Art. True culture, therefore. Ceremonials, too, it seems, may be organic, integral though symbolic. For instance what is the important tea-ceremony of the Japanese but the most graciously perfect way, all considered, of serving a cup of tea to respected or beloved guests? Grace and elegance, as we may see—of the thing itself—organic elegance. Not on it Greek-wise as the “elegant solution.” It was in easy, simple, spontaneous expression of Nature that the Japanese were so perfect—contenting themselves with humble obedience to Nature-law.
Naturally enough, Disorder, too, in this “clean” house built by Jimmu Tenno’s people is in the same category as dirt. So everything large or little of everyday use, even the works of Art for humble and profound admiration, have appropriate place when in use and are carefully put away into safe keeping when not in use.
All designed for kneeling on soft mats on the floor you say? Yes—but the same ideal, in principle, would work out just as well on one’s feet.
With this Shipto ideal of “Be Clean” in mind the Japanese dwelling in every structural member and fibre of its being means something fine, has genuine significance and straightway does that something with beautiful effect. Art, for once, is seen to be supremely natural.
Yes—here is definite root of Style in Industry. Also in every other country and period where Style developed as genuine consequence of natural or ethnic character, similar proofs may be found as to the origin of Style. Today, it seems to me, we hear this cry “Be Clean” from the depths of our own need. It is almost as though the Machine itself had, by force, issued edict similar to Shinto—“Be Clean.” Clean lines—clean surfaces—clean purposes. As swift as you like, but clean as the flight of an arrow. When this edict inspires organic results and not the mere picture-making that curses so-called “Modernism,” we will here find the basic elements of Style in our own Industry to be the same by machine as they were by hand back there in the beginning of the history of a unique civilization. To give this edict of the Machine human significance there is the command of the creative Artist to keep a grip upon the earth in use of the architectural planes parallel to Earth, and to make new materials qualify the new forms of the new methods, so that all is warmly and significantly human in the result. The Human equation is the
Art equation in it all. “Clean,” in human sense, does not mean “plain” but it does mean significant. Nor does it mean hard, nor mechanical nor mechanistic, nor that a man or a house or a chair or a child is a machine, except in the same sense that our own hearts are suction pumps.
Style in our industries will come out of similar, natural, “clean” use of machines upon “clean” material, with similar, unaffected, heartfelt simplicity instead of head-made simplicity. The nature of both machine and material for human use must be understood and mastered so they may be likewise in our case plastic interpretations by great Imagination. We will learn how to use both Machinery and Materials and perhaps Men as well in the coming century. But we must learn how to use them all not only for qualities they possess in themselves, but to use each so that they may be beautifully as well as scientifically related to human purpose in whatever form or function we humanly choose to put them. Then let us take all as much further along beyond the implications of “Be Clean,” as our superior advantages in aesthetics permit.
To get nearer to the surface. We started to speak of textiles: having during the discourse of our first chapter touched upon woodworking, stonework and metalworking, let us now go back for a moment to the Rodier fabrics for an example of present-day, successful design for the loom. Textures, infinite in variety, are the natural product of the loom. Pattern is related to, and is the natural consequence of, the mechanics of these varying textures. Large, flat patterns involved with textures, textures qualifying them or qualified by them, picturesque but with no thought of a picture, as in this product, are entirely modern in the best sense. And I would emphasize for you, in this connection, the fact that the ancient Art we have just been interpreting was never, in any phase of its industries, ruined by childish love of the picture. The “picture” sense in Art and Craft came in with the Renaissance, as one consequence of the insubordination of the Arts that disintegrated Architecture as the great Art. And before we can progress in our own Machine products as Art, we, too, will have to dispose of the insufferable insubordination of the picture. Summarily, if need be. I should like to strike the pictorial deathblow in our Art and Craft. Of course I do not mean the picturesque.
Because of this insubordination of the picture few tapestries except the “Mille-fleurs” (and then very early ones) exist as good textile designs on ac-
count of the complex shading essential to the foolish picture as designed by the undisciplined painter. The insubordination of painting, setting up shop on its own account, divorced from Architecture, (Architecture being the natural framework and background of all ancient, as it will be of any future, civilization), has cursed every form of Art endeavor whatsoever with similar abuses of the -pictorial. “Toujours la peinture,” ad libitum, ad nauseam—the picture. We live in the Pictorial Age. We do not have childlike imagery in simplicity but are “childish” in Art, and whatever form our great Art and Craft in future may take, one thing it will not be, and that thing is “Pictorial.” Even a Japanese Print, the popular form of imagery illustrating the popular life of Japan in all its phases, as the French well know, never degenerated to the mere picture. Let us be thankful that the Machine by way of the camera today takes the pictorial upon itself as a form of literature. This gratifying feat has, already, made great progress in the cinematograph. Let the Machine have it, I say, on those terms and keep it active there and serviceable in illustration as well, for what it may be worth—and it is worth much.But let us henceforth consider Literature and the Picture as one—eliminating both from the horizon of our Art and Craft—and for all time.
Let us now, in passing, glance at Glassmaking: the Leerdam glass products for which artists are employed to make designs upon a royalty basis, similar to authors writing for publishers, then the special Art of Lalique, and finally, the great, clear plates of our own commercial industry, the gift of the Machine, . . . great glass sheets to be cut up and used with no thought of beauty, valuable only because of their usefulness.
Here again let us insist that the same principle applies to glass as to wood, stone, metal or the textiles just mentioned. But how far variety may go can be seen in the range of the Holland product from the simple glass-blown forms of De Basle, Copius and Berlage at Leerdam to the virtuosity of French pieces by the genius Lalique. Certain characteristics of glass are properties of these designs: a piece by Lalique, being specialized handicraft, is useful as indicating the super-possibilities of glass as a beautiful material. Concerning our own “commercial” contribution (contributions so far are all “commercial”) to glass—glass, once a precious substance, limited in quantity, costly in any size—the glass industry has grown so that a perfect clarity in any thickness, quality or dimension up to 250 square feet from 1/8"
in thickness to 1 /%" thick, is so cheap and desirable that our modern world is drifting towards structures of glass and steel.
The whole history of Architecture would have been radically different had the ancients enjoyed any such grand privileges in this connection as are ours. The growing demand for sunshine and visibility make walls—even posts—something to get rid of at any cost. Glass did this. Glass alone, with no help from any of us, would eventually have destroyed Classic Architecture, root and branch.
Glass has now a perfect visibility, thin sheets of air crystallized to keep air currents outside or inside. Glass surfaces, too, may be modified to let the vision sweep through to any extent up to perfection. Tradition left no orders concerning this material as a means of perfect visibility; hence the sense of glass as crystal has not, as poetry, entered yet into Architecture. All the dignity of color and material available in any other material may be discounted by glass in light, and discounted with permanence.
Shadows were the “brush-work” of the ancient Architect. Let the “Modern” now work with light, light diffused, light reflected, light refracted—light for its own sake, shadows gratuitous. It is the Machine that makes modern these rare new opportunities in Glass—new experience that Architects so recent as the great Italian forebears, plucked even of their shrouds, frowning upon our “Renaissance,” would have considered magical. They would have thrown down their tools with the despair of the true Artist. Then they would have transformed their cabinets into a realm, their halls into bewildering vistas and avenues of light—their modest units into unlimited wealth of color patterns and delicate forms, rivalling the frostwork upon the window-panes, perhaps. They were creative enough to have found a world of illusion and brilliance, with jewels themselves only modest contributions to the splendor of their effects. And yet somehow Palladio, Vitruvius, Vignola, seem very dead, far away and silent in this connection, Bramante and Brunelleschi not so far, nor Sansovino, though we must not forget that the great Italians were busy working over ancient forms. There was Buonarroti. Where should he be in all this, I wonder?
The Prism has always fascinated man. We may now live in prismatic buildings, clean, beautiful and New. Here is one clear “material” proof of modern
advantage, for Glass is uncompromisingly Modern. Yes—Architecture is soon to live anew because of Glass and Steel.
And so we might go on to speak truly of nearly all our typical modern industries at work upon materials with Machinery. We could go on and on until we were all worn out and the subject would be still bright and new, there are so many industrial fields—so much machinery, so many processes, such riches in new materials.
We began this discussion of Art in Industry by saying, “Toleration and Liberty are the foundations of a great Republic.” Now let the Artist come. Well —let him come into this boundless new realm so he be a Liberal, hating only Intolerance and especially his own. As said at the beginning of this discourse, true Romanticism in Art is after all only Liberalism in Art. This quality in the Artist is the result of an inner experience and it is the essential poetry of the creative Artist that his exploring brother, tabulating the Sciences, seems never quite able to understand nor wholly respect. He distrusts that quality in life itself.
But the sense of Romance cannot die out of human hearts. Science itself is bringing us to greater need of it and unconsciously giving greater assurance of it at every step. Romance is shifting its center now, as it has done before and will do constantly—but it is immortal. Industry will only itself become and remain a Machine without it.
Our Architecture itself would become a poor, flat-faced thing of steel-bones, box-outlines, gas-pipe and hand-rail fittings—as sun-receptive as a concrete sidewalk or a glass tank without this essential heart beating in it. Architecture, without it, could inspire nothing, and would degenerate to a box merely to contain “Objets d’Art”—objects it should itself create and maintain. So beware! The Artist who condemns Romance is only a foolish reactionary. Such good sense as the Scientist or Philosopher in the disguise of “Artist” may have is not creative, although it may be corrective. Listen therefore and go back with what you may learn, to live and be true to Romance.
Again—there is no good reason why Objects of Art in Industry, because they are made by Machines in the Machine Age, should resemble the machines that made them, or any other machinery whatever. There might be excellent reason why they should not resemble machinery. There is no good reason why forms stripped clean of all considerations but function and utility should be
admirable beyond that point: they may be abominable from the human standpoint, but there is no need for them to be so in the Artist’s hands.
The negation naturally made by the Machine, gracefully accepted now, may, for a time, relieve us of sentimental abortion and abuse, but it cannot inspire and recreate humanity beyond that point. Inevitably the negation proceeds upon its own account to other abuses and abortions, even worse than sentimentality. Again, let us have no fears of Liberalism in Art in our Industries, but encourage it with new understanding, knowing at last that the term Romanticism never did apply to make-believe or falsifying, except as it degenerated to the artificiality that maintained the Renaissance.
The facts confronting us are sufficiently bare and hard. The taste for mediocrity in our country grows by what it feeds on.
Therefore the public of this Republic will, more than ever now, find its love of commonplace elegance gratified either by the sentimentality of the “ornamental” or the sterility of ornaphobia. The Machine Age, it seems, is either to be damned by senseless sentimentality or to be sterilized by a factory aesthetic. Nevertheless, I believe that Romance—this quality of the heart, the essential joy we have in living—by human imagination of the right sort can be brought to life again in Modern Industry. Creative Imagination may yet convert our prosaic problems to poetry while modem Rome howls and the eyebrows of the Pharisees rise.
And probably not more than one-fifth of the American public will know what is meant by the accusation, so frequently made in so many different languages, that the American is uncreative, four-fifths of the accused pointing to magnificent machinery and stupendous scientific accomplishment to refute the impeachment. So while we are digesting the nationalities speaking those same languages within our borders, such Culture as we have in sight must assist itself with intelligence to materialize for Americans out of everyday common places—and transcend the commonplace.
So finally, a practical suggestion as to ways and means to grow our own Style in Industry.
The Machine, as it exists in every important trade, should without delay be put, by way of capable Artist interpreters, into student hands—for them, at
first, to play with and, later, with which to work. Reluctantly I admit that to put the Machine, as the modern tool of a great civilization, to any extent into the hands of a body of young students, means some kind of school—and naturally such school would be called an Art School, but one in which the Fine Arts would be not only allied to the Industries they serve, but would stand there at the center of an industrial hive of characteristic industry as inspiration and influence in design-problems.
Sensitive, unspoiled students (and they may yet be found in this unqualified machine that America is becoming) should be put in touch with commercial industry in what we might call Industrial “Style” Centers, workshops equipped with modern machinery, connected perhaps with our universities, but endowed by the industries themselves, where the students would remain domiciled working part of the day in the shop itself.
Machinery-using crafts making useful things might through such Experiment Centers discover possibilities existing in the Nature of their craft—which the present industries know nothing about and might never discover for themselves. In such a school it would be the turn of the Fine Arts to serve Machinery in order that Machinery might better serve them and all together better serve a beauty-loving and appreciative United States.
Let us say that seven branches of Industrial Arts be taken for a beginning (a number should be grouped together for the reason that they react upon one another to the advantage of each). Let us name Glassmaking, Textiles, Pottery, Sheet Metals, Woodworking, Casting in Metal, Reproduction. Each Industry so represented should be willing to donate machinery and supply a competent machinist and to a certain extent endow its own craft, provided such industries were certain of proper management under safe auspices, and assured of a share in results which would be directly theirs—sharing either in benefit of designs or presently in designers themselves, both adapted to their particular field.
Such Experiment Centers intelligently conducted could do more to nationalize and vitalize our industries than all else, and soon would make them independent of France, Austria or any other country, except as instruction by international example from all countries would help work out our own forms. There is no reason why an Experiment Center of this character, each Center confined to forty students or less, should not make its own living and produce
valuable articles to help in “carrying-on.” As compared with the less favorably circumstanced factories, and owing to the Artists at the head of the group, each article would be of the quality of a work of Art and so be a genuine missionary wherever it went.
Such a school should be in the country, on sufficient land so that three hours a day of physical work on the soil would insure the living of the students and the resident group of seven artist workers, themselves the head of the student group. There would remain, say, seven hours of each day for forty-seven individuals in which to unite in production. A well directed force of this sort would very soon have considerable producing power. Thus belonging to the school each month there would be beautifully useful or usefully beautiful things ready for market and influence—stuffs, tapestries, table-linen, new cotton fabrics, table glassware, flower holders, lighting devices, window glass, mosaics, necklaces, screens, iron standards, fixtures, gates, fences, fire irons, enamelled metals for house or garden purposes, cast metal sculpture for gardens, building-hardware. All sorts of industrial art in aluminum, copper, lead, tin. Practical flower-pots, architectural flower containers on large scale, water jars, pots and sculpture. Paintings for decoration suitable for reproduction and designs for new media—for process-reproductions. Modern music, plays, rhythm, designs for farm buildings, the characteristic new problems like the gasoline station, the refreshment stand, food distribution, town and country cottages and objects for their furnishings, and factories, too, of various sorts.
The station might broadcast itself. Issue brochures, illustrated by itself, of pertinent phases of its work. Devote a branch to landscape studies on conservation and planting and town-planning. In short, the station would be a hive of inspired industry. Architecture, without hesitation, or equivocation, should be the broad essential background of the whole endeavor—again strong in Modem life as it ever was in Ancient times. It is logical to say that again it must be the background and framework of civilization. Such stations or centers could be alcoves in connection with standard University courses in the History of Art, Architecture and Archaeology. And it would not matter where the centers were located, were they sufficiently isolated in beautiful country. They should not be too easy of access.
No examinations, graduations or diplomas. But so soon as a student worker showed special competence in any branch of industry he would be available as teacher in the university or for a place in that industry, manufacturers who were contributors to the school having first right to use him or her. The body of inspirational talent and the trade machinists should be of such character that outside students would enjoy and seek points of contact with the work going on at the school—helpful to them and to the school as well.
I believe the time has come when Art must take the lead in Education because Creative Faculty is now, as ever, the birthright of Man—the quality that has enabled him to distinguish himself from the brute. Through tricks played upon himself by what he proudly styles his intellect, turning all experience into arrogant abstractions and applying them as such by systems of education, he has all but sterilized himself. Science has been tried and found to be only a body. Science, and Philosophy, too, have known but little of those inner experiences of the soul we call Art and Religion.
This creative faculty in man is that quality or faculty in him of getting himself born into whatever he does, and born again and again with fresh patterns as new problems arise. By means of this faculty he has the Gods if not God. A false premium has been placed by Education upon Will and Intellect. Imagination is the instrument by which the force in him works its miracles. Now—how to get back again to men and cultivate the creative quality in Man is the concern of such centers as here suggested. What more valuable step looking toward the future could any great institution take than to initiate such little Experiment Stations in out of the way places, where the creative endeavor of the whole youth is coordinate with the Machinery, and where the technique of his time is visible at work, so that youth may win back again the creative factor as the needed vitalizing force in Modem life?
We know, now, that creative Art cannot be taught. We know, too, that individual creative impulse is the salt and savour of the natural ego as well as the fruit and triumph of any struggle we call work. Civilization without it can only die a miserable death. To degrade and make hypocritical this quality of the individual by imposing mediocrity upon him in the name of misconceived and selfishly applied Democracy is the Modern Social Crime. Too plainly we already see the evil consequences of sentimentalized singing to Demos—foolishly ascribing to Demos the virtues of Deity. Concentration and sympathetic
inspiration should be isolated and concentrated in experimental work of this kind in order to hasten the time when Art shall take the lead in Education, and character be a natural consequence. Were this to be put into effect on even a small scale in various units scattered over the surface of these United States, this indispensable ego might be strengthened and restored to a sanity compared to which “egotism,” as we now know it in Education, would only be a sickly disease of Consciousness—highly improbable because manifestly absurd.
Thus given opportunity truly Liberal, American Youth might soon become the vital medium through which the Spirit of Man may so appear to men in their own work that they might again see and realize that great spirit as their own.
This Liberal opportunity to work and study is a practical suggestion for the growth of that quality of Style in Industry we have been seeking this afternoon.
Behind personality Tradition should stand—behind Tradition stands the race.
We have put Tradition before personality—and made Tradition as a fatal hurdle for race.
3: THE PASSING OF THE CORNICE
UNITY TEMPLE
CONCRETE MONOLITH. GRAVEL SURFACE CAST IN WOOD MOULDS. WATERPROOF WASHES AND WATER TABLE. CANTILEVER SLAB ROOF.
INTERIOR SPACE SCREENED INSTEAD OF WALLED.
1908
INSTINCTIVELY, I think, I hated the empty, pretentious shapes of the Renaissance. When sixteen years old, I used to read the great “Modem” of his day—Victor Hugo. Reading his discursive novel, Notre-Dame, I came upon the chapter, “Ceci Tueba Cela.” That story of the decline of Architecture made a lasting impression upon me. I saw the Renaissance as that setting sun all Europe mistook for dawn; I believed Gutenberg’s invention of the shifting types would kill the great edifice as Architecture. In fact, as we all may now see, printing was the first great blow to Art by the Machine. I saw the life-blood of beloved Architecture slowly ebbing, inevitably to be taken entirely away from the building by the book, the book being a more liberal form of expression for human thought. This mechanical invention was to become the channel for thought—because more facile and more direct. In place of the Art of Architecture was to come Literature made ubiquitous.
I saw that Architecture, in its great antique form, was going to die. Ghastly tragedy—I could hardly bear the thought of the consequences.
About this time, too—catastrophe! As the new West Wing of the Old Wisconsin State Capitol at Madison fell, I happened to be passing in the shade of the trees that bordered the green Park in which the building stood. Suddenly I heard the roar of collapse—saw the clouds of white lime-dust rise high in the air—heard the groans and fearful cries of those injured and not killed—-some forty workmen dead or seriously hurt. I remember clinging to the iron palings of the Park in full view of the scene, sick with horror as men plunged headlong from the basement openings—some seeming to be still madly fighting off falling bricks and timbers, only to fall dead in the grass outside, grass no longer green but whitened by the now falling clouds of lime.
The outer stone walls were still standing. Stone basement-piers carrying the iron interior supporting columns had given way and the roof took all the floors, sixty men at work on them, clear down to the basement. A great “classic” cornice had been projecting boldly out from the top of the building, against the sky. Its moorings partly torn away, this cornice now hung down in places, great hollow boxes of galvanized iron, hanging up there suspended on end. One great section of cornice I saw hanging above an upper window.
A workman hung, head downward, his foot caught, crushed on the sill of this window, by a falling beam. A red line streaked the stone wall below him and it seemed as though the hanging box of sheet-iron that a moment before had gloomed against the sky as the “classic” cornice, must tear loose by its own weight and cut him down before he could be rescued.
The spectacle of that sham feature hanging there, deadly menace to the pitifully moaning, topsy-turvy figure of a man—a working man—went far to deepen the dismay planted in a boy’s heart by Victor Hugo’s prophetic tale. This terrifying picture persisting in imagination gave rise to subsequent reflections. “This empty sheet-iron thing ... a little while ago it was pretending to be stone, . . . and doing this, mind you, for the Capitol of the great State of Wisconsin, . . . what a shame!
“Somebody must have been imposed upon!
“Was it the State or perhaps the Architect himself?
“Had the Architect been cheated in that too, as well as in the collapsed piers that had let the structure down? Or was it all deliberate and everybody knew about it, but did nothing about it—did not care? Wasn’t this the very thing Victor Hugo meant?”
I believed it was what he meant and began to examine cornices critically. “Why was it necessary to make them ‘imitation’? If it was necessary to do that, why have them at all? Were they really beautiful or useful anyway? I couldn’t see that they were particularly beautiful—except that a building looked ‘strange’ without one. But it looked more strange when the roof fell in and this thing called the cornice hung down endwise and was ‘thin.’ But that was it. . . . No matter how ‘thin’ it was, the cornice was put there regardless of Reality, to make the building familiar. It had no other meaning. Well, then, Victor Hugo saw this coming, did he, so long ago? ... He foresaw that Architecture would become a sham? . . . Was it all now sham or was it just the cornice that was shamming? . . . And if they would lie about the cornice, or lie with it this way in matters of State, why wouldn’t they lie about other parts of the building too . . . perhaps as a matter of taste?” And then came critical inquests held by the boy-coroner . . . the pilaster found to be another nauseating cheat. Others followed thick and fast, I remember.
It was early disillusionment and cruel, this vision of the life-blood of idolized architecture ebbing slowly away, vividly pointed and finally driven home by the horror of the falling building, showing the sham architecture, a preposterous bulk, threatening to take the very life of the workman himself, his lifeblood already dripping away down the wall, just beneath. The poor workman became significant, himself a symbol. Both experiences, “Ceci Tuera Cela” and the wreck of the Capitol by internal collapse, did something to me for which I have never ceased to be grateful. If the old order is to be preserved— regardless—it is not well for boys to read the great poets nor see Classic buildings fall down.
Soon after this, Viollet-le-Duc’s Dictionnaire Raisonné de l’Architecture Française fell into my hands by way of a beloved school-teacher aunt of mine and the work was finished, ready for the master to whom I came some four years later, Louis H. Sullivan—Beaux-Arts Rebel. I went to him, for one thing, because he did not believe in Cornices.
Now if the “pseudo-classic” forms of the Renaissance had had more life in them they would have died sooner and long ago have been decently buried—• this in accord with Goethe’s dictum that “Death is Nature’s ruse in order that she may have more life.” Renaissance Architecture, being but the dry bones of a life lived and dead, centuries before, the bones were left to bleach. For text, then, on this our third afternoon, our reference to authority is hereby inscribed to Moti, ancient Chinese Sage.
This inscription: “In twilight, light of the lantern, or in darkness, worship no old images nor run after new. They may arise to bind you, or, being false, betray you into bondage wherein your own shall wither.” (Twilight probably meaning partial understanding; lantern-light, glamour; darkness, ignorance.) Or another translation—Chinese is far from English:
“Except in full light of day bow down to no images, cast, graven, or builded by another, lest they, being false, betray and bind you powerless to Earth.” Still another:
“Without full knowledge worship no images, lest being false they bind thee powerless to make thine own true.”
And finally we have reached the title of the discourse—“The Passing of the Cornice,” the image of a dead culture.
There was a Graeco-Roman feature advocated by the American Institute of Architects to finish a building at the top. This authentic feature was called the Cornice. Not so long ago no building, great or small, high or low, dignified and costly or cheap and vile, was complete without a Cornice of some sort. You may see accredited cornices still hanging on and well out over the busy streets in any American City for no good purpose whatsoever . . . really for no purpose at all. But to the elect no building looked like a building unless it had the brackets, modifiions, and “fancy” fixings of this ornamental and ornamented pseudo-classic “feature.” Cornices were even more significantly insignificant than it is the habit of many of the main features of our buildings to be. The Cornice was an attitude, the ornamental gesture that gave to the provincial American structure the element of hallowed “culture.” That was all the significance Cornices ever had—the worship of a hypocritical theocratic “culture.” Usually built up above the roof and projecting well out beyond it, hanging out from the top of the wall, they had nothing in reason to do with construction—but there the Cornice had to be. It was, somehow, become “manner”—something like lifting our hat to the ladies, or, in extreme cases, like the “leg” an acrobat makes as he kisses his hand to the audience after doing his “turn.” The Cornice, in doing our “turn,” became our commonplace concession to respectable “Form,” thanks again to the Italians thus beset—and disturbed in their well earned Architectural slumber.
But, have you all noticed a change up there where the eye leaves our buildings for the sky—the “sky-line,” architects call it? Observe! More sky! The Cornice has gone. Gone, we may hope, to join the procession of foolish “concessions” and vain professions that passed earlier. Gone to join the “corner-tower,” the “hoop-skirt,” the “bustle” and the “cupola.”
Like them—gone! This shady-shabby architectural feature of our middle distance, the ’seventies, ’eighties and ’nineties, has been relegated to that mysterious scrap-heap supposedly reposing in the back-yard of oblivion. Look for a Comice in vain anywhere on America’s new buildings high or low, cheap or costly, public or private. You will hardly find one unless you are looking at some government “monument.” Government, it seems, is a commitment, a rendezvous with Traditions that hang on.
But for a time no skyscraper—yes, it is all that recent—was complete without the Cornice. The Belmont Hotel and the Flatiron Building in New York City perhaps said the last word, took the last grand stand and made the final grand gesture in behalf of our subject. For about that time the hidden anchors that tied the pretentious feature back on some high Chicago buildings began to rust off and let this assumption-of-virtue down into the city streets to kill a few people on the sidewalks below. The people killed, happened to be “leading citizens.” But for “accident” what would modern American cities be looking like, by now? Cornices cost outrageous sums, Cornices shut out the light below, but that didn’t seem to hurt Cornices, much, with us. Not until Cornices became dangerous and “pseudo-classic” by way of the A.I.A. (“Arbitrary Institute of Appearances”) began to crash down to city streets—did the city fathers talk “Ordinance” to the Institute. The learned architects listened, read the Ordinances, and though indignant, had no choice but to quit. Observe the relief!
Nor dare we imagine they would have dared to quit the Cornice on their own account!
Shall we see the stagey, empty frown of the Cornice glooming against the sky again? Has this cultured relic served its theatrical “turn” or are appearances for the moment too good to be true? Periodic “revivals” have enabled our aesthetic crimes to live so many lives that one may never be sure. But since we’ve learned to do without this particular “hangover” in this land of free progress and are getting used to bareheaded buildings, find the additional light agreeable, the money saved extremely useful, and as, especially, we are for “safety first,” we are probably safe from the perennial Renaissance for some years to come. At any rate for the moment “the glory that was Greece, the grandeur that was Rome,” ours by way of Italy, may cease turning in ancient and honorable graves. O Palladio! Vitruvius! Vignola!—be comforted —the twentieth century gives back to you your shrouds!
Ye Gods! And that was the American Architecture of Liberty! Yes, it was unwarranted liberty that American Architecture took.
We may well believe there is some subjective wave, that finally, perhaps blindly, gets buildings, costumes and customs all together in effect as civilization marches on. At least it would so seem as we look about us, for in the umbrageous Cornice-time immediately behind us, hats were extravagant cornices for human heads, just as the cornices were extravagant hats for buildings. And what about puffed sleeves, frizzes, furbelows and flounces? Didn’t they go remarkably well with pilasters, architraves and rusticated walls? In fact, weren’t they exactly the same thing? Even the skirts of the Cornice-period were extravagant cornices upside down over feet. And there was the “train” trailing the floor on occasion, the last word in cornices. Nor was “Dinner” in those days complete without its own peculiar “Cornice.” They called it “Dessert.” Many brave and agreeable men died of that less obvious “Cornice,” but “Cornice” nevertheless.
And the manners of that period of grandomania! Were they not emulation of the “Cornice” when really manner? And top-heavy too, with chivalry and other thinly disguised brutalities? Now? No hat brim at all. Just a close sheath for the head. Skirts? None. Instead, a pair of silken legs sheer from rigid stilted heel to flexing knees ; something scant and informal hung round the middle from above. What would have barely served as underwear in the late Cornice-days, now costume for the street. No “manner” in our best manners.
Study, by contrast, the flamboyant human and architectural silhouettes of the Cornice-period just past with the silhouettes of today. After the comparison, be as grateful as it is in your nature to be—for escape, for even the appearance of Simplicity.
Here comes “fashionable” penchant for the clean, significant lines of sculptural contours. Contrast these silhouettes in cars, buildings, clothing, hair dressing of today with those of the ’nineties. Even in the flower arrangements of the period of our “middle distance” and that of our immediate foreground you may see great difference. The “Bo-Kay” was what you remember it was. Now, a bouquet is a few long-stemmed flowers with artful carelessness slipped into a tall glass, or “au naturel,” a single species grouped in close sculptural mass over a low bowl. Consider, too, that modem music no longer needs the Cornice. It, too, can stop without the crescendo or the grand finale, the flourish of our grandfathers, which was “classic.” Yes, the Comice was “flourish”
too. Curious! Jazz, all too consistently, belongs to this awakening period, to the “youth” that killed the Cornice, awakening to see that nothing ever was quite so pretentious, empty, and finally demoralizing as that pompous gesture we were taught to respect and to call the “Cornice.” It had much—much too much—foreign baggage in its train, ever to be allowed to come back to America.
Should we now clearly perceive what the Cornice really meant in terms of human life, especially of our own life as dedicated to Liberty, we would be rid of Cornices forever. Turning instinctively from the Cornice shows our native instincts healthy enough. But we require knowledge of its fatality, where freedom is concerned, to insure protection from the periodic “aesthetic revival” that is successfully put over every few years just because of enterprising salesmanship and our own aimlessness. We must have a standard that will give us protection. If we know why we hate the Cornice now, it may never rise again to ride us or smite us some other day.
Suppose, for the sake of argument, once upon a time we did live in trees, lightly skipping from branch to branch, insured by our tails as we pelted each other with nuts. We dwelt sheltered from the sun and rain by the overhanging foliage of upper branches—grateful for both shelter and shade. Gratitude for that “overhead”—and the sense of it—has been with us all down the ages as the Cornice, finally become an emblem—a symbol —showed. Instinctive gratitude is of course fainter now. But whenever the Cornice, true to that primeval instinct, was real shelter or even the sense of it, and dropped roof-water free of the building walls—well, the Cornice was not a Cornice then but was an overhanging roof. Let the overhanging roof live as human shelter. It will never disappear from Architecture. The sense of Architecture as human shelter is a very fine sense—common sense, in fact. But as soon as this good and innocent instinct became a habit, original meaning, as usual, lost by the time usefulness departed, the ancient and no less fashionable Doctor-of-Appearances took notice, adopted the “look” of the overhang, began to play with it, and soon the citizen began to view the overhang from the street, as the Cornice. If ever “the doctor” knew or ever cared what meaning the overhang ever had, the doctor soon forgot. He became “Corniceconscious.” The roof-water now ran back from the cornice on to the flat roof
of the building and down inside down-spouts. But why should the doctor worry? Has the doctor of aesthetics ever worried about structural significances? No. So through him, although all had been reversed, this now obsession of the “overhead,” for mere aesthetic effect, an aesthetic that had got itself into Greek and, therefore, into Roman life as Art for Art’s sake, this arbitrary convention, became our accepted Academic pattern. It was all up with us then—until now.
The net result of it all is that no culture is recognizable to us as such without the Cornice. But just eliminate the troublesome and expensive feature from Greek and Roman buildings and see what happens by way of consequence. Then when you know what it meant in their buildings, just take that same concession to the academic artificiality of Tradition from their lives and see, as a consequence, what happens to “culture.” You will see by what is lost, as well as by what is left, that the Cornice, as such, originally was Graeco-Roman culture and to such an extent that—“pasticcio-Italiano”—it has been our own “American pseudo-classic” ever since. Inasmuch as nearly everything institutional in our much over-instituted lives is either Roman or Graeco-Roman, we couldn’t have had our chosen institutions without this cherished symbol. No, we had to do the precious Cornice too. So we did the Cornice-lie with the best of them, to the limit and far and away beyond any sense of limit at all.
Amazing! Utter artificiality become a more or less gracefully refined symbolic lie, the “culture” we Americans patterned and tried our best to make our own classic, too, and adored for a long, long time. Thomas Jefferson himself was blameworthy in that. George Washington no less so.
But pragmatic as the Romans were in all other matters, we may comfort ourselves a little, if there is any comfort in the fact that these same Romans, great Jurists and Executives, too, when it came to “culture,” denied their own splendid engineering invention of the arch for centuries in order to hang on to the same Cornice—or more correctly speaking, to hang the Cornice on. Not until the Roman Doctors-of-Appearances (their names are lost to us, so we cannot chastely and becomingly insult them) could conceal the Arch no longer, did they let the arch live as the Arch. Even then, in order to preserve “appearances,” the doctors insisted upon running a cornice—in miniature— around over the arch itself and called the little cornice on the curve an
archivolt. They then let the matter go at that. Yes, the noble arches themselves now had to have the cornices, and Renaissance Arches have all had cornices on their curves for several centuries or more, in fact had them on until today. Roofs were mostly now become flat or invisible. The roof-water ran back the other way. But here was the Cornice, derived from and still symbolic of the overhanging roof, continuing to hang over just the same. Yes, it was now great “Art.” In other words, the cornice was secure as academic aesthetic. No one dared go behind the thing to see how and what it really was. It no longer mattered what it was.
Another human instinct had left home and gone wrong, but civilization sentimentalized and made the degradation into prestige—irresistible. Professors taught the Cornice now as “good-school.” Every building, more or less, had to defer to this corniced authority to be habitable or valuable. Only a radical or two in any generation dared fight such authority and usually the fight cost the radical his economic life.
But now you may look back, although the perspective is still insufficient, and see what a sham this undemocratic fetish really was, what an imposition it became, how pompously it lied to us about itself; realize how much social meanness of soul it hid and what poverty of invention on the part of great architects it cleverly concealed for many centuries. And you may now observe as you go downtown that the worst is over. Only very sophisticated Doctors-of-Appearances dare use the Cornice any more, and then the dead living dare use it only for national monuments to honor the living dead; especially have they done so for a monument to Abraham Lincoln who would have said, with Emerson, “I love and honor Epaminondas—but I do not wish to be Epaminondas. I hold it more just to love the world of this hour, than the world of his hour.”
Here the Cornice, being by nature and derivation so inappropriate to the “great commoner,” gave to the doctor his opportunity for final triumph. The doctor has now succeeded in using it where most awful—too insulting. When we see this, almost any of us—even the “Best” of us—may fully realize why cornices had to die, for at least “let us desire not to disgrace the Soul!”
Now, for some time to come, democratic governmental departments being what they are, it may be that America will continue to be-cornice her dead heroes, dishonor them by its impotence. But there is ample evidence at
hand on every side that the “quick,” at least, have shed the Cornice. The sacred symbol is worn out—to be soon obliterated by free thought.
It is time man sealed this Tradition under a final monument. I suggest as admirable “project” for the students in Architecture at Princeton a design for this monument, and by way of epitaph:
“Here lies the most cherished liar of all the ages—Rest, that we may find Peace.”
For the first six thousand years of the world, from the pagodas of Hindustan to the Cathedral of Cologne, Architecture was the great writing of mankind. Whoever then was born a poet became an Architect. All the other Arts were the workmen of the great work. The “symbol” unceasingly characterized, when it did not dogmatize, it all. Stability was an Ideal—hence a general horror of progress. What consecration there then was, was devoted to a conservation of previous primitive types.
According to the great Modern poet, neglected now, quoted at the outset of this discourse—In the Hindoo, Egyptian and Roman edifices it was always the priest ... in the Phoenician, the merchant ... in the Greek, the aristocratic republican ... in the Gothic, the bourgeois. In the twentieth century—says our prophet—an Architect of genius may happen, as the accident of Dante happened in the thirteenth, although Architecture will no longer be the Social Art, the collective Art, the dominant Art. The great work of humanity it will be no longer.
But to Victor Hugo, when he spoke, Architecture was the grand residue of the great buildings that wrote the record of a theocratic, feudalistic humanity, theologic, philosophic, aristocratic. Concerning that Architecture his prophecy has come true. He foresaw Democracy as a consequence, but did not foresee the consequences of its engine—the Machine—except as that engine was symbolized by printing. He seems not to have foreseen that genius and imagination might find in the Machine mightier means than ever with which to create anew a more significant background and framework for twentieth century civilization than was ever known before. Nor foresee an Architect who might create anew in genuine Liberty—for great Liberty—on soil enriched by the very carcasses of the ancient Architectures. So let us take heart . . . we begin anew.
But instead of ourselves indulging in prophecy against prophecy, let us take hold of the Cornice at the source from which it came to us, and take it apart— in order to see what the feature actually was. It may give us something useful in our own hard case. Perhaps we may find in it something valuable to the “Modem”—in the sense that we ourselves are to be Modern or die disgraced. Of course I visited Athens—held up my hand in the clean Mediterranean air against the sun and saw the skeleton of my hand through its covering of pink flesh—saw the same translucence in the marble pillars of the aged Parthenon, and realized what “color” must have been in such light. I saw the yellow stained rocks of the barren terrain. I saw the ancient temples, barren, broken, yellow stained too, standing now magnificent in their crumbling state, more a part of that background than ever they were when born—more stoic now than allowed to be when those whose record they were had built them—more heroic, as is the Venus of Melos more beautiful without her arms. Like all who stand there, I tried to re-create the scene as it existed when pagan love of color made it come ablaze for the dark-skinned, kinky-haired, black-eyed Greeks to whom color must have been naturally the most becoming thing in life. I restored the arris of the mouldings, sharpened and perfected the detail of the cornices, obliterated the desolate grandeur of the scene with color, sound, and movement. And gradually I saw the whole as a great painted, wooden temple. Though now crumbling to original shapes of stone, so far as intelligence went at that time there were no stone forms whatever. The forms were only derived from wood! I could not make them stone, hard as I might try. Nor had the Greeks cared for that stone-quality in their buildings, for if traces found are to be trusted, and nature too, not only the forms but the marble surfaces themselves were all originally covered with decoration in gold and color. Marble sculpture was no less so covered than was the Architecture.
All sense of materials must have been lost or never have come alive to the Greeks. No such sympathy with environment as I now saw existed for them, nor had any other inspired them. No—not at all. These trabeated stone buildings harked back to what? A little study showed the horizontal lines of wooden beams, laid over vertical wooden posts, all delicately sculptured to refine and make elegant the resemblance. The pediments, especially the cornices, were the wooden projections of the timber roofs of earlier wooden tem-
pies, sculptured here in stone. Even the method of that ancient wood-construction was preserved in the more “modem” material, by way of the large, wooden beam ends that had originally rested on the wooden lintels, and by the smaller wooden beam ends that rested above those; even such details as the wooden pins that had fastened the beam structure together were here as sculptured stone ornament. Here then in all this fibrous trabeation was no organic stone building. Here was only a wooden temple as a “Tradition” embalmed—in noble material. Embalmed, it is true, with grace and refinement. But beyond that, and considering it all as something to be taken for itself, in itself, all was false—arbitrarily to preserve for posterity a tradition as arbitrary. Thought, then, in this life of the Greeks, was not so Free? The grand sculptured stone cornices of their greatest building had originally been but the timber edges and projections of an overhanging roof that was intended to drop roof-water free of the walls. Elegant refinements of proportion were not lost upon me, but there was small comfort to see recorded in them—for evermore—that Liberty had not gone very far in thought in ancient Greece. Here at this remote day Architecture had been merely prostitution of the New as a servile concession to the high-priest of the Old Order. In the hands of the impeccable Greeks here was noble, beautiful stone insulted and forced to do duty as an imitation enslaved to wood. Well, at any rate, the beautiful marble was itself again falling back from the shame of an artificial glory upon its own, once more. Here too, then, in this triumph was tragedy!
Was all this symbolic—a mere symptom of an artificial quality of thought, an imposition of authority that condemned this high civilization of the Greeks to die? Their “elegant solutions” and philosophic abstractions beneath the beautiful surface—were they as sinister? Were they too as false to Nature as their Architecture was false? Then why had it all to be born, re-born and again and yet again—confusing, corrupting and destroying, more or less, all subsequent chance of true organic human culture? Here it seemed was subtle poison deadly to Freedom. Form and Idea or Form and Function had become separated for the Greeks, the real separation fixed upon a helpless, unthinking people, whose tool was the chattel slave. By what power did such authority exist? In any case what could there be for Democracy in this sophisticated abstraction, made by force, whether as intelligence or as power?
And then I thought of the beauty of Greek sculpture and the perfect Vase of
the Greeks .... Keats’ Ode to a Grecian Urn came to mind. How different the sculpture and the vase were from their architecture—and yet the same. But Phidias fortunately had the living human body for his Tradition. He was modern and his works eternal. The Vase was sculpture too, pure and simple, so it could be perfected by them. It would live and represent them at their best. And their great stone Architecture—it, too, was beautiful “sculpture” —but it had for its Architectural Tradition only a wooden Temple!
It should die: here today in our New Freedom, with the Machine as Liberator of the human mind, quickener of the Artist-Conscience—it is for us to bury Greek Architecture deep. For us it is pagan poison. We have greater buildings to build upon a more substantial base—an ideal of Organic Architecture, complying with the ideal of true Democracy.
Democracy is an expression of the dignity and worth of the individual; that ideal of Democracy is essentially the thought of the man of Galilee, himself an humble Architect, the Architect in those days called Carpenter. When this unfolding architecture as distinguished from enfolding architecture comes to America there will be Truth of feature, to Truth of being: individuality realized as a noble attribute of being. That is the character the architecture of Democracy will take and probably that architecture will be an expression of the highest form of aristocracy the world has conceived, when we analyze it. Now what Architecture? Clearly this new conception will realize Architecture as no longer the sculptured block of some building material or as any enfolding imitation. Architecture must now unfold an inner content—express “life” from the “within.” Only a development according to Nature, an intelligently aimed at purpose, will materialize this ideal, so there is very little to help us in the old sculptural ideals of the Architecture Victor Hugo wrote about, so splendidly prophetic. And what little there is, is confined within the carved and colored comers of the world where and when it was allowed to be itself— and is underneath the surface, in far out-of-the-way places, hard to find.
But I imagine the great Romantic poet himself would be first to subscribe to this modern ideal of an organic architecture, a creation of industry wherein power unlimited lies ready for use by the Modem Mind, instead of the creature of chisel and hammer once held ready in the hands of the chattel slave. An Architecture no longer composed or arranged or pieced together as symbolic, but living as upstanding expression of reality. This Organic
architecture, too, would be so intimately a growth, all the while, as to make barbarous the continual destruction of the Old by the New. American Architecture, though both little and young, therefore conceives something deeper and at the same time more vital than the great Parthenon or even the beautiful Greek Vase: an Architecture no longer symbolic sculpture but a true culture that will grow greater buildings and grow more beautiful belongings true to the Nature of the thing and more at one with the Nature of Man. Radical, its roots where they belong—in the soil—this Architecture would be likely to live where all else has had to die or is dying.
Being integral this Art will not know contrasted and separate existence as Art, but will be as much “Nature” as we are ourselves natural. This should be the expression of any true Democracy. Such an ideal is nowise pagan, more nearly of the Crusades maybe—but racial or national no longer except in superficial sense. It is only the method, the proper technique in which to use our resources with new sense of materials, that remains to be realized. This realization may truly be said to be Modern: New in the thought of the coming world, in which the New and the Old shall be as one.
Now comes the usual feeling that this discourse has all been too free in idealization, not intimate enough realization of a very simple matter. The discourse simply means that “make-believe” is played out; that it has no longer nor ever had genuine significance as Art; that we are in a hard but hopeful case where any pretence fails to satisfy us. Something has happened in this new ideal of freedom we call America that is contagious and goes around the world. I don’t even know that it belongs to us as a nation particularly, because we, being the thing itself, seem to realize it least. It is often so. Of that which a man is most, he usually speaks least unless he has to speak, and then he will tell you less than someone who is not so much the thing himself, but can see it a little apart, in perspective. We see then that in us is a deeper hunger— a hunger for integrity. For some such reason as this we are waking to see ourselves as the provincial dumping-ground for the cast-off regalia of civilization entire. We have been the village aristocracy of the great Art World—“putting on” the style we took “by taste” from the pattern-books, or saw at the movies, or admired on post-cards sent home by those who have “been abroad”
—don’t you know? It never occurred to us that we had greater and more coming to us as our own than any of the aristocracy of art we aped and imitated ever had. But now we are beginning to see that even Colonial was a “hangover,” was a cornice, a nice, neat one, but the machine soon made it nasty-nice. Ad libitum, intoxicated by facility of “reproduction,” we ran the gamut of all the “Styles,” the Machine right after us to spoil the party. What, I ask you, in all History haven’t we as a “free” people made free with in the name of Art and Architecture? We have acted like hungry orphans turned loose in a bake-shop.
And like the poor orphans, too, we have a bad case of indigestion now that would kill a less young and robust adventurer in that tasty, pasty, sugary realm we have known as Art and Decoration. The confectionery we have consumed—yes, but not digested, mind you—would have mussed up the sources from which it came beyond hope of any mortal recovery.
We are sick with it and we are sick of it. Some of us for that reason, and some of us because we are growing up. It was all bad for us—the Machine made such “good taste” as we had, poisonous. Spanish was the latest acquired taste until “Modernistic” got itself here by way of the Paris market with Madame. We will soon be no better satisfied eating that layer-cake than with the other cake-eating. It is all too modish, too thin, too soon empty—too illiberal, too mean. Our dyspeptic American souls hunger for realization, for a substantial “inner experience.” Something more than a mere matter of taste, a taste for cake! All we’ve had has been predilection in this matter of taste, and we’ve tasted until we’re so taste full that it is only a question of “where do we go from here?”
No wonder sensible Henry says “Art is the bunk.” He is right; all that he has known by that name is no more than what he says it is. And pretty much all that all America knows, too, is likewise. The corruption of our own sources of power and inspiration shames or amuses us when we try to go deeper. But we are going deeper now, just the same. When we get the meaning of our shame we are disgusted—likely we turn from it all, but we come back to it again.
We have realized that Life without Beauty accomplished is no Life; we grasp at anything that promises beauty and are somehow punished. We find that like the rose it has thorns; like the thistle, it has defenses not to be grasped
that way. The old canons have lost fire and force. They no longer apply. We are lost in the face of a great adversary whose lineaments we begin to see. Destruction of the old standards we see on every side. This New thing becomes hateful—but fascinates us. As we struggle, we begin to realize that we live on it, and with it, but still we despise and fear it—nevertheless and all the more because it fascinates us.
Well—we begin to glimpse this great adversary as the instrument of a New Order. We are willing to believe there is a common sense. ... A sense common to our time directed toward specific purpose. We see an aeroplane clean and light-winged—the lines expressing power and purpose; we see the ocean liner, stream-lined, clean and swift—expressing power and purpose. The locomotive, too—power and purpose. Some automobiles begin to look the part. Why are not buildings, too, indicative of their special purpose? The forms of things that are perfectly adapted to their function, we now observe, seem to have a superior beauty of their own. We like to look at them. Then, as it begins to dawn on us that Form follows Function—why not so in Architecture especially? We see that all features in a good building, too, should correspond to some necessity for being—the reason for them, as well as for other shapes, being found in their very purpose. Buildings are made of materials, too. Materials have a life of their own that may enter into the building to give it more life. Here certain principles show countenance. It is the countenance of Organic Simplicity. Order is coming out of Chaos. The word Organic now has a new meaning, a Spiritual one! Here is hope.
With this principle in mind we see new value in freedom because we see new value in individuality: And there is no individuality without Freedom. The plane is a plane; the steamship is a steamship; the motor-car is a motor-car, and the more they are and look just that thing the more beautiful we find them. Buildings, too—why not? Men too? Why not? And now we see Democracy itself in this fresh light from within as an Ideal that is consistent with all these new expressions of this new power in Freedom. We see this adversary to the Old Order, the Machine, as—at last—a sword to cut old bonds and provide escape to Freedom; we see it as the servant and saviour of the New Order—if only it be creatively used by man!
Now, how to use it?
Then—what Architecture?
4: THE CARDBOARD HOUSE
WOODLAWN AVENUE HOUSE
BRICK WALLS AND MULLIONS. STONE WASHES AND WATER TABLE. FLAT TILE ROOF. COPPER GUTTERS. PRAIRIE BASEMENT TYPE.
1906-1908
“TNASMUCH as the rivalry of intelligences is the life of the beautiful—0 J_Poet!—the first rank is ever free. Let us remove everything which may disconcert daring minds and break their wings! Art is a species of valor. To deny that men of genius to come may be the peers of the men of genius of the past would be to deny the everworking power of God!” . . .
Now what Architecture for America?
Any house is a far too complicated, clumsy, fussy, mechanical counterfeit of the human body. Electric wiring for nervous system, plumbing for bowels, heating system and fireplaces for arteries and heart, and windows for eyes, nose and lungs generally. The structure of the house, too, is a kind of cellular tissue stuck full of bones, complex now, as the confusion of Bedlam and all beside. The whole interior is a kind of stomach that attempts to digest objects— objects, “objets d’art” maybe, but objects always. There the affected affliction sits, ever hungry—for ever more objects—or plethoric with over plenty. The whole life of the average house, it seems, is a sort of indigestion. A body in ill repair, suffering indisposition—constant tinkering and doctoring to keep alive. It is a marvel, we its infestors do not go insane in it and with it. Perhaps it is a form of insanity we have put into it. Lucky we are able to get something else out of it, though we do seldom get out of it alive ourselves.
But the passing of the Cornice with its enormous “baggage” from foreign parts in its train clears the way for American homes that may be modem biography and poems instead of slanderous Liars and poetry-crushers.
A house, we like to believe, is in statu quo a noble consort to man and the trees; therefore the house should have repose and such texture as will quiet the whole and make it graciously at one with External Nature.
Human houses should not be like boxes, blazing in the sun, nor should we outrage the Machine by trying to make dwelling-places too complementary to Machinery. Any building for humane purposes should be an elemental, sympathetic feature of the ground, complementary to its nature-environ-
ment, belonging by kinship to the terrain. A House is not going anywhere, if we can help it. We hope it is going to stay right where it is for a long, long time. It is not yet anyway even a moving-van. Certain houses for Los Angeles may yet become vans and roll off most anywhere or everywhere, which is something else again and far from a bad idea for certain classes of our population.
But most new “modernistic” houses manage to look as though cut from cardboard with scissors, the sheets of cardboard folded or bent in rectangles with an occasional curved cardboard surface added to get relief. The cardboard forms thus made are glued together in box-like forms—in a childish attempt to make buildings resemble steamships, flying machines or locomotives. By way of a new sense of the character and power of this Machine Age, this house strips and stoops to conquer by emulating, if not imitating, machinery. But so far, I see in most of the cardboard houses of the “modernistic” movement small evidence that their designers have mastered either the machinery or the mechanical processes that build the house. I can find no evidence of integral method in their making. Of late, they are the superficial, badly built product of this superficial, New “Surface-and-Mass” Aesthetic falsely claiming French Painting as a parent. And the houses themselves are not the new working of a fundamental Architectural principle in any sense. They are little less reactionary than was the Cornice—unfortunately for Americans, looking forward, lest again they fall victim to the mode. There is, however, this much to be said for this house—by means of it imported Art and Decoration may, for a time, completely triumph over “Architecture.” And such Architecture as it may triumph over—well, enough has already been said here, to show how infinitely the cardboard house is to be preferred to that form of bad surface-decoration. The Simplicity of Nature is not something which may easily be read—but is inexhaustible. Unfortunately the simplicity of these houses is too easily read—visibly an attitude, strained or forced. They are therefore decoration too. If we look into their construction we may see how construction itself has been complicated or confused, merely to arrive at exterior simplicity. Most of these houses at home and abroad are more or less badly built complements to the Machine Age, of whose principles or possibilities they show no understanding, or, if they do show such understanding to the degree of assimilating an aspect thereof, they utterly fail to make its virtues honor-
ably or humanly effective in any final result. Forcing surface-effects upon mass-effects which try hard to resemble running or steaming or flying or fighting machines, is no radical effort in any direction. It is only more scenepainting and just another picture to prove Victor Hugo’s thesis of Renaissance architecture as the setting sun—eventually passing with the Cornice. The Machine—we are now agreed, are we not—should build the building, if the building is such that the Machine may build it naturally and therefore build it supremely well. But it is not necessary for that reason to build as though the building, too, were a Machine—because, except in a very low sense, indeed, it is not a Machine, nor at all like one. Nor in that sense of being a Machine, could it be Architecture at all! It would be difficult to make it even good decoration for any length of time. But I propose, for the purposes of popular negation of the Cornice-days that are passed and as their final kick into oblivion, we might now, for a time, make buildings resemble Modern bath-tubs and aluminum kitchen-utensils, or copy pieces of well designed machinery to live in, particularly the liner, the aeroplane, the streetcar, and the motor-bus. We could trim up the trees, too, shape them into boxes—cheese or cracker—cut them to cubes and triangles or tetrahedron them and so make all kinds alike suitable consorts for such houses. And we are afraid we are eventually going to have as citizens Machine-made men, corollary to Machines, if we don’t “look out”? They might be face-masqued, head-shaved, hypodermically rendered even less emotional than they are, with patent-leather put over their hair and aluminum clothes cast on their bodies, and Madam herself altogether stripped and decoratively painted to suit. This delicate harmony, characteristic of machinery, ultimately achieved, however, could not be truly affirmative, except insofar as the negation, attempted to be performed therein, is itself affirmative. It seems to me that while the engaging cardboard houses may be appropriate gestures in connection with “Now What Architecture,” they are merely a negation, so not yet truly conservative in the great Cause which already runs well beyond them. Organic simplicity is the only simplicity that can answer for us here in America that pressing, perplexing question—Now What Architecture? This I firmly believe. It is vitally necessary to make the countenance of simplicity the affirmation of reality, lest any affectation of simplicity, should it become a mode or Fashion, may only leave this heady country refreshed for another
foolish orgy in Surface decoration of the sort lasting thirty years “by authority and by order,” and by means of which Democracy has already nearly ruined the look of itself for posterity, for a half-century to come, at least. Well then and again—“What Architecture?”
Let us take for text on this, our fourth afternoon, the greatest of all references to simplicity, the inspired admonition: “Consider the lilies of the field—they toil not, neither do they sjrin, yet verily I say unto thee—Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these.” An inspired saying—attributed to an humble Architect in ancient times, called Carpenter, who gave up Architecture nearly two thousand years ago to go to work upon its Source.
And if the text should seem to you too far away from our subject this afternoon—
“The Cardboard House”
—consider that for that very reason the text has been chosen. The cardboard house needs an antidote. The antidote is far more important than the house. As antidote—and as practical example, too, of the working out of an ideal of organic simplicity that has taken place here on American soil, step by step, under conditions that are your own—could I do better than to take apart for your benefit the buildings I have tried to build, to show you how they were, long ago, dedicated to the Ideal of Organic Simplicity? It seems to me that while another might do better than that, I certainly could not—for that is, truest and best, what I know about the Subject. What a man does, that he has.
When, “in the cause of Architecture,” in 1893, I first began to build the houses, sometimes referred to by the thoughtless as “The New School of the Middle West,” (some advertisers’ slogan comes along to label everything in this our busy woman’s country), the only way to simplify the awful building in vogue at the time was to conceive a finer entity—a better building—and get it built. The buildings standing then were all tall and all tight. Chimneys were lean and taller still, sooty fingers threatening the sky. And beside them, sticking up by way of dormers through the cruelly sharp, saw-tooth roofs, were the attics for “help” to swelter in. Dormers were elaborate devices, cunning little buildings complete in themselves, stuck to the main roof slopes to let “help” poke heads out of the attic for air.
Invariably the damp sticky clay of the prairie was dug out for a basement under the whole house, and the rubble-stone walls of this dank basement always stuck up above the ground a foot or more and blinked, with half-windows. So the universal “cellar” showed itself as a bank of some kind of masonry running around the whole house, for the house to sit up on—like a chair. The lean, upper house-walls of the usual two floors above this stone or brick basement were wood, set on top of this masonry-chair, clapboarded and painted, or else shingled and stained, preferably shingled and mixed, up and down, all together with mouldings crosswise. These overdressed wood house-walls had, cut in them—or cut out of them, to be precise— big holes for the big cat and little holes for the little cat to get in and out or for ulterior purposes of light and air. The house-walls were be-corniced or bracketed up at the top into the tall, purposely profusely complicated roof, dormers plus. The whole roof, as well as the roof as a whole, was scalloped and ridged and tipped and swanked and gabled to madness before they would allow it to be either shingled or slated. The whole exterior was be-deviled—• that is to say, mixed to puzzle-pieces, with corner-boards, panel-boards, window-frames, corner-blocks, plinth-blocks, rosettes, fantails, ingenious and jigger work in general. This was the only way they seemed to have, then, of “putting on style.” The scroll-saw and turning-lathe were at the moment the honest means of this fashionable mongering by the wood-butcher and to this entirely “moral” end. Unless the householder of the period were poor indeed, usually an ingenious corner-tower on his house eventuated into a candle-snuffer dome, a spire, an inverted rutabaga or radish or onion or—what is your favorite vegetable? Always elaborate bay-windows and fancy porches played “ring around a rosy” on this “imaginative” corner feature. And all this the building of the period could do equally well in brick or stone. It was an impartial society. All material looked pretty much alike in that day. Simplicity was as far from all this scrap-pile as the pandemonium of the barnyard is far from music. But it was easy for the Architect. All he had to do was to call: “Boy, take down No. 37, and put a bay-window on it for the lady!”
So—the first thing to do was to get rid of the attic and, therefore, of the dormer and of the useless “heights” below it. And next, get rid of the unwholesome basement, entirely—yes, absolutely—in any house built on the prairie. Instead of lean, brick chimneys, bristling up from steep roofs to hint
at “judgment” everywhere, I could see necessity for one only, a broad generous one, or at most, for two, these kept low down on gently sloping roofs or perhaps flat roofs. The big fireplace below, inside, became now a place for a real fire, justified the great size of this chimney outside. A real fireplace at that time was extraordinary. There were then “mantels” instead. A mantel was a marble frame for a few coals, or a piece of wooden furniture with tiles stuck in it and a “grate,” the whole set slam up against the wall. The “mantel” was an insult to comfort, but the integral fireplace became an important part of the building itself in the houses I was allowed to build out there on the prairie. It refreshed me to see the fire burning deep in the masonry of the house itself.
Taking a human being for my scale, I brought the whole house down in height to fit a normal man; believing in no other scale, I broadened the mass out, all I possibly could, as I brought it down into spaciousness. It has been said that were I three inches taller (I am 5' 83^" tall), all my houses would have been quite different in proportion. Perhaps.
House-walls were now to be started at the ground on a cement or stone water-table that looked like a low platform under the building, which it usually was, but the house-walls were stopped at the second story window-sill level, to let the rooms above come through in a continuous window-series, under the broad eaves of a gently sloping, overhanging roof. This made enclosing screens out of the lower walls as well as light screens out of the second story walls. Here was true enclosure of interior space. A new sense of building, it seems. The climate, being what it was, a matter of violent extremes of heat and cold, damp and dry, dark and bright, I gave broad protecting roof-shelter to the whole, getting back to the original purpose of the “Cornice.” The undersides of the roof projections were flat and light in color to create a glow of reflected light that made the upper rooms not dark, but delightful. The over-hangs had double value, shelter and preservation for the walls of the house as well as diffusion of reflected light for the upper story, through the “light screens” that took the place of the walls and were the windows.
At this time, a house to me was obvious primarily as interior space under fine shelter. I liked the sense of shelter in the “look of the building.” I achieved it, I believe. I then went after the variegated bands of material in the old walls to eliminate odds and ends in favor of one material and a single surface from
grade to eaves, or grade to second story sill-cope, treated as simple enclosing screens,—or else made a plain screen band around the second story above the window-sills, turned up over on to the ceiling beneath the eaves. This screen band was of the same material as the under side of the eaves themselves, or what architects call the “soffit.” The planes of the building parallel to the ground were all stressed, to grip the whole to earth. Sometimes it was possible to make the enclosing wall below this upper band of the second story, from the second story window-sill clear down to the ground, a heavy “wainscot” of fine masonry material resting on the cement or stone platform laid on the foundation. I liked that wainscot to be of masonry material when my clients felt they could afford it.
As a matter of form, too, I liked to see the projecting base, or water-table, set out over the foundation walls themselves—as a substantial preparation for the building. This was managed by setting the studs of the walls to the inside of the foundation walls, instead of to the outside. All door and window tops were now brought into line with each other with only comfortable head-clearance for the average human being. Eliminating the sufferers from the “attic” enabled the roofs to lie low. The house began to associate with the ground and become natural to its prairie site. And would the young man in architecture ever believe that this was all “new” then? Not only new, but destructive heresy—or ridiculous eccentricity. So New that what little prospect I had of ever earning a livelihood by making houses was nearly wrecked. At first, “they” called the houses “dress-reform” houses, because Society was just then excited about that particular “reform.” This simplification looked like some kind of “reform” to them. Oh, they called them all sorts of names that cannot be repeated, but “they” never found a better term for the work unless it was “Horizontal Gothic,” “Temperance Architecture” (with a sneer), etc., etc. I don’t know how I escaped the accusation of another “Renaissance.”
What I have just described was all on the outside of the house and was there chiefly because of what had happened inside. Dwellings of that period were “cut-up,” advisedly and completely, with the grim determination that should go with any cutting process. The “interiors” consisted of boxes beside or inside other boxes, called rooms. All boxes inside a complicated boxing. Each domestic “function” was properly box to box. I could see little sense in this
inhibition, this cellular sequestration that implied ancestors familiar with the cells of penal institutions, except for the privacy of bed-rooms on the upper floor. They were perhaps all right as “sleeping boxes.” So I declared the whole lower floor as one room, cutting off the kitchen as a laboratory, putting servants’ sleeping and living quarters next to it, semi-detached, on the ground floor, screening various portions in the big room, for certain domestic purposes—like dining or reading, or receiving a formal caller. There were no plans like these in existence at the time and my clients were pushed toward these ideas as helpful to a solution of the vexed servant-problem. Scores of doors disappeared and no end of partition. They liked it, both clients and servants. The house became more free as “space” and more livable, too. Interior spaciousness began to dawn.
Having got what windows and doors there were left lined up and lowered to convenient human height, the ceilings of the rooms, too, could be brought over on to the walls, by way of the horizontal, broad bands of plaster on the walls above the windows, the plaster colored the same as the room ceilings. This would bring the ceiling-surface down to the very window tops. The ceilings thus expanded, by extending them downward as the wall band above the windows, gave a generous overhead to even small rooms. The sense of the whole was broadened and made plastic, too, by this expedient. The enclosing walls and ceilings were thus made to flow together.
Here entered the important element of Plasticity—indispensable to successful use of the Machine, the true expression of Modernity. The outswinging windows were fought for because the casement window associated the house with out-of-doors—gave free openings, outward. In other words the so-called “casement” was simple and more human. In use and effect, more natural. If it had not existed I should have invented it. It was not used at that time in America, so I lost many clients because I insisted upon it when they wanted the “guillotine” or “double-hung” window then in use. The guillotine was not simple nor human. It was only expedient. I used it once in the Winslow House—my first house—and rejected it thereafter—forever. Nor at that time did I entirely eliminate the wooden trim. I did make it “plastic,” that is, light and continuously flowing instead of the heavy “cut and butt” of the usual carpenter work. No longer did the “trim,” so called, look like carpenter work. The machine could do it perfectly well as I laid it out. It was all after “quiet.”
This plastic trim, too, with its running “back-hand” enabled poor workmanship to be concealed. It was necessary with the field resources at hand at that time to conceal much. Machinery versus the union had already demoralized the workmen. The Machine resources were so little understood that extensive drawings had to be made merely to show the “mill-man” what to leave off. But the “trim” finally became only a single, flat, narrow, horizontal wood-band running around the room, one at the top of the windows and doors and another next to the floors, both connected with narrow, vertical, thin wood-bands that were used to divide the wall-surfaces of the whole room smoothly and flatly into folded color planes. The trim merely completed the window and door openings in this same plastic sense. When the interior had thus become wholly plastic, instead of structural, a New element, as I have said, had entered Architecture. Strangely enough an element that had not existed in Architectural History before. Not alone in the trim, but in numerous ways too tedious to describe in words, this revolutionary sense of the plastic whole, an instinct with me at first, began to work more and more intelligently and have fascinating, unforeseen consequ ences. Here was something that began to organize itself. When several houses had been finished and compared with the house of the period, there was very little of that house left standing. Nearly every one had stood the house of the period as long as he could stand it, judging by appreciation of the change. Now all this probably tedious description is intended to indicate directly in bare outline how thus early there was an ideal of organic simplicity put to work, with historical consequences, here in your own country. The main motives and indications were (and I enjoyed them all):
First—	To reduce the number of necessary parts of the house and the
separate rooms to a minimum, and make all come together as enclosed space—so divided that light, air and vista permeated the whole with a sense of unity.
Second— To associate the building as a whole with its site by extension and emphasis of the planes parallel to the ground, but keeping the floors off the best part of the site, thus leaving that better part for use in connection with the life of the house. Extended level planes were found useful in this connection.
Third— To eliminate the room as a box and the house as another by making all walls enclosing screens—the ceilings and floors and enclosing screens to flow into each other as one large enclosure of space, with minor subdivisions only.
Make all house proportions more liberally human, with less wasted space in structure, and structure more appropriate to material, and so the whole more livable. Liberal is the best word. Extended straight lines or stream-lines were useful in this.
Fourth— To get the unwholesome basement up out of the ground, entirely above it, as a low pedestal for the living-portion of the home, making the foundation itself visible as a low masonry platform on which the building should stand.
Fifth— To harmonize all necessary openings to “outside” or to “inside” with good human proportions and make them occur naturally— singly or as a series in the scheme of the whole building. Usually they appeared as “light-screens” instead of walls, because all the “Architecture” of the house was chiefly the way these openings came in such walls as were grouped about the rooms as enclosing screens. The room as such was now the essential architectural expression, and there were to be no holes cut in walls as holes are cut in a box, because this was not in keeping with the ideal of “plastic.” Cutting holes was violent.
Sixth— To eliminate combinations of diSerent materials in favor of mono-material so far as possible; to use no ornament that did not come out of the nature of materials to make the whole building clearer and more expressive as a place to live in, and give the conception of the building appropriate revealing emphasis. Geometrical or straight lines were natural to the machinery at work in the building trades then, so the interiors took on this character naturally.
Seventh—To incorporate all heating, lighting, plumbing so that these systems became constituent parts of the building itself. These service features became architectural and in this attempt the ideal of an organic architecture was at work.
Eighth— To incorporate as organic Architecture—so far as possible—-furnishings, making them all one with the building and designing them in simple terms for machine work. Again straight lines and rectilinear forms.
Ninth— Eliminate the Decorator. He was all curves and all efflorescence, if not all “period.”
This was all rational enough so far as the thought of an organic architecture went. The particular forms this thought took in the feeling of it all could only be personal. There was nothing whatever at this time to help make them what they were. All seemed to be the most natural thing in the world and grew up out of the circumstances of the moment. Whatever they may be worth in the long run is all they are worth.
Now simplicity being the point in question in this early constructive effort, organic simplicity I soon found to be a matter of true coordination. And Beauty I soon felt to be a matter of the sympathy with which such coordination was effected. Plainness was not necessarily simplicity. Crude furniture of the Roycroft-Stickley-Mission Style, which came along later, was offensively plain, plain as a barn door—but never was simple in any true sense. Nor, I found, were merely machine-made things in themselves simple. To think “in simple,” is to deal in simples, and that means with an eye single to the altogether. This, I believe, is the secret of simplicity. Perhaps we may truly regard nothing at all as simple in itself. I believe that no one thing in itself is ever so, but must achieve simplicity (as an Artist should use the term) as a perfectly realized part of some organic whole. Only as a feature or any part becomes an harmonious element in the harmonious whole does it arrive at the estate of simplicity. Any wild flower is truly simple, but double the same wild flower by cultivation, it ceases to be so. The scheme of the original is no longer clear. Clarity of design and perfect significance both are first essentials of the spontaneously born simplicity of the lilies of the field who neither toil nor spin, as contrasted with Solomon who had “toiled and spun”—that is to say, no doubt had put on himself and had put on his temple, properly “composed,” everything in the category of good things but the cook-stove.
Five lines where three are enough is stupidity. Nine pounds where three are sufficient is stupidity. But to eliminate expressive words that intensify or vivify meaning in speaking or writing is not simplicity; nor is similar elimination in Architecture simplicity—it, too, may be stupidity. In Architecture, expressive changes of surface, emphasis of line and especially textures of material, may go to make facts eloquent, forms more significant. Elimination, therefore, may be just as meaningless as elaboration, perhaps more often is so. I offer any fool, for an example.
To know what to leave out and what to put in, just where and just how—Ah, that is to have been educated in knowledge of Simplicity.
As for Objects of Art in the house even in that early day they were the “bête noir” of the new simplicity. If well chosen, well enough in the house, but only if each was properly digested by the whole. Antique or modern sculpture, paintings, pottery, might become objectives in the Architectural scheme and I accepted them, aimed at them, and assimilated them. Such things may take their places as elements in the design of any house. They are then precious things, gracious and good to live with. But it is difficult to do this well. Better, if it may be done, to design all features together. At that time, too, I tried to make my clients see that furniture and furnishings, not built in as integral features of the building, should be designed as attributes of whatever furniture was built in and should be seen as minor parts of the building itself, even if detached or kept aside to be employed on occasion. But when the building itself was finished, the old furniture the clients already possessed went in with them to await the time when the interior might be completed. Very few of the houses were, therefore, anything but painful to me after the clients moved in and, helplessly, dragged the horrors of the old order along after them.
But I soon found it difficult, anyway, to make some of the furniture in the “abstract”; that is, to design it as architecture and make it “human” at the same time—fit for human use. I have been black and blue in some spot, somewhere, almost all my life from too intimate contacts with my own furniture. Human beings must group, sit or recline—confound them—and they must dine, but dining is much easier to manage and always was a great artistic opportunity. Arrangements for the informality of sitting comfortably, singly or in groups, where it is desirable or natural to sit, and still to
belong in disarray to the scheme as a whole—that is a matter difficult to accomplish. But it can be done now, and should be done, because only those attributes of human comfort and convenience, made to belong in this digested or integrated sense to the architecture of the home as a whole, should be there at all, in Modern Architecture. For that matter about four-fifths of the contents of nearly every home could be given away with good effect to that home. But the things given away might go on to poison some other home. So why not at once destroy undesirable things . . . make an end of them?
Here then, in foregoing outline, is the gist of America’s contribution to Modem American Architecture as it was already under way in 1893. But the gospel of elimination is one never preached enough. No matter how much preached, Simplicity is a spiritual ideal seldom organically reached. Nevertheless, by assuming the virtue by imitation—or by increasing structural makeshifts to get superficial simplicity—the effects may cultivate a taste that will demand the reality in course of time, but it may also destroy all hope of the real thing.
Standing here, with the perspective of long persistent effort in the direction of an organic Architecture in view, I can again assure you out of this initial experience that Repose is the reward of true simplicity and that organic simplicity is sure of Repose. Repose is the highest quality in the Art of Architecture, next to integrity, and a reward for integrity. Simplicity may well be held to the fore as a spiritual ideal, but when actually achieved, as in the “lilies of the field,” it is something that comes of itself, something spontaneously born out of the nature of the doing whatever it is that is to be done. Simplicity, too, is a reward for fine feeling and straight thinking in working a principle, well in hand,' to a consistent end. Solomon knew nothing about it, for he was only wise. And this, I think, is what Jesus meant by the text we have chosen for this discourse—“Consider the lilies of the field,” as contrasted, for beauty, with Solomon.
Now, a chair is a machine to sit in.
A home is a machine to live in.
The human body is a machine to be worked by will.
A tree is a machine to bear fruit.
A plant is a machine to bear flowers and seeds.
And, as I’ve admitted before somewhere, a heart is a suction-pump. Does that idea thrill you?
Trite as it is, it may be as well to think it over because the least any of these things may be, is just that. All of them are that before they are anything else. And to violate that mechanical requirement in any of them is to finish before anything of higher purpose can happen. To ignore the fact is either sentimentality or the prevalent insanity. Let us acknowledge in this respect, that this matter of mechanics is just as true of the work of Art as it is true of anything else. But, were we to stop with that trite acknowledgment, we should only be living in a low, rudimentary sense. This skeleton rudiment accepted, understood, is the first condition of any fruit or flower we may hope to get from ourselves. Let us continue to call this flower and fruit of ourselves, even in this Machine Age, Abt. Some Architects, as we may see, now consciously acknowledge this “Machine” rudiment. Some will eventually get to it by circuitous mental labor. Some are the thing itself without question and already in need of “treatment.” But “Americans” (I prefer to be more specific and say “Usonians”) have been educated “blind” to the higher human uses of it all—• while actually in sight of this higher human use all the while.
Therefore, now let the declaration that “all is machinery” stand nobly forth for what it is worth. But why not more profoundly declare that “Form follows Function” and let it go at that? Saying, “Form follows Function,” is not only deeper, it is clearer, and it goes further in a more comprehensive way to say the thing to be said, because the implication of this saying includes the heart of the whole matter. It may be that Function follows Form, as, or if, you prefer, but it is easier thinking with the first proposition just as it is easier to stand on your feet and nod your head than it would be to stand on your head and nod your feet. Let us not forget that the Simplicity of the Universe is very different from the Simplicity of a Machine.
New significance in Architecture implies new materials qualifying form and textures, requires fresh feeling, which will eventually qualify both as “ornament.” But “Decoration” must be sent on its way or now be given the meaning that it has lost, if it is to stay. Since “Decoration” became acknowledged as such, and ambitiously set up for itself as Decoration, it has been a makeshift, in the light of this ideal of Organic Architecture. Any House Decoration, as such, is an architectural makeshift, however well it may be done,
unless the decoration, so called, is part of the Architect’s design in both concept and execution.
Since Architecture in the old sense died and Decoration has had to shift for itself more and more, all so-called Decoration is become ornamental, therefore no longer integral. There can be no true simplicity in either Architecture or Decoration under any such condition. Let Decoration, therefore, die for Architecture, and the Decorator become an Architect, but not an “Interior Architect.”
Ornament can never be applied to Architecture any more than Architecture should ever be applied to Decoration. All ornament, if not developed within the nature of Architecture and as organic part of such expression, vitiates the whole fabric no matter how clever or beautiful it may be as something in itself.
Yes—for a century or more Decoration has been setting up for itself, and in our prosperous country has come pretty near to doing very well, thank you. I think we may say that it is pretty much all we have now to show as Domestic Architecture, as Domestic Architecture still goes with us at the present time. But we may as well face it. The Interior Decorator thrives with us because we have no Architecture. Any Decorator is the natural enemy of organic simplicity in Architecture. He, persuasive Doctor-of-Appearances that he must be when he becomes Architectural substitute, will give you an imitation of anything, even an imitation of imitative simplicity. Just at the moment, May 1930, he is expert in this imitation. France, the born Decorator, is now engaged with “Madame,” owing to the good fortune of the French market, in selling us this ready-made or made-to-order simplicity. Yes, Imitation Simplicity is the latest addition to imported “stock.” The Decorators of America are now equipped to furnish especially this. Observe. And how very charming the suggestions conveyed by these imitations sometimes are!
Would you have again the general principles of the spiritual-ideal of organic simplicity at work in our Culture? If so, then let us reiterate: First, Simplicity is Constitutional Order. And it is worthy of note in this connection that 9x9 equals 81 is just as simple as 2 plus 2 equals 4. Nor is the obvious more simple necessarily than the occult. The obvious is obvious simply because it falls within our special horizon, is therefore easier for us to see; that is all. Yet all
simplicity near or far has a countenance, a visage, that is characteristic. But this countenance is visible only to those who can grasp the whole and enjoy the significance of the minor part, as such, in relation to the whole when in flower. This is for the critics.
This characteristic visage may be simulated—the real complication glossed over, the internal conflict hidden by surface and belied by mass. The internal complication may be and usually is increased to create the semblance of and get credit for—simplicity. This is the Simplicity-lie usually achieved by most of the “surface and mass” architects. This is for the young architect.
Truly ordered simplicity in the hands of the great artist may flower into a bewildering profusion, exquisitely exuberant, and render all more clear than ever. Good William Blake says exuberance is beauty, meaning that it is so in this very sense. This is for the Modern Artist with the Machine in his hands. False Simplicity—Simplicity as an affectation, that is, Simplicity constructed as a Decorator’s outside put upon a complicated, wasteful engineer’s or carpenter’s “Structure,” outside or inside—is not good enough Simplicity. It cannot be simple at all. But that is what passes for Simplicity, now that startling Simplicity-effects are becoming the fashion. That kind of Simplicity is violent. This is for “Art and Decoration.”
Soon we shall want Simplicity inviolate. There is one way to get that Simplicity. My guess is, there is only one way really to get it. And that way is, on principle, by way of Construction developed as Architecture. That is for us, one and all.
5: THE TYRANNY OF THE SKYSCRAPER
BOCK ATELIERS
CONCRETE. SLAB ROOF. STONE WASHES AND WATER TABLE. WINDOWS WRAPPING CORNERS TO EXPRESS INTERIOR SPACE. 1902.
A
MICHELANGELO built the first skyscraper, I suppose, when he hurled the Pantheon on top of the Parthenon. The Pope named it St. Peter’s and the world called it a day, celebrating the great act ever since in the sincerest form of human flattery possible. As is well known, that form is imitation.
Buonarroti, being a sculptor himself (he was painter also but, unluckily, painted pictures of sculpture), probably thought Architecture, too, ought to be Sculpture. So he made the grandest statue he could conceive out of Italian Renaissance Architecture. The new church dome that was the consequence was empty of meaning or of any significance whatever except as the Pope’s mitre has it. But, in fact, the great dome was just the sort of thing authority had been looking for as a symbol. The world saw it, accepted and adopted it as the great symbol of great Authority. And so it has flourished as this symbol ever since, not only in the great capitals of the great countries of the world, but, alas, in every division of this country, in every State, in every county, in every municipality thereof.
From general to particular the imitation proceeds, from the dome of the National Capitol itself to the dome of the State Capitol. From the State Capitol to the dome of the County Court House, and then from the County Court House on down to the dome of the City Hall. Everywhere the symbol leaves us, for our authority, in debt to Michelangelo for life. Great success the world calls this and Arthur Brisbane calls it Great Art. Many institutions of learning also adopted the dome. Universities themselves affected it until they preferred Gothic. Big business, I suspect, covets it and would like to take it. But to its honor be it said that it has not yet done so. Yes—-this is success. Probably every other sculptor who ever lived would like to have done or to do the thing that Michelangelo did.
Yet, as consequence of a great sculptor’s sense of grandeur in an Art that was not quite his own, we may see a tyranny that might well make the tyrannical skyscraper of the present day sway in its socket sick with envy, although the tyrannical dome is by no means so cruel as the tyrannical skyscraper. But the tyrannical dome is more magniloquent waste. How tragic
it all is! It is not only as though Buonarroti himself had never seen the Grand Canyon, which of course he never could have seen, but it is as though no one else had ever seen it either, and monumental buildings therefore kept right on being domeous, domicular or dome-istic—on stilts because they knew no better.
Domed or damned was and is the status of official buildings in all countries, especially in ours, as a consequence of the great Italian’s impulsive indiscretion. But no other individual sculptor, painter or architect, let us hope, may ever achieve such success again, or Architecture at the end of its resources may pass out in favor of something else.
It would be interesting to me to know what Buonarroti would think of it now. But it is too late. We shall never know except as we imagine it for ourselves.
We should have to ignore the cradle-of-the-race, Persia, even Rome itself, to say that the sculptor did more than appropriate the dome. The earlier Romans had already made flat ones thrusting against the building walls, and the domes of Persia, relatively modest, though seated deep in the building, were tall and very beautiful. Stamboul and Hagia Sophia of course make St. Peter’s look like the scrap-pile of reborn posts, pilasters and mouldings of the Graeco-Roman sort that it is.
But Buonarroti got his dome up higher than all others—got it out of the building itself up onto stilts! Ah! that was better. History relates, however, that a hurry-up call had to be sent in at the last moment for the blacksmith. A grand chain was needed, and needed in a hurry, too, to keep this monumental grandeur, up there where it was, long enough for it to do its deadly work. While they were getting this grand chain fastened around the haunches of the grand dome, in jeopardy on its stilts, our hero, the truly great sculptor, deeply, or rather highly, in trouble with Architecture, must have known some hours of anguish such as only Architects can ever know.
I can imagine the relief with which he crawled into bed when all was secure, and slept for thirty-six hours without turning over. This contribution “by the greatest artist who ever lived”—Arthur Brisbane says that is what he is —was our grandest heritage from the rebirth of Architecture in Italy, called the Renaissance, and countless billions it has cost us to brag like that.
But all triumph, humanly speaking, is short-lived and we ourselves have found a new way to play hobby-horse with the Renaissance—a way particularly our own, and now we, in our time, astonish the world similarly. We are not putting a dome up on stilts—no, but we are carrying the stilts themselves on up higher than the dome ever stood and hanging reborn Architecture, or Architecture-soon-to-be-born, all over the steel, chasing up and down between the steel-stilts in automatic machines at the rate of a mile a minute, until the world gasps, votes our innovation a success, and imitates. Another worldly success, but not this time empty in the name of grandeur. By no means, we are no longer like that. We are doing it for money, mind you— charging off whatever deficit may arise in connection therewith to Advertising Account.
We are now, ourselves, running races up into the sky for advertising purposes, not necessarily advertising authority now but still nobly experimenting with human lives, meantime carrying the herd-instinct to its logical conclusion. Eventually, I fervently hope, carrying the aforesaid instinct to its destruction by giving it all that is coming to it so that it will have to get out into the country where it belongs—and stay there, for the city will be no more, having been “done to death.”
Our peculiar invention, the skyscraper, began on our soil when Louis H. Sullivan came through the door that connected my little cubicle with his room in the Auditorium Tower, pushed a drawing-board with a stretch of manila paper upon it over onto my draughting-table, and, without a word, went back again into his own room and closed the door behind him.
There it was, in delicately pencilled elevation. I stared at it and sensed what had happened. It was the Wainwright Building—and there was the very first human expression of a tall steel office-building as Architecture. It was tall and consistently so—a unit, where all before had been one cornice building on top of another cornice building. This was a greater achievement than the Papal Dome, I believe, because here was utility become beauty by sheer truimph of imaginative vision.
Here out of chaos came one harmonious thing in service of human need where artist-ingenuity had struggled with discord in vain. The vertical walls were vertical screens, the whole emphatically topped by a broad band of ornament fencing the top story, resting above the screens and thrown into shade
by an extension of the roof-slab that said, emphatically, “finished.” The extension of the slab had no business to say “finished,” or anything else, so emphatically above the city streets, but that was a minor matter soon corrected. The Skyscraper as a piece of Architecture had arrived.
About the same time John Wellborn Root conceived a tall building that was a unit—The Monadnock. But it was a solid-walled brick building with openings cut out of the walls. The brick, however, was carried across openings on concealed steel angles and the flowing contours, or profile, unnatural to brick work was got by forcing the material—hundreds of special moulds for special bricks being made—to work out the curves and slopes. Both these buildings therefore had their faults. But the Wainwright Building has characterized all skyscrapers since, as St. Peter’s characterized all domes, with this difference: there was synthetic Architectural stuff in the Wainwright Building, it was in the line of organic Architecture—St. Peter’s was only grandiose Sculpture.
A man in a congested downtown New York street, not long ago, pointed to a vacant city lot where steam shovels were excavating. “I own it,” he said, in answer to a question from a man next to him (the man happened to be me), “and I own it clear all the way up,” making an upward gesture with his hand. Yes—he did own it, “all the way up,” and he might have added, too, “all the way down through to the other side of the world.” But then he might have thoughtfully qualified it by, “at least through to the center of the earth.” Yes, there stood His Majesty, legal ownership. Not only was he legally free to sell his lucky lot in the landlord lottery to increase this congestion of his neighbors “all the way up,” but he was blindly encouraged by the great city itself to do so, in favor of super-concentration. The city, then, gets a thrill out of “going tall”? Architects, advertising as wholesale “manufacturers of space for rent,” are advocating tall, taller and tallest, in behalf of their hardy clients. Inventive genius, too, properly invited, aids and abets them all together, until this glorious patriotic enterprise, space-making for rent, is looked upon as bona-fide proof of American progress and greatness. The space-makers-for-rent say skyscrapers solve the problem of congestion, and might honestly add, create congestion, in order to solve it some more some other day, until it will all probably dissolve out into the country, as in-
evitable reaction. Meantime, these Machine-made solutions with an ancient architectural look about them all, like the Buonarroti dome, are foolishly imitated out on the western prairies and in the desolate mountain States. In large or even in smaller and perhaps even in very small towns, you may now see both together.
Our modern steel Goliath has strayed as far away from native moorings as Tokio, Japan, where it is almost as appropriate to that country as the Comice is appropriate to Abraham Lincoln, in our own.
This apotheosis of the landlord may be seen now as another tyranny—The Tyranny of the Skyscraper. It is true, so it seems, that “it is only on extremes that the indolent popular mind can rest.”
Having established an approximate form for these lectures—a preliminary amble in the direction of the subject, then a reference to authority as text, then the discourse and a conclusion to lay it finally before you, all in the good old manner of my father’s sermons—let us keep the form, choosing as text this time: “Do unto others as ye would that others should do unto you.” The attribution is universally known. But not so well known perhaps is the command by Moti, the Chinese Sage: “Do yourselves that which you would have others do themselves.”
The Tyranny of the Skyscraper
It has only just begun, but we may observe that Father Knickerbocker’s Village, to choose our most conspicuous instance, is already gone so far out of drawing, beyond human scale, that—become the great Metropolis—it is no good place in which to live, to do good work in, or wherein even to go to market. This, notwithstanding the stimulus or excitation of the herd-instinct that curses the whole performance. “The only way to cross the street in New York City now is to be bom on the other side,” one of her own has recently said.
None the less—in fact just because of this—the price of ground that happens to be caught in the urban drift as it rims uptown in a narrow streak—no doubt to msh back again—soars just because the lucky areas may be multiplied by as many times as it is possible to sell over and over again the original ground area—thanks to the mechanical device of the skyscraper. The ground area used to be multiplied by ten, it was soon multiplied by

MODERN ARCHITECTURE
fifty, and it may now be multiplied by one hundred or more. Meantime, we patiently pass over wide, relatively empty spaces in the city to get from one such congested area to another such congested area, waiting patiently, I suppose, until the very congestion, which is the source of inflated values, overreaches itself by solution and the very congestion it was built to serve severely interferes with and finally curses its own sacred sales-privilege. New York, even at this very early stage of the high and narrow, speaks of the traffic problem, openly confessing such congestion—though guardedly. And as congestion must rapidly increase, metropolitan misery has merely begun. Yes—merely begun—for should every owner of a lot contiguous to or even already within the commercially exploited areas, not to mention those hopefully lying empty in between, actually take advantage of this opportunity to soar, all upward flights of ownership would soon become useless and worthless. This must be obvious to any one. Moreover the occupants of the tall buildings are yet only about one-third the motor-car men that all will eventually emerge if their devotion to machine-made concentration means anything profitable to them.
So only those congestion-promoters with their space-manufacturers and congestion-solvers who came first, or who will now make haste, with their extended telescopes, uplifted elephant-trunks, Bedford-stone rockets, Gothic toothpicks, modern fountain pens, and “Eversharps” shrieking verticality, selling perpendicularity to the earthworms in the village lane below, can ever be served. Nevertheless property owners lost between the luck, continue to capitalize their undeveloped ground on the same basis as the man lucky enough to have got up first into the air. So fictitious land-values are created on paper. Owing to the vogue of the skyscraper, real estate values boom on a false basis, and to hold and handle these unreal values, now aggravated by the machine-made, standard solution, subways—sub-subways—are proposed, and super sidewalks, or super, super sidewalks or double-decked or triple-decked streets. Proposals are made to set all the fair forest of buildings up out of reach of the traffic on their own fair stilts as a concession to the crowd. The human life flowing in and out of all this crowded perpendicularity is to accommodate itself to growth as of potato sprouts in a cellar. Yes—these super-most solutions are seriously proposed to hold and handle landlord ‘profits in a dull craze for verticality and vertigo that concentrates
the citizen in an exaggerated super-concentration that would have shocked Babylon—and have made the tower of Babel itself fall down to the ground and worship.
“To have and to hold,” that is now the dire problem of the skyscraper minded. Just why it should be unethical or a weakness to allow this terrific concentration to relieve itself by spreading out is quite clear. Anyone can see why. And to show to what lengths the landlord is willing and prepared to go to prevent it: as superior and philanthropic a landlord as Gordon Strong of Chicago recently argued—as the Germans originally suggested—the uselessness of the freedom of sun and air, claiming artificial ventilation and lighting now preferable, demanding that walls be built without windows, rooms be hermetically sealed, distribution and communication be had by artificially lighted and ventilated tunnels, subways and super-ways. Here, on behalf of the landlord, by way of the time-serving space-maker-for-rent, we arrive at the “City of Night”: Man at last and all so soon enslaved by, and his very fife at the mercy of, his own appliances.
A logical conclusion, this one of Gordon Strong’s, too, with its strong points— if the profits of exciting and encouraging the concentration of citizens are to be kept up to profitable pitch and the citizen be further educated and reconciled to such increased congestion as this would eventually put up to him. This patient citizen—so much more valuable, it seems, if and when congested! Must the patient animal be further congested or further trained to congest himself until he has utterly relinquished his birthright? Congested yet some more and taught—he can learn—to take his time (his own time especially, mind you), and watch his step more carefully than ever? Is he, the pickle in this brine, to be further reconciled or harder pushed to keep on insanely crowding himself into vertical grooves in order that he may be stalled in horizontal ones?
Probably—but in the name of common sense and an Organic Architecture, why should the attempt be made to so reconcile him, by the Architects themselves, at least? Architects are yet something more than hired men, I hope. Else why should they not quit and get an honest living by honest labor in the country, preparing for the eventual urban exodus?
May we rightfully assume Architecture to be in the service of humanity?
Do we not know that if Architecture is not reared and maintained in such service it will eventually be damned?
The city, too, for another century, may we not still believe, was intended to add to the happiness, security and beauty of the life of the individual considered as a human being? Both assumptions, however, are denied by the un-American false premium put upon congestion by the skyscraper minded: un-American, I say, because for many years past rapid mobilizing, flying, motoring, teletransmission, steadily proceeding, have given back to man the sense of space, free space, in the sense that a great, free, new country ought to know it—given it back again to a free people. Steam took it away. Electricity and the Machine are giving it back again to man and have not only made super-concentration in a tight, narrow tallness unnecessary, but vicious, as the human motions of the city-habitant became daily more and more compact and violent. All appropriate sense of the space-values the American citizen is entitled to now in environment are gone in the great American City, as freedom is gone in a collision. Why are we as architects, as citizens, and as a nation, so slow to grasp the nature of this thing? Why do we continue to allow a blind instinct driven by greed to make the fashion and kill, for a free people in a new land, so many fine possibilities in spacious city planning? The human benefits of modern automobilization and teletransmission— where are they? Here we may see them all going by default, going by the board, betrayed—to preserve a stupid, selfish tradition of proprietorship. Is it because we are all, more or less, by Nature and opportunity, proprietors? Are we proprietors first and free-men afterward—if there is any afterward? At any rate, all these lately increased capacities of men for a wide range of lateral movement due to mechanicization are becoming useless to the citizen, because we happen to be sympathetic to the cupidity of proprietorship and see it not only as commercially profitable but as sensational.
Now, as a matter of course and in common with all Usonian villages that grow up into great cities and then grow on into the great metropolis, Father Knickerbocker’s Village grew up to its present jammed estate; the great metropolis grew up on the original village-gridiron. New York, even without skyscrapers and automobiles, would have been crucified long ago by the gridiron. Barely tolerable for a village, the grid becomes a dangerous crisscross check to all forward movements even in a large town where horses
are motive power. But with the automobile and skyscraper that opposes and kills the automobile’s contribution to the city, stop-and-go attempts to get across to somewhere or to anywhere, for that matter, in the great Metropolis, are inevitable waste—dangerous and maddening to a degree where sacrificial loss, in every sense but one, is for everyone.
Erstwhile village streets become grinding pits of metropolitan misery. Frustration of all life, in the-village-that-became-a-city, is imminent in this, the great unforeseen Metropolis; the Machine that built it and furnishes it forth also was equally unforeseen. Therefore it may not be due, alone, to this ever-to-be-regretted but inherited animal tendency of his race to herd, that the citizen has landed in all this urban jam. But that animal tendency to herd is all that keeps him jammed now against his larger and more important interests as a thinking being. He is tragically, sometimes comically, jammed. True, properly fenced, he jams himself. Properly fenced he may continue to jam himself for another decade or so, and cheerfully take the consequences. Strangely helpless for long periods of time is this Usonian, human social unit! But let us try to believe that—as Lincoln observed—not all of him for all of the time.
Now what does the human unit, so far in contempt in all this commercial Bedlam, receive as recompense for the pains of stricture and demoralizing loss of freedom, for the insulting degradation of his appropriate sense of space? What does he receive beside a foolish pride in the loss of himself to his time, increase in his taxes and increase in the number of handsome policemen at crossings?
A little study shows that the skyscraper in the rank and file of the “big show” is becoming something more than the rank abuse of a commercial expedient. I see it as really a mechanical conflict of machine resources. An internal collision! Even the landlord must soon realize that, as profitable landlordism, the success of verticality is but temporary, both in kind and character, because the citizen of the near future preferring horizontality—the gift of his motor-car, and telephonic or telegraphic inventions—will turn and reject verticality as the body of any American City. The citizen himself will turn upon it in self-defense. He will gradually abandon the city. It is now quite easy and safe for him to do so. Already the better part of him can do better than remain.
The landlord knows to his dismay that to sell the first ten floors of New York City is his new problem. The city fathers, too, now see that, except on certain open spaces, and under changed conditions where beautiful tall buildings might well rise as high as the city liked, the haphazard skyscraper in the rank and file of city streets is doomed—doomed by its own competition. In certain strategic locations in every village, town or city, tall buildings, and as tall as may be, should be permissible. But even in such locations very tall buildings should be restricted to only such area of the lot on which they stand as can be lighted from the outside and be directly reached from a single interior vertical groove of direct entrance to such space. Normal freedom of movement may thus be obtained below on the lot-area that is proprietary to the building itself. Thus all tall building would be restricted to the central portion thus usable of each private lot area, adding the balance of that area, as park space, to the city streets. There would then be no longer interior courts in any building.
All real estate in the rank and file and upon which the tall buildings will cast their shadows, and from which they must partly borrow their light, should in building stay down to the point where the streets will be relieved of motorcar congestion, whether that point be three, five, seven or nine stories, this to be determined according to the width of the streets on which the buildings stand.
As for the widening of streets, the present sidewalk and curb might be thrown into the street as transportation area, and the future sidewalks raised to head room above the present street level, becoming in skilful hands well designed architectural features of the city. And these elevated sidewalks should be connected across, each way, at the street intersections and down, by incline, to the streets below at the same four points of street intersections. This would make all pedestrian movement free of automobilization and—crossing in any direction above the traffic—safe. Motor cars might be temporarily parked just beneath these elevated sidewalks, the sidewalks, perhaps, cantilevered from the buildings.
Parking space in front of all present shop-windows would thus be provided and protected overhead by the elevated sidewalks. Show-windows would become double-decked by this scheme. Show-windows above for the sidewalks and show-windows below for the road-bed. This practical expedient, for of
course it is no more than an expedient—only expedients are possible—would put a show-window emphasis on the second-story sidewalk level, which might become a mezzanine for entrances to the different shops also.
Entrances could be had to stores from the road-bed by recessions built in the lower store-front or by loggias that might be cut back into them. Such restraint and ordered release for tall buildings as here proposed might enhance the aspect of picturesque tallness and not leave further chaotic unfinished masses jamming into the blue. Such well designed separation of transportation and pedestrians as this might save the wear and tear of citizens doing daily the stations of the cross on their way to work.
Since in the Metropolis the gridiron is organic disaster, and to modify it much is impossible, why not, therefore, accept and respect it as definite limitation and ease it by some such practical expedient? Working toward such modifications as suggested would vastly benefit all concerned:
First—By limiting construction.
Second—By taking pedestrians off the road-bed and so widening it.
The upper sidewalks might be made sightly architectural features of the city. While all this means millions expended, it might be done; whereas to abandon the old cities may be done but to build new ones will not be done.
Various other expedients are now practicable, too, if they were to be insisted upon, as they might well be, in the public welfare—such as allowing no coal to be burned in the city, all being converted into electricity outside at the mines, and cutting down the now absurd automobile sizes of distinctly city carriers. All these things would palliate the evil of the skyscraper situation. But the danger of the city to humanity lies deeper, in the fact that human sensibilities naturally become callous or utterly damned by the constantly increasing futile sacrifices of time and space and patience, when condemned by stricture to their narrow grooves and crucified by their painful mechanical privileges. Condemned by their own senseless excess? Yes, and worse soon.
It seems that it has always been impossible to foresee the great city; not until it has grown up and won an individuality of its own is it aware of its needs. Its greatest asset is this individuality so hard won. The city begins as a village, is sometimes soon a town and then a city. Finally, perhaps, it becomes a Metropolis; more often the city remains just another hamlet. But every
village could start out with the plans and specifications for a Metropolis, I suppose. Some few, Washington among them, did so and partially arrived after exciting misadventures.
But the necessity for the City wanes because of the larger human interest. That larger human interest? Is it not always on the side of being, considering the individual as related, even in his work—why not especially in his work?— to health and to the freedom in spacing, mobile in a free new country; living in and related to sun and air; living in and related to growing greenery about him as he moves and has his little being here in his brief sojourn on an Earth that should be inexpressibly beautiful to him!
What is he here for anyway? Life is the one thing of value to him, is it not? But the Machine-made in a Machine Age, here in the greatest of Machines, a great City, conspires to take that freedom away from him before he can fairly start to civilize himself. We know why it does. And let us at this moment try to be honest with ourselves on another point, this “thrill”—the vaunted beauty of the skyscraper as an individual performance. At first, as we have seen, the skyscraper was a pile of cornice-buildings in reborn style, one cornice-building riding the top of another cornice-building. Then a great Architect saw it as a unit, and as beautiful Architecture. Pretty soon, certain other architects, so educated—probably by the Beaux-Arts—as to see that way, saw it as a column, with base, shaft and capital. Then other architects with other tastes seemed to see it as Gothic—commercial competitor to the Cathedral. Now the wholesale manufacturers of space-for-rent are seeing it as a commercial tower-building with plain masonry surfaces and restrained ornament upon which New York’s set-back laws have forced a certain picturesque outline, an outline pretty much all alike. A picturesqueness at first welcome as a superficial relief, but already visible as the same monotony-in-variety that has been the fate of all such attempts to beautify our country. Standardization defeats these attempts—the Machine triumphs over them all, because they are all false. Principle is not at work in them.
The Skyscraper of today is only the prostitute semblance of the architecture it professes to be. The heavy brick and stone that falsely represents walls is, by the very set-back laws, unnaturally forced onto the interior steel stilts to be carried down by them through twenty, fifty or more stories to the ground. The picture is improved, but the picturesque element in it all is false work
built over a hollow box. These new tops are shams, too—box-balloons. The usual service of the Doctor-of-Appearances has here again been rendered to modem Society.
New York, so far as material wealth goes, piled high and piling higher into the air, is a commercial Machine falsely qualified by a thin disguise. The disguise is a collection of brick and masonry façades, glaring signs and staring dead walls, peak beside peak, rising from canyon cutting across canyon. Everything in the narrowing lanes below is “on the hard,” groaning, rattling, shrieking! In reality the great machine-made Machine is a forest of riveted steel posts, riveted girder-beams, riveted brackets and concrete slabs, steel reinforced, closed in by heavy brick and stone walls, all carried by the steel framing itself—finally topped by water-tanks, set-backs, and spires, dead walls decorated by exaggerated advertising or chastely painted in panels with colored brick-work.
What beauty the whole has is haphazard, notwithstanding the book-architecture which space-makers-for-rent have ingeniously tied onto the splendid steel sinews that strain from story to story beneath all this weight of make-believe. But the Lintels, Architraves, Pilasters and Cornices of the pseudoclassicist are now giving way to the better plainness of surface-and-mass effects. This is making, now, the picturesque external New York, while the steel, behind it all, still nobly stands up to its more serious responsibilities. Some of the more recent skyscraper decoration may be said to be very handsomely suggestive of an Architecture to come. But how far away, yet, are appearances from reality!
The true nature of this thing is prostitute to the shallow picturesque, in attempt to render a wholly insignificant, therefore inconsequential, beauty. In any depth of human experience it is an ignoble sacrifice. No factitious sham like this should be accepted as “Culture.”
As seen in “The Passing of the Cornice,” we are the modern Romans. Reflect that the ancient Romans at the height of their prosperity lied likewise to themselves no less shamefully, when they pasted Greek architecture onto their magnificent engineering invention of the masonry arch to cover it decently. The Romans, too, were trying to make the kind of picture or the grand gesture demanded by Culture. The Roman arch was, in that age, comparable to the greatest of all scientific or engineering inventions
in our own Machine Age, comparable especially to our invention of steel. So likewise, what integrity any solution of the skyscraper problem might have in itself as good steel-and-glass construction has been stupidly thrown away. The native forests of steel, concrete and glass, the new materials of our time, have great possibilities. But in the hands of the modem Doctor-of-Appearances they have been made to seem rather than allowed to be. Sophisticated polishing by the accredited Doctor only puts a glare upon its shame. It cannot be possible that sham like this is really our own civilized choice? But owing to the neglect of any noble standard, such as that of an organic architecture, it is all going by default. All—sold.
Were it only strictly business there would be hope. But even that is not the case except as competitive advertising in any form is good business. Business ethics make a good platform for true Aesthetics in this Machine Age or in any other.
No—what makes this pretentious ignorance so tragic is that there is a conscious yearn, a generosity, a prodigality in the name of taste and refinement in nearly all of it. Were only mummery dropped, temporary expedient though it may be in itself, space-manufacturing-for-rent, so far as that goes in the skyscraper, might become genuine architecture and be beautiful as standardization in steel, metals and glass.
We now have reasonably safe mechanical means to build buildings as tall as we want to see them, and there are many places and uses for them in any village, town, or city, but especially in the country. Were we to learn to limit such buildings to their proper places and give them the integrity as standardized steel and glass and copper they deserve, we would be justly entitled to a spiritual pride in them; our submission to them would not then be servile in any sense. We might take genuine pride in them with civic integrity. The skyscraper might find infinite expression in variety—as beauty.
But today the great city as an edifice mocks any such integrity. Artists idealize the edifice in graphic dreams of gigantic tombs into which all life has fled—or must flee—or in which humanity remains to perish. Uninhabitable monstrosities? An insanity we are invited to admire?
From any humane standpoint the super-concentration of the skyscraper is super-imposition not worth its human price.
It is impossible not to believe that, of necessity, horizontality and the freedom 96

of new beauty will eventually take the place of opportune vertically and senseless stricture. And if these desiderata cannot be realized in the city, if they have no place there, they will take the place of the city. Breadth is now possible and preferable to verticality and vertigo, from any sensible human standpoint. Transportation and electrical transmission have made breadth of space more a human asset than ever, else what does our great machine-power mean to human beings? In all the history of human life upon earth, breadth, the consciousness of freedom, the sense of space appropriate to Freedom, is more desirable than height to live with in the use and beauty that it yields mankind.
Why then, has Commerce, the soul of this great, crude and youthful Nation, any pressing need further to capitalize and exploit the rudimentary animal instincts of the race it thrives on, or need to masquerade in the path picturesque, like the proverbial wolf in sheep’s clothing, in New York City or anywhere else?
As for Beauty—Standardization and its cruel but honest tool, the Machine, given understanding and accomplished technique, might make our own civilization beautiful in a new and noble sense. These inept, impotent, mechanistic elements, so cruel in themselves, have untold possibilities of beauty. In spite of prevalent and profitable abuses Standardization and the Machine are here to serve humanity. However much they may be out of drawing, human imagination may use them as a means to more life, and greater life, for the Commonwealth. So why should the Architect as Artist shirk or ignore humane possibilities to become anybody’s hired man—for profit? Or if he is on his own why should he be willing to pay tribute to false gods merely to please the unsure taste of a transitory period, or even his own “superior” taste?
Today all skyscrapers have been whittled to a point, and a smoking chimney is usually the point. They whistle, they steam, they moor dirigibles, they wave flags, or they merely aspire, and nevertheless very much resemble each other at all points. They compete—they pictorialize—and are all the same.
But they do not materialize as Architecture. Empty of all other significance, seen from a distance something like paralysis seems to stultify them. They
97
K,
are monotonous. They no longer startle or amuse. Verticality is already stale; vertigo has given way to nausea; perpendicularity is changed by corrugation of various sorts, some wholly crosswise, some crosswise at the sides with perpendicularity at the center, yet all remaining “envelopes.” The types of envelope wearily reiterate the artificial set-back, or are forced back for effect, with only now and then a flight that has no meaning, like the Chrysler Building.
The light that shone in the Wainwright Building as a promise, flickered feebly and is fading away. Skyscraper Architecture is a mere matter of a clumsy imitation masonry envelope for a steel skeleton. They have no life of their own—no life to give, receiving none from the nature of construction. No, none. And they have no relation to their surroundings. Utterly barbaric, they rise regardless of special consideration for environment or for each other, except to win the race or get the tenant. Space as a becoming psychic element of the American city is gone. Instead of this fine sense is come the tall and narrow stricture. The skyscraper envelope is not ethical, beautiful, or permanent. It is a commercial exploit or a mere expedient. It has no higher ideal of unity than commercial success.
6: THE CITY
SMALL TOWN HALL
PLASTERED FRAME. 1912-1913
IS THE city a natural triumph of the herd instinct over humanity, and therefore a temporal necessity as a hang-over from the infancy of the race, to be outgrown as humanity grows?
Or is the city only a persistent form of social disease eventuating in the fate all cities have met?
Civilization always seemed to need the city. The city expressed, contained, and tried to conserve what the flower of the civilization that built it most cherished, although it was always infested with the worst elements of society as a wharf is infested with rats. So the city may be said to have served civilization. But the civilizations that built the city invariably died with it. Did the civilizations themselves die of it?
Acceleration invariably preceded such decay.
Acceleration in some form usually occurs just before decline and while this acceleration may not be the cause of death it is a dangerous symptom. A temperature of 104 in the veins and arteries of any human being would be regarded as acceleration dangerous to life.
In the streets and avenues of the city acceleration due to the skyscraper is similarly dangerous to any life the city may have left, even though we yet fail to see the danger.
I believe the city, as we know it today, is to die.
We are witnessing the acceleration that precedes dissolution.
Our modern civilization, however, may not only survive the city but may profit by it; probably the death of the city is to be the greatest service the Machine will ultimately render the human being if, by means of it, Man conquers. If the Machine conquers, it is conceivable that Man will again remain to perish with his city, because the city, like all minions of the Machine, has grown up in man’s image—minus only the living impetus that is Man. The city is itself only Man-the-Machine—the deadly shadow of Sentient Man. But now comes a shallow philosophy accepting Machinery, in itself, as prophetic. Philosophers draw plans, picture, and prophesy a future city, more desirable, they say, than the pig-pile now in travail, their pictures reducing everything to a mean height—geometrically spaced.
In order to preserve air and passage, this future city relegates the human individual as a unit or factor to pigeonhole 337611, block F, avenue A, street No. 127. And there is nothing at which to wink an eye that could distinguish No. 337611 from No. 337610 or 27643, bureau D, intersection 118 and 119. Thus is the sentient individual factor—the citizen—appropriately disposed of in the cavernous recesses of a mechanistic system appropriate to man’s ultimate extinction.
This future city may be valuable and utilitarian along a line of march toward the ultimate triumph of the Machine over Man and may be accomplished before the turn finally comes.
To me it is dire prophecy. Skull and cross-bones symbolize a similar fate. Let us prefer to prophesy, finally, the triumph of Man over the Machine.
For final text, then, for our final discourse:
“Except as you, Sons-of-Earth, honor your birthright, and cherish it well by human endeavor, you shall be cut down, and perish in darkness, or go up in high towers—a sacrifice to the most high God. Look you well, therefore, to yourselves in your posterity. Keep all close to Earth, your feet upon the Earth, your hands employed in the fruitfulness thereof be your vision never so far, and on high.”
—Attributed to some unheeded Babylonian prophet.
What built the cities that, invariably, have died? Necessity.
With that necessity gone, only dogged Tradition that is another name for habit can keep the city alive, Tradition that has the vitality of inertia and the power of the ball and chain.
Necessity built the city when we had no swift, universal means of transportation and had no means of communication except by various direct personal contacts. Then the city became naturally the great meeting-place, the grand concourse, the immediate source of wealth and power in human intercourse. Only by congregating thus, the vaster the congregation the better, could the better fruits of human living then be had.
In that day the real life of the city lay in the stress of individual ties and the
variety of contacts. The electric spark of curiosity and surprise was alive in the street, in public buildings, in the home.
Government the city had—Fashions and Fads. But the salt and savour of individual wit, taste and character made the city a festival of life: a carnival as compared with any city today.
And Architecture then reflected this livelier human condition as it now reflects the Machine. Nor had the common denominator then arrived in the reckoning.
The common denominator has arrived with the Machine in TJsonia. Machine prophecy such as we have just referred to shows, if nothing else, that we are to deal with machinery considered as common-denominator salvation and in its most dangerous form here among us and deal with it soon, before it has finally to deal with our posterity as dominator. To deny virtue to the common denominator or to deny virtue to its eventual emancipator the Machine would be absurd. But the eventual city the common denominator will build with its machines will not only be greatly different from the olden city or the city of today; it will be vastly different from the new Machine-city of Machine-prophecy as we see it outlined by Le Corbusier and his school. What once made the city the great and powerful human interest that it was is now preparing the reaction that will drive the city somewhere, into something else. The human element in the civic equation may already be seen drifting or pushed—going in several different directions.
Congestion was no unmixed human evil until electricity, electrical intercommunication, motor cars, the telephone and publicity came; add to these the airship when it lays away its wings and becomes a self-contained mechanical unit.
Accepting all these, everything changes.
Organic consequences of these changes, unperceived at first, now appear. Freedom of human reach and movement, therefore the human horizon as a sphere of action is, in a single decade, immeasurably widened by new service rendered by the Machine. Horizontality has received an impetus that widens human activities immeasurably.
Therefore such need for concentration as originally built the city is really nearing an end. But these new facilities—of movement—gifts to us of the Machine, have, for a time, only intensified the old activity.
We are really witnessing an inevitable collision between mechanistic factors. The struggle is on. Additional human pressure, thus caused, thoughtlessly finds release by piling high into the air. The thoughtless human tendency in any emergency is to stand still, or to run away. We do—stay right there and pile up, or run away from the collision, to live to fight again some other day. To meet this human trait of staying right where we are, the skyscraper was born and, as we have seen, has become a tyranny. But the skyscraper will serve, equally well, those who are to run away, because probably the tall building has its real future in the country. But the skyscraper is now the landlord’s ruse to hold the profits not only of concentration but of super-concentration: in the skyscraper itself we see the commercial expedient that enables the landlord to exploit the city to the limit, and exploit it by ordinance.
So Greater Freedom to spread out without inconvenience, the most valuable gift brought by these new servants—electrical intercommunication, the automobile, telephone, airship and radio—has been perverted for the moment into the skyscraper, and the gifts of the Machine diverted to profit lucky realty.
Let us admit popular thrill in the acceleration, the excitement, directly due to these new mechanistic facilities. Temperatures run high. No one seems to know whether the excess is healthy excitement of growth or the fever of disease; whether it means progress or is only some new form of exploitation. Forces are themselves blind. In all history we may see that the human beings involved with elemental forces remain blind also for long periods of time. But —saving clause—along with the forces released by our new mechanistic servants, there comes in our day an ubiquitous publicity, a valuable publicity that often succeeds in getting done in a month what formerly may have drifted a decade. We have already cut elapsed time in all forms of human intercommunication, a hundred to one. To be conservative, what took a century in human affairs now takes ten years.
Fifteen years, an epoch.
Thirty years, an age.
So the reactions to any human activity, idea or movement may control this great agency, and even in one lifetime show the people the wisdom or folly of the nature of any particular activity and call for correction before the
THE CITY
affair is too far gone. Thus the fate of earlier civilization may be avoided by the dissemination of knowledge in ours. Educational influences thus brought to bear may avert disaster.
The traffic problem, as we have already seen in the “Tyranny of the Skyscraper,” forces attention to tyrannical verticality. The traffic problem is new but increasingly difficult—if not impossible—of solution.
Other problems will call soon and call louder.
As we have seen, the gridiron, originally laid out for the village now grown to the metropolis, already is cause for sufficient economic waste and human pain to wreck the structure of the city. High blood pressure, in the congested veins and arteries that were once the peaceful village gridiron, is becoming intolerable.
The pretended means of relief provided by space-makers-for-rent—the skyscraper itself—is now rendering distress more acute. The same means of relief carried somewhat further, and long before the solution reaches its logical conclusion, will have killed the patient—the overgrown city. Witness the splitting up of Los Angeles and Chicago into several centers, again to be split into many more.
And yet in new Machine-prophecy, the tyranny of the skyscraper now finds a philosophy to fortify itself as an ideal
We see, by the prophetic pictures of the city of the future, how the humanity involved therein is to be dealt with in order to render the human benefits of electricity, the automobile, the telephone, the airship and radio into herd-exploitation instead of into individual human lives.
And alongside these specific skyscraper solutions-by-picture of downtown difficulties there usually goes the problem of the tenement, the none-too-pretty picture of wholesale housing of the poor.
The poor, it seems, are still to be with us and multiplied, in this grand new era of the Machine. At any rate they are to be accepted, confirmed and especially provided for therein as we may see in the plans.
Catastrophe is to be made organic—built in.
That the poor will benefit by increased sanitation may be seen and granted at first glance. But not only are the living quarters of the poor to be made germ-
proof, but life itself, wherever individual choice is concerned, is to be made just as antiseptic, if we trust our own eyes.
The poor man is to become just as is the rich man—No. 367222, block 99, shelf 17, entrance K.
But the surface-and-mass architecture that now proposes to extinguish the poor man as human, has already proposed to do the same for his landlord. Therefore why should the poor man complain? Has he not, still, his labor for his pains?
There he is, the poor man! No longer in a rubbish heap. No. He is a mechanized unit in a mechanical system, but, so far as he goes, he still is but two by twice. He has been cleaned up but toned down.
Nor can the poor in the modernistic picture choose anything aesthetically alive to live with, at least so far as neighbors or landlord can see it. Dirty rags have been covered with a clean cardboard smock.
The poor man is exhibit C—cog 309,761,128 in the machine, in this new model for the greater machine the city is to become.
Observe the simplified aspect!
This indeed, is the Ne Plus Ultra of the E Pluribus Unum of Machinery. This new scheme for the city is delightfully impartial, extinguishes everyone, distinguishes nothing except by way of the upper stories, unless it be certain routine economies sacred to a business man’s civilization, certain routine economies to be shared by the innovators with the ubiquitous numericals who are the “common denominator,” shared with them by the nominators of the system as seen perfected in the picture. Shared fifty-fifty? Half to the initial nominator, half to the numericals? Fair enough—or—who can say?
The indistinguishable division of the benefits must in any case be left to the generosity of the initial nominators themselves, whoever they are. And who may say who they are?
But Humanity here is orderly. Human beings are again rank and file in the great war-—this time industrial—a peaceful war. The rank and file of the common denominator this time is gratuitously officered by architecture, standardized like any army, marched not only to and fro but up and down. Up and down—even more—much more and more to come. The common denominator on these up-and-down terms would be no more alive without the initial nominator than the machine will be without the human brain.
The common denominator itself has become the Machine, come into its very own at last before the war is fairly begun.
“The Noble Duke of York, he had ten thousand men”—he made them all go ten floors up and ten floors up again. And none may know just why they now go narrowly up, up, up, to come narrowly down, down, down—instead of freely going in and out and comfortably around about among the beautiful things to which their lives are related on this earth. Is this not to reduce everyone but the mechanistic devisors and those who may secure the privileges of the top stories, to the ranks—of the poor?
Well—the poor?
Why are they the poor? Is there mechanical cure, then, for shiftlessness— machine-made? Or are the thriftless those whom the Machine Age is to herd beneficially in the mass and cover becomingly with a semblance of decency in a machine-made Utopia? Or are the poor now to be the thrifty—themselves thus turned poor in all senses but one?
The lame, halt, blind and the sick are the only poor. As for the other poor— the discouraged, the unhappy—fresh air, free space, green grass growing all around, fruits, flowers, vegetables in return for the little work on the ground they require, would do more to abolish their poverty than any benefice mechanistic devisors can ever confer.
At present the urban whirl is common-denominator recreation; the urban crowd is common-denominator consolation; the dark comers of movie halls are the common-denominator retreats for recreation when those retreats are not far worse.
And the herd-instinct that moves in the crowd and curses it is only the more developed by the mechanistic conditions in which the crowd swarms and lives. Millions are already sunk so low as to know no other preferment, to desire none. The common denominator—so profitable when congested—being further educated to congest, taught to be lost when not excited by the pressure and warmth of the crowd, turns argus-eyed toward what—more whirl?
Yet many of the individuals composing the crowd, the best among them, know well that an ounce of independence and freedom in spacing under natural circumstances, is worth a ton of machine patronage, however disguised or distributed as sanitation or as “Art.”
A free America, democratic in the sense that our forefathers intended it to be, means just this individual freedom for all, rich or poor, or else this system of government we call democracy is only an expedient to enslave man to the Machine and make him like it.
But Democracy will, by means of the Machine, demonstrate that the city is no place for the poor, because even the poor are human.
The Machine, once our formidable adversary, is ready and competent to undertake the drudgeries of living on this Earth. The margin of leisure even now widens as the Machine succeeds. This margin of leisure should be spent, with the fields, in the gardens and in travel. The margin should be expanded and devoted to making beautiful the environment in which human beings are born to live—into which one brings the children who will be the Usonia of tomorrow.
And the Machine, I believe—absurd as it may seem now, absurd even to those who are to be the first to leave—will enable all that was human in the city to go to the country and grow up with it: enable human life to be based squarely and fairly on the ground. The sense of freedom in space is an abiding human desire, because the horizontal line is the line of domesticity —the Earthline of human life. The City has taken this freedom away.
A market, a counting-house and a factory is what the city has already become: the personal element in it all—the individual—withdrawing more and more as time goes on.
Only when the city becomes purely and simply utilitarian, will it have the order that is beauty, and the simplicity which the Machine, in competent hands, may very well render as human benefit. That event may well be left to the Machine.
This, the only possible ideal machine seen as a city, will be invaded at ten o’clock, abandoned at four, for three days of the week. The other four days of the week will be devoted to the more or less joyful matter of living elsewhere under conditions natural to man. The dividing lines between town and country are even now gradually disappearing as conditions are reversing themselves. The country absorbs the life of the city as the city shrinks to the utilitarian purpose that now alone justifies its existence. Even that coneen-
tration for utilitarian purposes we have just admitted may be first to go, as the result of impending decentralization of industry. It will soon become unnecessary to concentrate in masses for any purpose whatsoever. The individual unit, in more sympathetic grouping on the ground, will grow stronger in the hard earned freedom gained at first by that element of the city not prostitute to the Machine. Henry Ford stated this idea in his plan for the development of Muscle Shoals.
Even the small town is too large. It will gradually merge into the general non-urban development. Ruralism as distinguished from Urbanism is American, and truly Democratic.
The country already affords great road systems—splendid highways. They, too, leading toward the city at first, will eventually hasten reaction away from it. Natural parks in our country are becoming everywhere available. And millions of individual building sites, large and small, good for little else, are everywhere neglected. Why, where there is so much idle land, should it be parcelled out by realtors to families, in strips 25', 50' or even 100' wide? This imposition is a survival of feudal thinking, of the social economies practised by and upon the serf. An acre to the family should be the democratic minimum if this Machine of ours is a success!
What stands in the way?
It is only necessary to compact the standardized efficiency of the Machine, confine the concentration of its operation to where it belongs and distribute the benefits at large. The benefits are human benefits or they are bitter fruit. Much bitter fruit already hangs on the city-tree beside the good, to rot the whole.
An important feature of the coming disintegration of the Usonian city may be seen in any and every service station along the highway. The service station is future city service in embryo. Each station that happens to be naturally located will as naturally grow into a neighborhood distribution center, meeting-place, restaurant, rest room or whatever else is needed. A thousand centers as city equivalents to every town or city center we now have, will be the result of this advance agent of decentralization.
To many such traffic stations, destined to become neighborhood centers, will be added, perhaps, features for special entertainment not yet available by a man’s own fireside. But soon there will be little not reaching him at his own
fireside by broadcasting, television and publication. In cultural means, the Machine is improving rapidly and constantly.
Perfect distribution like ubiquitous publicity is a common capacity of the Machine. This single capacity, when it really begins to operate, will revolutionize our present arrangement for concentration in cities. Stores, linked to decentralized chain service stations, will give more perfect machinery of distribution than could ever be had by centralization in cities.
Complete mobilization of the people is another result fast approaching. Therefore the opportunity will come soon for the individual to pick up by the wayside anything in the way of food and supplies he may require, as well as to find a satisfactory temporary lodging.
The great highways are in process of becoming the decentralized metropolis. Wayside interests of all kinds will be commonplace. The luxurious motor-bus, travelling over magnificent road-systems, will make intercommunication universal and interesting. The railway is already only for the “long haul” in many parts of the country.
A day’s journey anywhere will soon be something to be enjoyed in itself, enlivened, serviced and perfectly accommodated anywhere en route. No need to tangle up in spasmodic stop-and-go traffic in a trip to town or to any city at all.
Cities are great mouths. New York the greatest mouth in the world. With generally perfect distribution of food and supplies over the entire area’'of the countryside, one of the vital elements helping to build the city has left it forever, to spread out on the soil from which it came: local products finding a short haul direct, where an expensive long haul and then back again was once necessary.
Within easy distance of any man’s dwelling will be everything needed in the category of foodstuffs or supplies which the city itself can now supply. The “movies,” “talkies” and all, will soon be seen and heard better at home than in any hall. Symphony concerts, operas and lectures will eventually be taken more easily to the home than the people there can be taken to the great halls in old style, and be heard more satisfactorily in congenial company. The home of the individual social unit will contain in itself in this respect all the city heretofore could afford, plus intimate comfort and free individual choice.
Schools will be made delightful, beautiful places, much smaller, and more specialized. Of various types, they will be enlivening, charming features along the byways of every countryside. Our popular games will be features in the school parks, which will be really sylvan parks available far and near to everyone.
To gratify what is natural and desirable in the get-together instinct of the community natural places of great beauty—in our mountains, seasides, prairies and forests—will be developed as automobile objectives, and at such recreation grounds would center the planetarium, the race-track, the great concert hall, the various units of the national theater, museums, and art galleries. Similar common interests of the many will be centered there naturally, ten such places to one we have now.
There will be no privately owned theaters, although there will be places for them along the highways. But good plays and other entertainments might be seen at these automobile objectives from end to end of the country in various national circuits—wherever a play showed itself popular or desired. Such objectives would naturally compete with each other in interest and beauty, stimulate travel, and make mobilization a pleasure, not a nuisance—• affording somewhere worth while to go. The entire countryside would then be a well developed park—buildings standing in it, tall or wide, with beauty and privacy for everyone.
There will soon remain the necessity for only shorter and shorter periods of concentration in the offices directly concerned with invention, standardization and production. The city of the near future will be a depot for the factory—-perhaps. Whatever it is, it will be only a degraded mechanistic servant of the Machine, because Man himself will have escaped to find all the city ever offered him, plus the privacy the city never had and is trying to teach him that he does not want. Man will find the manlike Freedom for himself and his that Democracy must mean.
Very well—how to mitigate, meantime, the horror of human life caught helpless or unaware in the machinery that is the city? How easiest and soonest to assist the social unit in escaping the gradual paralysis of individual independence that is characteristic of the Machine-made moron, a paralysis of the emotional nature necessary to the triumph of the Machine over Man, instead
of the quickening of his humanity necessary to Man’s triumph over the Machine?
That is the Architect’s immediate problem, as I see it.
Measured over great free areas, the living interest should be educated to lie in the contact of free individualities in the freedom of sun, light and air, breadth of spacing—with the ground. Again we need the stress of encountering varieties on a scale and in circumstances worthy the ideal of democracy and more a part of External Nature than ever before seen—more so because of internal harmony. We want the electric spark of popular curiosity and surprise to come to life again, along the highways and byways and over every acre of the land. In charming homes and schools and significant public gathering places . . . architectural beauty related to natural beauty. Art should be natural and be itself the joy of creating perfect harmony between ourselves and the birthright we have all but sold.
We may now dream of the time when there will be less government, yet more ordered freedom. More generous human spacing, we may be sure, will see to that.
When the salt and savour of individual wit, taste and character in modern life will have come into its own and the countryside far and near will be a festival of life—great life—then only will Man have succeeded with his Machine. The Machine will then have become the Liberator of Human Life.
And our Architecture will reflect this.
Shirking this reality, vaunted “modernity” is still making another “picture,” everywhere clinging to the pictorial—missing joy in merely seeking pleasure. “Modernistic” is attempting by fresh attitudinizing to improve the “picture.” The “new movement” still seeks to recreate joy by making shift to improve the imitation, neglectful of all but appropriate gestures.
But even an improved imitation as a picture will soon be trampled down and out—because of the Machine. No amount of picture making will ever save America now!
The Artifex alone in search of Beauty can give back the significance we have lost—and enable the Republic to arrive at that Great Art, in the inevitably Man-made concerns of life, which will be to the human spirit what clear
springs of water, blue sky, green grass and noble trees are to parched animal senses. For where the work of the artificer is a necessity, there the Artist must be creatively at work on significance as a higher form of life, or the life of the human spirit will perish in this fresh endeavor that as yet is only a promise in this twentieth century.
The Necessity for Artistry, that is laid upon us by the desire to be civilized, is not a matter only of appearances. Human necessity, however Machine-made or mechanically met, carries within itself the secret of the beauty we must have to keep us fit to live or to live with. We need it to live in or to live on. That new beauty should be something to live for. The “picture,” never fear, will take care of itself. In any organic architecture the Picture will be a natural result, a significant consequence, not a perverse cause of pose and sham.
Eventually we must live for the Beautiful whether we want to or not. Our industrial champion, Henry Ford, was forced to recognize this—probably not connecting the beautiful with Art, “the Bunk.” Just as he did in his industry, so America will be compelled to allow necessity its own honest beauty, or die a death nowise different from those nations whose traditions we accepted and idolized.
Unless what we now miscall culture becomes natively fit and is no longer allowed to remain superficial, this Picture, which America is so extravagantly busy “pictorializing,” can only hasten the end. The buttons, stuffs, dictums, wheels and things we are now using for the purpose of the picture will smother the essential—the life they were falsely made to falsely conceal instead of to express. And this experiment in civilization we call Democracy will find its way to a scrap-heap into which no subsequent race may paw with much success for proofs of quality.
Suppose some catastrophe suddenly wiped out what we have done to these United States at this moment. And suppose, ten centuries thereafter, antiquarians came to seek the significance of what we were in the veins of us—in the ruins that remained, what would they find? Just what would they find to be the nature of this picture-minded “pictorialization” of life and its contribution to the wisdom or the beauty of the ages past or to come?
Would the future find we were a jackdaw-people with a monkey-psychology
given over to the vice of devices—looking to devices for salvation—and discovering this very salvation to be only another and final device?
No? Just the same, they would find broken bits of every civilization that ever took its place in the sun hoarded in all sorts of irrevelant places in ours.
They would dig up traces of sacred Greek monuments for banking houses. The papal dome in cast iron fragments would litter the ancient site of every seat of authority, together with fragments in stone and terra-cotta of twelfth century cathedrals where offices and shops were indicated by mangled machinery—relics of dwellings in fifty-seven varieties and fragments of stone in heaps, none genuine in character, all absurdly mixed. They would find the toilet appurtenances of former ages preserved as classic parlor ornaments in ours. They would find a wilderness of wiring, wheels and complex devices of curious ingenuity, and—ye gods—what a collection of buttons! They might unearth traces of devices that enabled men to take to the air like birds or to go into the water like fishes, and they might find relics of our competent schemes of transportation and a network or web of tangled wires stringing across the country, the relic of all our remarkable teletransmissions. But I think the most characteristic relic of all would be our plumbing. Everywhere a vast collection of enamelled or porcelain waterclosets, baths and washbowls, white tiles and brass piping. Next would be the vast confusion of riveted steelwork in various states of collapse and disintegration where it had been imbedded in concrete. Where the steel was not so buried all would be gone except here and there where whole machines—a loom, a linotype, a cash register, a tractor, a dynamo, a passenger elevator—might be entombed in concrete chambers and so preserved to arouse speculation and curiosity, or to cause amusement as they were taken for relics of a faith in devices—a faith that failed! Of the cherished picture we are making nothing of any significance would remain. The ruin would defy restoration by the historian; it would represent a total loss in human Culture, except as a possible warning. A few books might be preserved to assist restoration, although the chemicalized paper now in use would probably have destroyed most of them utterly. Such glass and pottery as we make could tell but little except curious falsehoods. Certain fragments of stone building on the city sites would remain to puzzle the savant, for they would be quite Greek or quite Roman or quite Medieval Gothic, unless they were Egyptian or Byzantine. But mainly they would
find heaps of a Pseudo-Renaissance,—something that never told, nor ever could tell, anything at all. Only our industrial buildings could tell anything worth knowing about us. But few of these buildings would survive that long —electrolysis and rust would have eaten them utterly, excepting those where steel was buried in concrete. Glass fragments would be found in great quantity, but the frames, unless they happened to be bronze, and all else would be gone. They would have no skyscraper to gauge us by. Not one of those we have built would be there.
How and where, then, were it suddenly interrupted, would our progressive democratizing based upon picturizing the appliance, take its place in the procession of civilizations that rose and fell at appointed times and places? What Architecture would appear in the ruins?
And yet—in all this attempt behind the significantly insignificant picture, may we not see culture itself becoming year by year more plastic? Are not some of our modem ideas less obviously constructed and more potent from within wherever we are beginning to emerge from the first intoxication of liberty? The eventual consequence of Individual Freedom is surely the elimination by free thought of the insignificant and false. Imprisoning forms and fascinating philosophic abstractions grow weaker as character grows stronger and more enlightened according to Nature; this they will do in Freedom such as we profess—if only we will practise that Freedom. And, in spite of our small hypocrisy and adventitious reactions, let no one doubt that we really do yearn to practise genuine Freedom to a far greater extent than we do, all inhibitions and prohibitions notwithstanding. Yes, we may see a new sense of manlike Freedom growing up to end all this cruel make-believe. Freedom, in reality, is already impatient of pseudo-classic posture and will soon be sick of all picturizing whatsoever.
A common sense is on the rise that will sweep our borrowed finery, and the scene-painting that always goes with it, to the museums, and encourage good life so to live that America may honorably pay her debt to manhood by keeping her promises to her own Ideal.