Figure 1.1. Pasquino, Piazza di Pasquino, Rome. Photograph by the author. 

Introduction 

Their story begins on ground level, with footsteps. 

Michel de Certeau 

T he ravaged body of Pasquino haunts Rome’s urban space (see Figure I.i). Situated within a convergence of pathways, the marble statue remains, after almost five hundred years, an illusory presence among rushing footsteps that come into close proximity only to be dispersed again. People approach from all directions, including the nearby and much frequented Piazza Navona, but do not necessarily stop. When they do linger, it is usually to consider the anonymous notes and verses that sometimes are still found attached to the ancient statue or the nearby walls, some recently posted, others fading or peeling away. On occasion, the proliferation of these sardonic and scornful messages compels pedestrians and even motorcyclists, in spite of direction or speed, to come to a sudden halt. Certainly Pasquino’s own disintegrating body cannot hold passersby in place for long, and even in these days of zealous art conservation there is little concern for its future. Ironically, it is the statue’s ruinous body that has enabled Pasquino to speak to the present. His many disguised voices constantly bring urban space into the moment by revealing its conflicts and contradictions, and producing, in the words of Henri Lefebvre, “both its worst and its best . . . as prodigal of monstrosities as of promises (that it cannot keep).”1 

The representation of Pasquino (see Figure 1.2) within a set of prints published in Rome in 1621 offers the opportunity to consider the crucial relation between the statue’s fading corporeality and the time and space of the street.2  Images of Ancient Statuary of the City of Rome  presents a sequence of Rome’s most celebrated ancient statues and through their reconstruction projects a fantasy of bodily coherence and perfection. Pasquino dwells uneasily within this vision of Rome. The print itself is barely stitched together, revealing its various revisions as well as the statue s own multiple appropriations. Horns and whips are still visible at the foot of the statue, but these belong to another Pasquino, one associated with clandestine forms of poetry rather than archaeological reconstruction.3 The accumulation of sarcastic messages around the statue 

1

 

Figure 1.2. Pasquino,  Images of Ancient Statuary of the City of Rome, 1621, 115. British Library. 

seems to overwhelm its new Latin title, which, inserted within the frame, insists on the statue’s archaeological classification. Numbers found around the margins remind the viewer that the print, like Pasquino, has had other affiliations. Pasquino’s own voice, inscribed at the base of the statue, only adds to the ambiguity of his identity: 

I am not as I seem a worn-out baboon without feet and without hands Nor am I the ape of Nicolö Zoppino with the other limbs deformed and strange But I am that most famous Pasquino and I make tremble the most powerful Lords and astonish foreigners and peasants when I compose in vernacular or in Latin My persona was shaped thus by the blows that strike me from here and from there Because I speak their faults openly, but as long as I have my well-used tongue in my mouth 

What do I care, even if the rest of me perishes, I shall keep singing but it is Zara that chooses whose turn it is to play the fool.4 

Pasquino attributes the power of his voice to a diminished physical appearance that permits others to take on his persona but remain undetected. Thus to have a voice the statue, like the print, enacts a constant process of fragmentation and reconstruction.5 Moreover, the reference to Zara, the game of dice, suggests that this voice is not without risk and that the statue, like the print, cannot be reduced to a singular will, either by presuming the full force of its intention or by delimiting its consequences. Almost faceless, Pasquino turns to face the viewer and, by way of a torn piece of paper located haphazardly above his head, promises: “See how I am about to sing all the truth. The torn messages attached to the wall, in Latin and Italian, evoke the custom of posting anonymous verses in which language’s own hierarchies are appropriated to critique inequitable social relations. But these verses do not, as one might expect, target the powerful and the un just. Rather they mock the necessity of taking up disguises as one moves through the city, operates in the papal court, or seeks to seduce women.6 It would seem that the exchanges around Pasquino are represented as a continuation of exchanges located elsewhere in the city. If in this space disembodiment is necessary for truth, it is precisely because in all other spaces disembodiment is necessary for deception. The altered body is detached from direct social interaction and responsibility, and even becomes susceptible to the erroneous, unpredictable, and random through such dislocated social relations. Few visual images could convey this social predicament more poignantly than Pasquino’s disintegrating body, entangled as it is within the vestiges of his usually unacknowledged and now virtually absent companion. 

The practice of posting transgressive verses for all to see can be regarded as an example of that much discussed early modern imaginary space, the world turned upside down.7 After all, the inscription  “Pazzia Sapienza ”(“insane wisdom”), located directly below the statue, makes the idea of a satirical inversion of social space explicit. Yet utopic space is not usually defined through social relations operating in actual places.8 Pasquino, however, stands out from other ancient statues featured in the set 

of prints precisely through the specificity of time and place. These may boast of complete and impervious bodies, but their integrity is produced in relation to the abstracted space of the blank page.9 By contrast, Pasquino is situated against a crumbling wall surface and among the satiric notes that link the statue to a neighborhood in Rome’s central district of Parione. Even the inscription,  “Pazzia Sapienza,”  which calls up the inversion of the social order, also points to a specific locale, since it puns both the urban space of the piazza and the nearby university, the Sapienza. It so happens that the installation of the statue at this particular juncture of streets was associated from an early date with the university, and especially with the public display of learned poetry by members of the Sapienza during their procession on the feast day of St. Mark.10 Cardinal Oliviero Carafa, who was said to have placed Pasquino in 1501 at the side of the Orsini palace where he held rooms, was also credited with establishing this practice, which included dressing the statue in mythological disguises, posting a selection of Latin verses, and publishing the most outstanding examples. Other sixteenth-century accounts seek to affix the statue within the same locale but for entirely different reasons. One maintains that the statue was placed in front of the shop of a tailor called Pasquino, who worked for the papal court and whose boisterous critique of those in power led to his being credited, long after his death and by way of his marble namesake, with all such views.11 

Rather than an imaginary inversion of social reality, Pasquino evokes a public space and is a potent reminder of the conflictual relations through which early modern notions of the public were forged.12 Indeed, what emerges in all attempts to represent the site of Pasquino is the diverse, unpredictable, and ephemeral noises of the street. One only has to consider early modern guidebooks to detect the statue’s multiple and contingent claims. Within seventeenth-century tourist guidebooks of Rome the city is defined in terms of orderly itineraries, clear boundaries, and physical tra-versability. Its coherence and segmentation are, in fact, taken as signs of modernity. Yet Pasquino fails both to fit within the overall city and to be separated from other urban spaces. The guidebook  Portrait of Modern Rome,  first published in 1638, represents Pasquino through a juxtaposition of image (see Figure 1.3) and text, directing each to perform a slightly different task.13 In the image, the statue is shown high on a pedestal and set against a high palace wall. Pasquino is on the edge but he commands an urban space shaped by gnarled pathways. In contrast to the void that gives shape to the adjacent image of Piazza Navona (see Figure 6.4 in chapter 6), the space of Pasquino is overflowing with physical movement and exchange, as vehicles, people, and animals scurry to and from the statue. The messages attached to the walls, although illegible to the reader of the guide, remain the focus of all haphazard convergence. Pasquino becomes a diversion from the increasingly monumentalized Piazza Navona, which is itself defined in relation to its “displacement,” the space of Pasquino. 

Figure 1.3. Pasquino,  Portrait of Modern Rome,  1638, p. 232. British Library. 

Within the text another context for Pasquino emerges, that of the city at large: 

Pasquino is an ancient statue, in excellence reputed to be the equal of the famous Hercules of the Belvedere. Of both one and the other due to the injury of time, or to Barbarians, nothing remains but a trunk, the other members being entirely useless and worn. It is believed that the name of this one, as of the one in the Campidoglio commonly called Marforio, was given as a joke, or more impudently in irony. Since in Italy crude and stupid men are named with this sort of vocabulary, it was customary for those of great talent to publicize wittily their slander under the two names to remain hidden. And the location of this statue has greatly served these sorts because being the most frequented of Rome, and being the street that is called Ponteficia, it gave much opportunity to attach their libelous writings, so that they could most quickly be seen and all made public. Its celebrity has given the name not only to the district, but also to the palace in the corner of which it is situated. These two in its honor are today called Pasquino, even if the palace belongs to the Lords Orsini, the most ancient barons and most prominent Romans and even Prefects of Rome, and as the most spacious and magnificent in the city, it has served to house eminent lords. And it is here that the center of Rome is said to be.14 

Pasquino is initially linked to the equally ruinous torso Belvedere, one of the celebrated statues in the Vatican collections, and thus is assessed according to its aesthetic merits. But almost immediately this gives way to another circuit, namely that of the talking statues distributed throughout Rome and endowed with transgressive voices and narratives.15 Thus Pasquino circulates within two very different citywide networks, which can be distinguished according to Henri Lefebvre’s notions of domination and appropriation.16 As an object of aesthetic interest, the statue functions in the manner of a monument and thus exercises “an attraction only to the degree that it creates distance.”17 In relation to citywide circulation of critique, however, the statue “gathers things together only to the extent that it pushes them away and disperses them.” In the first instance, the statue represents claims of social rank, specifically the long-term domination of the neighborhood by the Orsini family through an unbroken lineage that ties local space to the city’s illustrious ancient history. In the second instance, it represents those for whom the links between space and time are much more tenuous, entailing momentary appropriations full of danger but also opportunity. 

The domination and appropriation of space are raised side by side, but they intersect in unexpected ways. By naming the Ponteficia, the thoroughfare that linked the Vatican to the center of Rome, the guide attributes the statue’s opportunities to its location within the route of the papal  possesso.  In the seventeenth century this procession, undertaken by the newly elected pope from San Pietro to his bishop’s seat at San Giovanni Laterano, obliged Rome’s diverse groups and officials to participate in the public performance of their own subjection to papal authority. The appropriation of 

Pasquino became most resonant precisely during the time of the  possesso,  when the space of clandestine critique came into direct contact with papal politics. After all, these uses of the space operated not only during the procession itself, but also in its restagings within widely distributed prints and pamphlets. Pamphlets of Leo XI’s  possesso,  held on August n, 1605, foreground the performance of Tuscan poetry in honor of the newly elected Medici pope undertaken by the Florentine community at the statue of Pasquino.18 This new kind of topical pamphlet banked on novelty and surprise, and in the 1644  possesso  of Innocent X these were provided by a local French merchant’s reconstruction of Pasquino as a mythical god: 

As for the Piazza that is called Pasquino, it was sumptuously adorned with tapestries and damasks, by the French merchant called Monsu Gabriel Sologna, who has a large shop under the palazzo of the Lords Orsini, which faces the piazza on two sides, and is full of luxurious merchandise and curious articles from France. At the angle of the shop is a celebrated statue, which is not lacking in esteem by those knowledgeable in sculpture for its attitude of an ancient gladiator soldier, and which now resembles a torso, or remnant of a statue, and is called by the entire world Pasquino. The latter was beautiful, healed from its lack of limbs and beautifully ornamented, and in this solemnity transformed into a Neptune with a beard and curly white mane, and with trident in hand, arranged and assembled inside a beautiful triumphant chariot.19 

The account defines the space as a piazza, bringing to it coherence and autonomy through the joint devices of courtly excess and exotic marketable products. The rich display of materials removed the space from ordinary time, and thus from the possibility of other, more illicit appropriations. Yet it also linked it to its everyday commercial uses by highlighting Solognas attempt to gain the upper hand over local sellers. 

Indeed, the presence of merchant activities and particularly the printing industry was crucial to the ways this space operated as a concentrated site of circulation and exchange. Many early modern accounts describe the proliferation of printing shops and booksellers in this neighborhood, and call attention to the new production of topical pamphlets as well as to the display of printed materials on the street.20 In the new guidebook  In Search of Rome,  first published in 1644 as a rival to  Portrait of Modern Rome,  the statue is specifically used to define a marketplace of print, one that also includes other forms of communications that move across the city and even beyond: 

Pasquino, where one finds the seat of the compilers of topical pamphlets and the writers of stories. In that one is the post office of Milan, the printer of the chamber (Stampator Camerale), the book sellers, the glove shops and the stationers.21 

If the illicit possibilities of the space are erased through the interests of consumers, this commercial venture brushes up against and even banks on Pasquino’s irreverent associations. The posting of subversive texts brought to the market of print not only 

potential buyers through the congregation of people, but also the topicality of the space and its sense of urgency. 

Within this intersection of streets, then, public opinion and the marketing of print were closely interlinked. According to Alexandra Halasz, the intervention of printed pamphlets in the public sphere was met with concern for the dissemination of discourse by the marketplace outside the authority of church and state.22 This worry is present in the guidebook  In Search of Rome,  which includes a second, rather different account of the site of Pasquino but still produced through the deployment of printed materials: 

In the piazza of Pasquino will be the beginning of this day’s tour. The piazza is thus called from an antique statue reputed to be excellent, even if through the injury of time it is reduced to only an almost deformed trunk. The name is thought to be invented and the image to be of someone else unknown to us; it serves those in the curia and charitable institutions to publicize  bandi,  bulls, decrees, indulgences and the like; it is situated at an angle of the palace of the Orsini.23 

The scholarly interests raised by the statue are consistent with the guide’s approach to antiquities, yet the worry expressed about Pasquino’s lack of clear identity cannot but be associated with the transgressive opportunities of the space, be it through the circulation of public opinion or commerce. Even so, if there is opportunity here, it is given over to authority. Indeed, it is the notifications, bulls, and decrees through which authorities regulated the street and its movements that are foregrounded. Yet neither papal nor civic officials favored this area for posting printed orders, perhaps due to its proliferation of print shops, and even its reputation for the display of illicit writings.  In Search of Rome,  as will emerge here, reinvests the notion of the changing modern city with stable state authority. But equally decisive is the guide’s commitment to forging public rather than local space. The space of Pasquino is thus shown to resonate in relation to the citywide circulation of print. And, since the relation of the district to the circulation of print is still retained, the act of substituting one kind of printed material (official regulation) for others (pamphlets and prints for the market or even illicit texts) brings these much closer together. After all, these already shared the practice of posting and reading printed paper on the street as well as the assumption of citywide circulation. 

The appearance of new kinds of guidebooks in the late 1630s signals a decisive moment of change in Rome’s complex interrelations. These argue for a modern city produced from particular forms of urban order, comprehensive knowledge, and social progress. But just who had a stake in the unprecedented but also distinctly varied discourses on urban modernity generated through tourism and the marketplace? Certainly the guidebooks emerged at a time when authorities accelerated their recent management of a changing urban terrain. The scholarly literature has focused on just this aspect of Rome’s urban life, privileging papal attempts to reorganize and modern- 

ize the city.24 In these studies, descriptions of the city as an unreadable urban terrain are frequently juxtaposed with plans for spacious squares, straight thoroughfares, and axial vistas. Unobstructed urban movement is taken to be the measurement of modernity, but only for pilgrims, tourists, or the fashionable carriage of the upper ranks. Such interpretations, constrained by a tendency to filter a myriad of social practices and relations through the intentions of a single pope, have served to obscure the con-flictual struggles for public space. Rome has become a singular subject, inseparable from a sequence of popes—Nicholas V, Sixtus V, Alexander VII—all apparently fit-ting into a coherent program of urban planning. One has to ask: What is the work of a consistent representation of Rome that reduces the urban surface to a spectacle of papal power and overwhelms everyone in its vicinity? In the seventeenth century such abstract conceptions of Rome were marshalled to counter multiple claims to urban space, some prompted by expanding market exchange, tourism, and institutions of charity, others by increasing immigration from without and fragmentation from within.25 The anxiety around Rome as a disruptive urban agglomeration is as palpable now as it was then. 

Scholarly studies certainly have considered the conflictual claims for authority in the city, including the discontinuity between papal regimes and the absence of a legally constituted aristocratic state that brought an unusual degree of social mobility at the top and frequent phases of instability at all levels.26 But if the study of seventeenth-century Roman urbanism tends to be removed from social conflict and uncertainty, conflictual histories of the city tend to be detached from their spatial implications. It is telling that the civic government, seeking to claim responsibility over the social and physical fabric of the city, argued above all for a clear link between time and space. Laurie Nussdorfer’s excellent study of the  Popolo Romano  (Roman People) explores the complicated ways in which the Roman elite managed to achieve a somewhat reinvigorated presence in the city while becoming increasingly embroiled in collusive relations with papal authority. While this civic body was headed by a senator who was a foreign judge appointed by the pope, its fast turnover of offices offered a structure under which a fragmented elite could negotiate internal and external conflicts by claiming the right to represent the city as a whole. Significantly, the offices that allowed the greatest room to maneuver were those most closely concerned with urban space. Moreover, a core group within the elite that claimed longstanding Roman citizenship usually held these offices. The masters of the street  (Maestri di Strada),  who administered the physical fabric of the city, were always selected from families that could trace their history in Rome back at least three hundred years.27 

Yet the  Popolo Romano's  relationship to urban space remained highly mediated. Increasingly, civic officials in charge of city streets had papal counterparts.28 Moreover, these officials relied to an extraordinary degree on ceremonial rituals, spending most of their funds on the regalia for city processions. Meanwhile, the apostolic chamber, the office of the Roman Curia most concerned with the city of Rome, constantly 

worked to dislodge the  Popolo Romanos  claims to interlinked time and space and, by distributing civic offices widely, sought to weaken the stronghold of Roman gentry over local space. And it simultaneously challenged other local claims, be it those of the large population of artisans and traders, mendicants, prostitutes, foreign nationals, or local wealthy families, all of whom had reasons to resist attempts to reorganize the overall city. Overt conflict, however, was neither immediate nor played out in the space of a direct opponent. The  Popolo Romano  waited until the death of the pope and then rushed to expand its dwindling sources of authority. But other urban conflicts were also deferred and displaced, and spilled with particular force during the  Sede Vacante,  the unpredictable time between papal regimes. 

Print’s intervention into these relations cannot be overestimated. At this time a remarkable range of printed images, from street posters to collectible prints, entered urban life, organizing its movements, exposing concealed conflicts, and proposing new kinds of public space. Innovative forms of printed representation redefined access to city streets, encouraging tourists, pilgrims, and penitent processors, but also constraining women, merchants, and Jewish Romans. Rome’s publishers, keen to expand the commercial possibilities of print, introduced diverse vocabularies of urban modernity and put these on the market at opportune moments, especially during times of controversy and crisis. In this unprecedented production of urban imagery, the city could be orderly, changeable, progressive, or even unpredictable. Rome could be explored through local or citywide itineraries, and offer both spectacles of actual urban disaster and visions of urban utopia. The new modes of visualizing the city, moreover, could facilitate touristic pleasures but also urban control and transformation. Indeed, rival authorities intensified their regular deployment of print with any threat of urban disruption by drawing on some of the same visual strategies introduced by the print market. In sum, printing intersected with other forces and, while working both from the street and from the more abstracted spaces of circulation, offered unprecedented political and marketing opportunities.29 

If print offered new techniques for urban order and visibility, its production of discourses of urban modernity was open to new users and appropriations. As recent studies have shown, the appearance of new institutions, especially those related to tourism and social welfare, led to multiple efforts to define citywide networks of influence based on divergent notions of social progress.30 Since these notions increasingly depended on definitions of public space, their contradictions became apparent in space. Giovanni Maggi’s hugely successful pilgrimage map (see Figure 1.4), printed repeatedly throughout the seventeenth century, is one of many cartographic images that claim a modern city.31 It represents an orderly and coherent urban unit delimited by the clear boundary of the ancient walls and further clarified by the divisions between districts provided by the river. The orientation of the map, north to south laid out across the page from left to right, links the physical movement of people entering the city from the northern gate, the Porta del Popolo, to the viewer’s perusal from left to 

Figure 1.4. Giovanni Maggi, A/ew  Description of the City of Rome,  1672. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

right. Indeed, the city is represented as unobstructed paths of transit. Urban structures are reduced to neat clusters, thus enabling the location of key pilgrimage sites, especially the seven pilgrimage churches located along the outer edges of the city, to be read within a chain of protruding obelisks and columns. In addition to pilgrim destinations, the index identifies points of entry, passage, and circulation; for instance, the main city gates and the four bridges linking the two parts of the city. Only two arteries are named, both crucial pilgrimage routes to San Pietro: the Parione (or Ponteficia), which crosses the densely built center, and the Lungara, which runs along the river on the western side. 

Given that the map orders Rome for walking, the absence of bodies is striking. It is as if the time of bodily movement would diminish the readability of urban space. Henri Lefebvre’s  The Production of Space,  with its suggestive critique of the abstraction of space, offers a useful point of departure for analyzing such forms of representation that claim homogeneity but actually pursue a desire for homogeneous space.32 How 

do the very attempts to clarify the overall legibility of Rome for religious pilgrimage raise questions about the coherence of its parts? Some distinctions are descriptive, for instance, between the eastern part with its suburban villas surrounded by lush fields, and the densely urbanized area along the bulge of the river. Others are registered more forcefully, through actual boundaries and orientations. The Borgo may be one of Rome’s fourteen districts, but as the pilgrimage site of San Pietro it protrudes from its location west of the river onto the rest of the city and is the focus of major arteries, bridges, and gates. The dominant orientation of this seemingly objective map means that Trastevere, the other district west of the river, appears on the foreground and bounded on all sides. It so happens that these two districts had an ambivalent relation to the conception of “the city” and their relative status altered constantly depending on time. During the  Sede Vacante,  the Borgo was separated through law and military force from the city of Rome, which was regarded as a threat to the papal election. During times of flooding or epidemic, the already strained relations between Rome and its poorest district, Trastevere, became explicit as restrictions were posted and enclosures were erected. Of course, the internal area most consistently extricated from the city of Rome, the Jewish Ghetto, is entirely erased from the map, even though its boundaries were physical and became unsurmountable during any kind of urban crisis. These contradictions of space are fully revealed through specific time, but they are hardly put to rest through the transparency implied by the map. And while the eradication of lived time could suit pilgrimage, new tourist itineraries, and the institutionalization of charity, it did not always match the pursuit of a dynamic marketplace, of alternative forms of tourism, or, for that matter, of social order. 

Any consideration of urban movement must start with the everyday, which, as the time and space of the body, brings together discipline and resistance, repetition and unpredictability. For Michel de Certeau, everyday practices may be the focus of new forms of disciplinarity, but for that very reason they are also the site of people’s conscious, and especially unself-conscious and unconscious creative appropriation.33 His is an argument for the production of users of consumer culture and for the productivity of practices that leave no trace and have been all too easily erased. Lefebvre, deeply concerned with the abstractions of space that conceal differences in order to facilitate the paths of capitalism, considers the everyday to be a crucial locus of contradiction but one that has been largely colonized through labor. Even so, Lefebvre acknowledges that while markets claim a coherent global space, consumption is localized and thus produces spatial contradictions between homogeneity and fragmentation.34 These arguments, and particularly their different orientations, direct my consideration of the everyday, which in the seventeenth century was at the center of struggles by authorities to appropriate discourses of urban modernity and to privilege some forms of urban movement over others. Within printed street regulation, for instance, the repetitive patterns of the everyday served official attempts to control urban life but also provided people with the most opportune moments of appropriation. I 

take up the everyday as both practice and a new focus of representation, with its conscious and unconscious components, and within a historically specific moment when it took on particular dimensions. One of these dimensions pertains to the specificity of space. Lefebvre and de Certeau concur on the importance of bodily movement in activating spatial points of limit and conflict, what the latter calls a “here” in relation to an “abroad.” And they concur on the importance of spatial particularities in the body’s everyday movements, especially in the crucial relation between repetition and unpredictability, which serves both to suppress and reveal fears and desires within space. For Lefebvre, the more purposeful the space, the more unifunctional and less susceptible to appropriation it becomes because it is removed from the complexities and unpredictabilities of lived time.35 Thus the everyday reveals itself unevenly throughout urban space. In comparison with Piazza Navona or Piazza Giudea, two sites that will be considered in this study, the space of Pasquino was more difficult to dominate for any length of time, by being either monumentalized or denied. Ultimately, Pasquino shows that local space was not so hidden or the overall city so well organized that one cannot find the dynamic and conflictual interrelation between the two. 

In this search, printing is very helpful. Of course, printing was not simply an extension of existing institutions and autocratic aims, it was also a profoundly transformative technology in its own right. Intervening in the minutia of everyday life in entirely new ways, printing reshaped everyday practices both by seeking to control them and by providing constrictions and opportunities within which these practices were Forged or reshaped. This new technology had the distinction of being more intimately related to ordinary life than other forms of representation, and of prompting a more self-conscious approach to its representations. In this way, it reveals that discoursive formations and bodily practices were entirely interconnected. In effect, the representational and the performative were much more connected than de Certeau would have it, but also much more conflictual than Foucault seems to imply. Guidebooks, for instance, brought into view aspects of urban life previously suppressed. But they did so by forging detached and conceptual ways of viewing that produced new forms of embodiment. The latter, of course, introduced both new opportunities and new constraints to readers. One of printing’s most decisive effects was the formation of networks of readers, bound together by competing images of urban space rather than by shared physical space. But even here print was constantly at work on the body, opening up new ways of entering urban space, both by reworking one’s relation to actual spaces and people and by increasingly moving social exchange on to other, more displaced experiences. Above all, while printing reconfigured bodies and their new possibilities through abstractions of space, it also brought the body back to the street, but now to encounter other people as well as the self in the struggle for public space. 

De Certeau argues most eloquently for the different vantage point of the street, a vantage point produced by bodies that move, intersect, collide, and in the process rework urban space in ways that can never become legible from any single viewing 

point.36 Bodily street movement was at the center of the forms of subjectivity and agency facilitated by printing, especially because it activated the relation of time and space and rendered it both more distinctive and overtly artificial. One can turn to Pasquino to explore how the political possibilities raised by the statue were always understood to depend on the conjunction of a body in particular time and space. Stories about Pasquino are as fanciful as they are numerous, but they insist on the specificity of the space and moment from which he speaks. Accounts of the various attempts, usually by disgruntled popes or barons, to fling the statue into the river are always accompanied by the miraculous reappearance of Pasquino, not here or there, but always at the side of the tailors shop.37 A satiric poem published soon after the serious flood of 1589 raises the implications of Pasquino’s location as it evokes a disorderly and conflictual urban space: 

Then it [the river] covered up poor Pasquino 

who thought that he occupied a high position 

and made a greater abundance of water than of wine 

because for two days it kept him concealed 

and he did not speak neither vulgarly nor in Latin 

and did very well to keep still 

because as soon as he raved 

the Tiber would take him away. 

So he begs the  Popolo Romano  that it should have some pity for him and should take him from this low ground and with Marforio put him on the Campidoglio so that he may speak strongly and softly and tell each one I want and I don’t want but the  popolo romano  will not consent because he has a wicked and loathsome tongue. 

So that my Pasquino have patience and stay in holy peace in your place and from here begin to have warning of not speaking too much nor too little and above all honor Lord Tiber or he will return to make you drink.38 

In this moment of crisis, the curtailment of Pasquino’s voice offers an opportunity to satirize the viability of the voice of the  Popolo Romano,  whose officials are said to govern from the heights of the Campidoglio. The means is provided by the pasquinade’s customary inversion of high and low. Intertwining topographical and political space, Pasquino’s low ground and rebellious voice are juxtaposed with the Campidoglio’s high ground and passive voice. Moreover, it is the proposed relocation of Pasquino to 

the Campidoglio that reveals the  Popolo Romano  to be different from the  popolo romano.  It so happens that the statue of Marforio, Pasquino’s most celebrated discussant, had recently been moved from a field at the foot of the Campidoglio to its uppermost centralized space, taking it out of the reach of those posting responses to Pasquino.39 By implying that civic representation is not the same as the people of Rome, the poem reasserts that the viability of a public voice depends on the particularity of the space from which it is produced. 

Of course, pasquinades had been detached from the physical location of Pasquino from the earliest stages, with the publication of the university’s learned poems.40 Other pasquinades, especially those associated with Roman politics, moved out of local space through transcriptions in private letters, diplomatic correspondence, and even printed books.41 These illicit writings, which circulated through the city in all sorts of untraceable ways, worried authorities and brought the harshest official retributions. According to the seventeenth-century diarist Giacinto Gigli, the possession of pasquinades could result in punishment by death and even the dismemberment of the body and its display on the street:42 

On the first of December at night, the Bolognese Marchese Manoli Bentivoglio was beheaded in the prisons of the Campidoglio for a book of pasquinades that was found in his house and he was beheaded without confessing anything, but was convicted with two people’s testimonials, who were themselves hung the same morning in the piazza Giudea. The body of the beheaded Marchese was displayed at the foot of the Campidoglio the entire day, and it is said that one of the witnesses before dying said that they had accused him falsely, since he was innocent. But whatever the truth, it was noticed that all those that had part in his death perished badly, and amongst others a notary died insane, the Cardinal Verospi died unexpectedly, Pietro Colangelo who was now the Fiscal officer of the Campidoglio died at night vomiting much blood.43 

This evocative account of retribution links the space of Pasquino to the Campidoglio and Piazza Giudea, which was located at the entrance of the ghetto and was used by officials to enforce control over Jewish communities. The paths taken by pasquinades intertwine particular urban spaces, revealing collusion between civic and papal officials in the oppressive governance of Jewish Romans. These paths, moreover, raise the specter of the unpredictable and uncontrollable, even in the face of unmitigated forms of authority. 

Unforeseeable possibilities were also raised as pasquinades moved within networks of international politics, especially those circulated through embassy reports and pertaining to papal politics. The latter, conflating learned poetry with political critique, have led scholars to presume that Pasquino functioned primarily to facilitate power struggles between aristocratic families.44 But such political networks were not without their local dimension. The two major phases of attack on papal families—against the Carafa 

after the death of Paul IV, and against the Pamphili during the reign of Innocent X— occurred at moments when fraught papal-city relations coincided with pontificates headed by families from the Parione district.45 Many of these pasquinades, moreover, link particular local conflicts to more extended and indirect power struggles. During the 1640s, when a serious food shortage was exacerbated by increased local taxation for the reorganization of Piazza Navona, many pasquinades conveyed the idea of a citywide need by juxtaposing the area’s surplus of power with its scarcity of bread.46 Frequently these critiques spoke for “the people,” appropriating a term usually deployed by both papal and civic regulation to argue for order and peace. At the site of Pasquino “the people” may be no less strategic a concept, yet it evokes the relation between political corruption and the lack of everyday necessities. Even so, attacks on papal nepotism and other excesses of authority took the form of personal defamation, accusing male individuals of sodomy, feminine tendencies, heretical beliefs, or thievery.47 When specific women were targeted, the pasquinade became a vehicle for misogynist ranting. In sum, through the constant intersection of local and citywide conflicts, and the conflation of the personal and the public, the pasquinade reappropriated the official concept of “the people” but also reasserted oppressive categorizations of people. 

The street, then, can be regarded as a space that forcefully intertwines the specificities of the local with the more abstracted spaces of the city. Or, to put it another way, it entangles specific performances with specific representations in a relation that is both dynamic and unstable. Pasquino’s diverse and contradictory voices, including those produced by scholarly poetry, political critique, and even marketable print, were never entirely separate, although they did entail conscious moments with particular stakes that turned the multiple possibilities of the street into a distinctive place.48 In this process, printed representation, rather than bodily force, held increasingly far-reaching consequences. In fact, print changed the relation between the domination and appropriation of urban space by bringing these together within the same space and time. As will emerge here, different forms of printing met in particular spaces and time, clashing over the question of how and to what end urban space could be given visual form and legibility. Just as new types of printed guidebooks targeted audiences by offering them individual command over unknown streets, printed posters that lined the very same streets attempted to control the movements of other sectors of the urban population. Contradictions are most overt when print for the market and regulatory print become explicitly entangled, and this increasingly emerges within the same form of representation. 

Some of the ensuing effects were purposeful and were defined through the technological, cultural, and political claims of printing. These are of interest here, but even more so are the changes that were inadvertent, not foreseen by those who produced printed materials but forged through the ways people came to use these materials. The print of Pasquino with which I started this discussion enables such appropriations. Its 

various components, organized through the act of viewing, make particular interpretations possible. Indeed, the hastily situated pieces of paper, torn and with peeling corners that project out beyond the picture space, call up the time of the reader of the print as much as the time of posting and reading illicit texts on the street. By thus acknowledging the bodily presence of the reader, the print makes room for what de Certeau has called “the tactic,” which is to say the intervention of readers as they operate within a system of meaning and make something of their own.49 This is not to say that such uses stand apart from dominant or normative discourses or their unequal power relations. On the contrary, according to de Certeau the tactic is always intertwined within and serves to rework discoursive formations. For instance, the reading of this print initially depends on the set of images within which it is situated.  Images of Ancient Statuary of the City of Rome  presents a sequence of statues which, regardless of location or status, have been conjoined within an abstract system of archaeological and aesthetic classification. Toward this end, all, with the exception of Pasquino, have undergone bodily reconstruction. It would seem that the set of prints, like contemporary scholarly debates, could not contain the statue within the boundaries of classical knowledge and was obliged to accommodate identities produced on the street.50 Pasquino, in turn, distracts the viewer of these prints from the attractions of a perfectly embodied utopic Rome, turning thoughts to the city’s indirect and unpredictable relations, and even to the claims of people excluded from this vision of social coherence. 

These possibilities could prove exhilarating but also frightening, and this is precisely how questions of subjectivity emerge within print culture. It has been argued that early modern subjectivities depended on new discourses produced from the subject to the object, which is to say from an inner place to a clarified world.51 What is proposed is an aggressive form of visuality that has as its spatial dimension the private spaces of reading. But subjectivity was also formed within urban space, in which viewing practices took on new urgency, prompting a more self-conscious relation between the self and others and thus a notion of looking predicated on being looked at. If print proved such a crucial site for reworking early modern subjectivities, it was because it brought into interplay colliding perceptions and revealed the street itself as an actual and virtual space in which identity could be reconfigured and was always open to negotiation. Print for the marketplace appropriated discourses of urban modernity by manipulating established pictorial vocabularies? bringing different ones together, and making these resonate with and against each other. It is these encounters that activated processes of self-awareness, splintering allegiances, and self-censorship. Interestingly enough, new types of painting for the market also confronted viewers with both images of street life and strategies with which to forge a more self-conscious approach to pictorial representation.52 Print, however, staked out forms of visuality not open to painting, claiming for itself not only the objectivity of scientific knowledge but also the immediacy of social exchange. Of course, some forms of print aspired to the status 

of painting, which is to say, to the status of the unique and permanent object. As Roger Chartier argues, new hierarchies of print and new modes of validating its vocabularies emerged in relation to the expansion of print audiences.53 But even lavish collectible prints were part of a technology of reproduction that changed the relation between images and viewers. As will emerge here, collectible single-sheet images in particular pressed for a more self-conscious approach to imagery by going far to activate and implicate the body within new practices of viewing. In the words of Mieke Bal, working from an idea of Maurice Merleau-Ponty, “The eye like the skin, is another site where culturally constructed opposites turn out to be inseparable, where mind and body collaborate.”54 The relation between the possibilities of bodily movement and of vision is increasingly explored in pictorial vocabularies of urban modernity and even underscores the types of print—topographical views, processional prints—that provide a starting point for this book. 

I will start with the printed materials that served both to facilitate and curtail physical movement, frequently at the same time. The  bando,  the street poster deployed by authorities to impose order over the city, offers an opportunity to consider how urban space was shaped through the contestation of everyday movement. How did the daily practice of posting regulations interrupt the flow of the everyday, charge certain spaces with expectation and fear, and prompt sudden spectacles of corporal punishment? Coercive in its categorizations of certain people, the  bando  proves to have been much broader in its interventions, exposing the rivalry over jurisdiction in the city, the increasing fluidity of commercial exchange, and the institutionalization of charity and mendicancy. Ultimately, this ubiquitous form of printed poster, while claiming to bring transparency to urban space, shaped the visual practices through which people negotiated, usurped, and shared space. 

A very different type of movement through the city was prompted by the emergence of the modern guidebook. In particular, I take up the very different tourist itineraries proposed by the two most successful new guidebooks, one ordering the city through local knowledge and notions of social progress, the other through intellectual challenge and aesthetic improvement. Equally important is the established guide for pilgrims, particularly its early-seventeenth-century editions that deployed new strategies to meet an increasingly competitive marketplace. In relation to new perspectives on the city, these guidebooks redefined the potential reader, who was now persuaded to take up the opportunities of a well-ordered and legible modern city. The reader’s tenuous position between the domination and appropriation of urban space increasingly hinged on visual observation, which was defined through the display of relics, works of charity, antiquities, modern art, and public space, and which served to produce competing claims for urban space and its public dimensions. 

The street procession, a third type of urban movement, was expanded but also curtailed through its restagings in print. The three instances that I will consider offer 

different social relations (local, urban, and citywide) and different interactions with print. The annual procession of the Company of Santa Caterina dei Funari, staged in the district of Sant’Angelo to display the transformation of daughters of prostitutes, confronted constant controversy and disruption and failed to be secured through print. The daily processions of Holy Year carried out by the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini moved poor pilgrims across the city and, through the strategic circulation of print, facilitated the systematization of urban charity. As for the unique triumphal procession, I will consider two celebrated instances, the 1608 canonization rituals of Rome’s own cult patron Santa Francesca Romana, and the 1655 entry of the recent convert to Catholicism, Queen Christina of Sweden. With these singular performances, publishers were particularly successful in bringing legibility and legitimacy to a specific viewpoint, and drawing on the controversy of the event and on the female body produced resonant images of citywide collectivity. 

In the second section of the book I consider urban movement in its metaphorical trajectories, especially the unpredictable flow of water and rumor through the city. The print market drew on these powerful metaphors for seepage, conflict, and opportunity, contributing decisively to discourses on urban modernity and public space. Imagery of water’s overflow, which simultaneously evokes progress and contamination, emerges with particular vividness in publications on city floods, the restoration of aqueducts, and the building of new fountains. These ultimately focus attention on the volatile space of the piazza, especially when it coincided with the fountain and the market. Authorities, commercial pursuits, and diverse urban communities clashed within the space of the fountain piazza, and print publishers increasingly exploited these exchanges. But even such extensions of the vocabularies of urban modernity could not bring visual form to the fountain piazza when it was found at the entrance of the Jewish Ghetto. All the more reason to be attentive to Francisco Corduba’s highly unusual representation of Piazza Giudea, fashioned through suppressions and excesses of vision, and confronting viewers with a site of negotiation between the ghetto and the rest of the city. 

The threatening flow of rumor operated at all times, but always in relation to the  Sede Vacante.  As recent scholarly studies have noted, in early-seventeenth-century Rome the time between the death of one pope and the election of the next became both longer and more violent. A new perspective to this crucial time of change is gained by examining how print publishers, in their attempts to market papal ritual, participated in the production and circulation of uncertainty and rumor. The sudden proliferation of prints and pamphlets dealing with the change of pontiff altered people’s relation to the  Sede Vacante  by offering views into an unusual time of urban conflict. But these publications simultaneously altered the modes of representation, substituting local perspectives with a more touristic outlook. This crucial nexus is pertinent to a new kind of conclave print, which worked to shift the focus of the  Sede 

Vacante  away from the political machinations of the papal election and toward the pleasures of observing threatening and unpredictable relations within the city. 

By the late 1640s a set of ongoing urban conflicts intersected in unexpected ways, especially through the practices and exchanges facilitated by print. How did new forms of representation and circulation afforded by printing alter urban claims by taking these to newly configured audiences, more unpredictable in their physical location and political loyalties, but also more demanding in their approach to visual vocabularies and urban representation? Piazza Navona provides the focus of one of two case studies. A space fashioned from a city market, aristocratic and artisan residents, transient sellers, international tourists, and courtly festivities, the piazzas multiple claims and appropriations came into direct conflict when in 1644 the election of Innocent XI led to its physical transformation. This aggressive attempt to extricate the piazza from the rest of Rome while defining it as its center culminated with the building of a lavish decorative central fountain. All struggles to empty the piazza of the movements and exchanges of the market and refill it with universalizing images of papal authority were negotiated and extended through print. Yet print also reveals the conflictual aspects of this enterprise, whether in posters pertaining to the ongoing struggle to pave the piazza or in lavish prints and pamphlets put on the market to coincide with the 1651 opening of Berninis Four Rivers fountain. In fact, the latter complicate the question of public space by confronting viewers with both conflictual visual vocabularies of urban modernity and conflictual claims over the piazza. Thus, at the moment of consolidation of papal, family, and tourist interests, the controversies around the expanding market and the presence of a self-conscious viewpoint are revealed. 

An even more decisive exchange between print and urban space was prompted by the bubonic plague that struck Rome in 1656—57. It is at this moment that conflicts within urban space became explicit and entered the visual vocabularies of collectible and touristic prints. I will focus on an ambitious set of three prints etched by Louis Rouhier and published by Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi during the final months of the epidemic itself. The innovative visual strategies deployed in these prints to construct a new vision of the modern city presume viewers familiar with the diverse vocabularies of urban modernity. But they also conjoin the touristic pursuit of urban visibility with fears of bodily contamination and bring into tension desires and repressions around urban legibility and social exchange. It is the body’s movement that emerges with decisive force to destabilize the urban clarity proposed by new forms of tourism and official notions of public space. This body is both sacrificed to the uncontrollable forces of disease and disciplined for transgressions of the law. This body threatens urban legibility but evokes that which cannot be pictured, yet is overt in its absence. In effect, this body brings into view the movements of the everyday by settling on two sites of viewership: the hospital of the contaminated and the public space of corporal punishment. When social order was most threatened, the display of bodily contamination and bodily punishment produces an aggressive and anxious legibility, threatening to 

spill out of the moment and bringing visibility to conflicts over public space operating at other times. 

Pasquino serves as a metaphor for a space that produced print culture and was produced by print culture. This is a space where the bodily and the abstract intersect, where fragmentation and reconstruction intertwine, and where the possibilities of movement on the street and their representation in print cannot be separated. It retains the worries and opportunities of momentary appropriation, and its voices unexpectedly reemerge, perhaps chastened, perhaps reinvigorated. Pasquino will reappear and disappear throughout this study, speaking for a new kind of urban space produced out of print, and out of the ephemeral as much as the enduring aspects of print. 

Figure 1.1. "Aridatece Marc'Aurelio!" February 1993, Rome. Photograph by the author. 

“Vagando per la cittä” 

I The Printed  Bando  and 

the Everyday Moves of the Street 

I t might be only a fleeting encounter. Someone walking on the street notices a poster and is compelled to respond to its visual advances (see Figure i.i). The starkly dislocated golden image of Marcus Aurelius surges forward toward the passerby, evoking a void at the center of civic space. For twelve years Piazza del Campidoglio, the seat of Rome’s municipal government and the statue’s customary location, lay vacant, the lines of its star pavement converging at Michelangelo’s celebrated but empty marble base. Initially this was due to the lengthy and costly restoration of the equestrian statue, but then its setting on the piazza became the focus of an acrimonious debate.1 The restoration team, supported by the “scientific international community” and RAS—the foundation that contributed most of the funds—insisted through newspaper and television interviews that the statue of Marcus Aurelius could not withstand further exposure to the urban environment and needed to be relocated in the nearby museum.2 In response, a campaign headed by the civic government demanded the return of the statue to the piazza, soliciting wider support through the circulation of a street poster announcing a rally on February 21,1993.3 

The conventions of the street poster are specific to time and location, but they insist, above all else, on transitory and provisional conditions: a visual vocabulary that presumes a viewer constantly on the move, a topical issue perhaps countered by a nearby poster, and a setting that registers the signs of its own impending disappearance. It is an exchange that situates urban space in the present moment and necessitates strategies from both sides. The poster of Marcus Aurelius could count on one or—at the most—two days of attention on Rome’s hectic streets. Even so, its uncompromising demand was unleashed suddenly and forcefully, extended through the multiplication of the poster, wall after wall, street after street. Image and text worked to convey a notion of civic community quickly, starting at the top with the boldly lettered statement “Aridatece Marc’Aurelio” (“Give us back Marcus Aurelius”), which is in Roman dialect and evokes the everyday voices of the market piazza. Indeed, those who took the time to scrutinize the lower text were reminded of the statue’s long history within its piazza. They were also presented with an impressive list of supporters, ranging from 

23 

city associations to Italian celebrities and implying a more elastic notion of community. But it is by reversing much of the scientific rhetoric offered by the restorers that the poster ultimately defines its community. Instead of claiming Marcus Aurelius for a global future, it locates the statue in the particular place to which it is bound through four hundred years of history. Instead of a universal public, all those born and yet to be born in whose name the scientists seek to preserve the statue, it reinstates a Roman community, those people intertwined with the statue by space and history. Thus, by insisting on specific social relations, the poster counters a concept of global space divested of social debate. After all, the arguments foregrounded by the restorers—a universal hierarchy of aesthetics that renders the statue necessary for all humanity, and the technology that will preserve it for all time—conceal while reasserting the unequal relations that interlink a global community. The poster, seeking not simply to convey a particular argument but also to construct an audience for itself, provoked passersby to take sides and either accept or reject its conflation of geographical specificity, localized language, and political viewpoint. Of course many would fail to recognize themselves fully or even partly within the image projected by this poster. But these potentially disruptive encounters are no less significant, for in reconfiguring the social exchange on offer they too will make their imprint on urban space. 

Attempts to define the “Roman people” in the space and time of the piazza are also found in seventeenth-century printed posters, and in these the idea of a coherent community is likewise sustained by the history that bound people to the Campidoglio and its celebrated statue. On the fifth of September, 1656, civic authorities posted an order (see Figure 1.2) prohibiting people in the neighborhood from playing ball games, washing clothes, or throwing garbage in the piazza of the Campidoglio.4 In particular, it forbade the deliberate flinging of stones at the statuary, especially all attacks on the bronze equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius, which according to the poster was recently restored at great expense in order to maintain it for the future of the city and its people. In this instance, the poster relied not on an innovative design but on the intimidating appearance of a printed text. Moreover, the terms of exchange were activated through rituals used to introduce such posters on the street and entailed the threat of fines and corporal punishment. Even so, the two posters share crucial rhetorical strategies. The concept of “the people,” representing the present and future rather than simply the past, becomes a way to define urban space. And these intersecting notions of the people, time, and space take shape only as they contest rival claims. Given the ongoing struggle of Rome’s civic government to maintain some degree of authority, it is not surprising to find its officials using street posters to claim a citywide constituency. Yet the poster itself brings into question who these people might be as well as their desire to be represented by the  Popolo Romano. 

In early seventeenth-century Rome the printed street poster proved crucial to the reworking of urban relations, prompting exchanges with high stakes. The  bando,  as this kind of public notification was generically known, addressed all sectors of the 

Figure 1.2. Edict, on the Piazza del Campidoglio and its statuary, September 5,1656. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

population and served to regulate and control virtually all aspects of urban life.5 For many people the daily encounter with printed orders on the street (see Figure 1.3) forged an antagonistic relation with authority and frequently led to direct confrontation with the legal system. For all, the  bando  was entirely intertwined with everyday life. Orders were posted on the most frequented city spaces and surrounded one at all times as one moved through the street, traversed the market, carried out work, lodged in a hotel, or participated in any festivity. Scholars have considered the  bando  only as a historical document, which can be consulted for specific and unequivocal acts of authority. Yet the engagement with printed orders occurred in the context of daily life, and this factor framed people’s exchange with authority. In effect, no single street poster can be understood apart from the particular urban space in which it circulated or from the networks of social relations and conflicts that it activated. 

It may seem odd to argue for a process of exchange in relation to a form of representation that wielded power in very overt ways. After all, the  bando  imposed constraints on all sorts of social activities and exchanges with the threat of harsh penalties. This is particularly evident at times of greatest instability. During the plague of 1656-57, for instance, every movement in, out, and within the city was restricted through the street poster, which became crucial to the citywide imposition of oppressive controls. Even so, there is no lack of evidence of people’s enterprising manipulation of the  bando ’s format and practices. One such telling example is an order posted on March 22,1657, by the Congregation of Flealth, a special committee set up by the apostolic chamber to govern the city during the plague.6 It announces that the restrictions imposed on Jewish Romans to remain within the enclosure of the ghetto were now lifted, and thus Jewish merchants were allowed, once again, to move through the city, enter Christian houses for business purposes, and go out of the city gates to work. Within two days a poster (see Figure 1.4) appeared on the street admonishing those who presumed that the congregation had meant to lift all constraints on Jewish Romans and not just those imposed during the current crisis.7 An ambiguity in the phrasing of the order opened up an opportunity, enabling those addressed to come up with a strategic reading. The swiftness of the exchange tells us something about the ways the  bando  produced a particular sense of urban time, with possibilities changing unexpectedly from one posting to the next. It also reveals that the congregation’s anxiety was prompted not only by the disobedience of a community, but also by its obligation to the apostolic chamber, which claimed exclusive jurisdiction over Jewish Romans. The site of the  bando  thus intertwined the acrimonious relations between diverse authorities with the resourcefulness of people who constantly faced official restrictions. 

Viewed from this perspective, the street poster offers precious evidence of the practices of everyday life, even if it is within a form of representation that sought to control and even eradicate these practices. This representation was imposed on people, but it prompted an exchange not without options. In trying to conceptualize the ways 

Figure 1.3. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (1), 1657 (detail). Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo e la Documentazione, Rome. 

people engaged with printed notifications, I have drawn on de Certeau’s work on everyday life, especially his argument on how systems that seek to control through spatial strategies leave people only the opportunities brought by time.8 According to de Certeau these modes of control also produce in people the skills to recognize and act upon an unexpected possibility. The orders from the Congregation of Health show that the exchange generated by this kind of printed poster can be productively conceived in this way. But they also indicate that everyday practices were forged, not, as de Certeau has suggested, outside of or hidden from official urban discourses, but 

Figure 1.4. Declaration, on edict revoking health restrictions against Jews, March 24,1657. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

in a constant and frequently conflictual exchange. In addition, these orders open up an entangled set of social relations rather than a direct exchange between two parties. And, of course, they confirm that each exchange was affected by those that came before and impinged on those that came after. Thus alongside an official notion of the people” objectified to justify the actions of this or that authority, the  bando  reveals people as subjects formed within a web of social relations constantly under contestation and renegotiation. By being attentive to the specificities of the street poster, I hope to show that its practices and exchanges actively altered urban space and urban identities. I also will argue that while some of these changes were purposeful and imposed through the representational strategies deployed by authorities, others were prompted by opportunity and the ways people engaged on a daily basis with the printed  bando. 

Spatial Transparency and Temporal Chaos 

Before exploring the  bandos  appearance on the street, it is useful to consider its representational strategies, especially the ways its authority was encoded within a particular vision of urban space. Street notifications addressed issues in three ways: a particular group of people, a particular urban space, and a particular time of year. Peoples were grouped into specific categories—clerics, sellers of prepared meats, mendicants, Jews, prostitutes, artisans, vagabonds, and so forth—and these were defined in relation to their movements on the street. Urban space, conceived within specific boundaries or as citywide, was shown to require constant regulation. Time, usually cyclical and recurrent—carnival, feast days, duration of a plague, aftermath of a flood—was represented as dangerous and bound to unleash disruption when particular peoples and particular spaces converged. In effect, the  bando  represents the city as in constant need of control and authority as relentless in its efforts to impose order. 

Paradoxically, for a view of Rome in urgent need of control to emerge, the city had to be shown always on the verge of chaos. One does not have to read too many examples of the  bando  to realize that the very question of its effectiveness was consistently raised in the imposition of new regulations. While such assertions of people’s willful disobedience provided a justification for official orders, they also implied a source of authority that was deficient and open to question. On January 20, 1648, an edict appeared ordering people to clear their houses and surrounding street of the water and refuse scattered by the flooding of the river. The order combines the authority of the apostolic chamber and of the masters of the street,9 and in it questions of authority weigh as heavily as those of transgression: 

Being that with another edict of ours posted last December 10th, it was ordered that proprietors as well as tenants and lodgers must within a certain time drain and clean their houses and cellars of the water and filth of the river Tiber, and also the street in front of their houses and property. And because one can see that many, in 

fact the majority, under the pretext that after the publication of this edict the river rose once again and filled houses, cellars and streets of the same water and filth, and others of having their cellars in places beneath those of others, not only have not drained and cleaned their houses, cellars and street under these and other varied pretexts but continue to put off doing so. Yet the result of all exceptions and excuses is the escape of the odor and the infection of the air, which with time this water and filth will cause, confirming the above-posted edict.10 

What this  bando  reveals is not simply disobedience on the part of anonymous people to the stated regulations, but disobedience as a useful factor in the constant struggle between papal and civic authorities. It so happens that the  Popolo Romano  used the recurrent flooding of the river to impose citywide sanitary orders and thus reclaim authority over the fabric of the city. In this instance, however, the chamberlain of the apostolic chamber stepped in on the grounds that the health of the city was now in danger. Thus, authority, like disobedience, is closely tied to opportunity. For the latter it was provided by the chance of the river flooding a second time, and even by the circumstance of having one’s property beneath another’s, and for the former by the apparent disregard of the December io order posted under the authority of the masters of the street. No mere transparent conveyor of commands, the  bando 's representation of disobedience could activate the fraught relations between authorities as well as between authority and urban communities. 

With its constant juxtaposition of chaos and order, the street poster became the primary means through which rival authorities reasserted their claims over the social and physical fabric of the city.11 The masters of the street, who posted edicts dealing with street maintenance and hygiene, were civic officials but increasingly under the control of the president of the street in the apostolic chamber. The chamberlain, head of the apostolic chamber and in charge of the church’s financial concerns, dealt with taxation and the revoking of licenses but frequently entered into areas claimed by the masters of the street or even by its own officer, the governor of Rome. A constant area of conflict was trade and commerce. The apostolic chamber established food prices, but the capitoline chamber retained authority over trade practices, enforcing prices and conditions and location of sale, and collecting taxes on wine and meat. Orders pertaining to market practices always appeared under the name of the conservators of the  Popolo Romano,  which also had the right to punish transgressors. The governor of Rome administered justice in the city, posted regulations during carnival, and at other times dealt with any potential threat to internal security, forbidding the carrying of weapons on the street, the circulation of defamatory writings, and the playing of street games.12 And it was the governor who pursued transgressions of street regulation through the courts, sharing civil and criminal jurisdiction with civic tribunals and officers of the  Popolo Romano.  All of these areas of authority were at one time or other usurped by another body, and this constant blurring of the boundaries of authority affected the relation between the printed  bando  and its diverse publics. 

Struggles for authority invariably emerged in relation to particular times of the church calendar. It is striking how year after year, for well over the first half of the seventeenth century, the annual carnival was framed by the posting of the same set of regulations and prohibitions. The governor always posted restrictions on masquerading and took the opportunity to reassert papal authority over Jewish Romans by posting a  bando  that prohibited attacks against these communities during carnival.13 The governor also regulated all carnival races, although the conservators at times intervened, as in 1642 when they posted an unusual edict forbidding competitors from entering the race unless they had applied in writing.14 The eruption of a violent dispute during the previous year’s races prompted these civic officers to inject their voice within a time from which they were usually excluded. Even more opportunities opened up during the time of city processions, which presented too many variables of space, time, and people to establish firm jurisdiction. 

Evidently the social relations activated through the  bando  bring into question de / Certeau’s division between space as a strategy of authority and time as a tactic of the everyday.15 Indeed, time was a crucial factor in the pursuit of authority since collusive relations rarely permitted direct confrontation. Conflict became overt only during the  Sede Vacante,  a time when the  Popolo Romano  immediately expanded its area of authority. Thus on July 29, 1644, the day after the death of Urban VIII, the conservators rushed to post orders dealing with city security.16 People were commanded to clear street stalls and to lock and illuminate private houses. Hoteliers were to report visitors and surgeons bodily injuries, while everyone was prohibited from carrying weapons and taking up any kind of disguise. Within two days the College of Cardinals posted its own orders dealing with the same concerns, only to have the  Popolo Romano  repost six more by August 4.17 In spite of the preoccupations of a problematic election, the College of Cardinals responded by circulating an unprecedented  bando  on August 8 that brought a direct challenge to the conservators’ authority: 

[Hjaving foreseen with the  bando  of the 30th of July to preserve peaceful life in Rome during this  Sede Vacante. .  . . Nevertheless, having had news of other  bandi  posted on the orders of the Lords Conservators of Rome on the same subjects that we in our  bandi  had already foreseen. In order that due to this multiplicity of  bandi,  the people will not be in doubt about which they must obey, causing not only confusion but much harm to justice and public order. With the present public  bando  we revoke and annul the  bandi  posted by the said Lords Conservators and others that in any manner have been posted concerning the governing of the city of Rome.18 

But was there a potential for confusion on the street? After all, the orders of the  Popolo Romano  were virtually the same as those posted by the College of Cardinals, distinguishable only by the coats of arms and signatures. All such notifications were produced by the official printer, who held exclusive rights to print not only all official 

edicts but also all legal permissions, licenses, and calendars.19 Ownership of these materials came with the office, enabling the printer to draw on an existing stock of texts and images and readjust them only as requested. So the many printed notifications on the streets of Rome in early August 1644 presented no actual discrepancies. What alarmed the College of Cardinals was the  Popolo Romanos  aggressive attempt to extend its authority during the  Sede Vacante,  and perhaps the citywide perception of a new balance of power. According to Gigli, by the time the conflict was acknowledged in street posters it had already circulated through rumor.20 A significant realignment of authority became necessary, and when the same orders were reposted by the  Popolo Romano  on August 16, they included the phrase “with the participation and consent of the Sacred College of the Eminent and Reverend Gentlemen Cardinals.”21 

While the College of Cardinals followed an established strategy by accusing the  Popolo Romano  of facilitating urban disobedience, the disclosure that this possibility was on the street, where the  bando's  legibility might be undermined, is worth further consideration. After all, the  bando's  representation of space was as strategic as that of time. Street posters deal with a fairly broad range of issues, yet virtually all pertain to movement and access within the city and depend on particular definitions of urban space. These definitions are by no means consistent. They may seek to bind separate spaces of the city together around issues of security, commerce, charity, and social progress, or they may enclose a particular space in relation to social control, family interests, and tourism. Yet they all served to restrict movement for some, with the aim of facilitating it for others. In effect, the  bando  presumes the presence of people for whom the unknown and unpredictable, particularly when it comes to other human bodies, is a problem. Examples of posters that seek to bring legibility to urban space by categorizing women as prostitutes proliferate.22 One issued by the governor on November 27,1624 (see Figure 1.5) reads: 

[I] t is commanded and prohibited from now on that any of these prostitutes or dishonest women (even married) may not dare or presume, under penalty of th t frusta  in public, and exile from the city of Rome ... to be at windows, nor in public dressed as a man, nor can they come out of their houses at night, not even with the proper woman’s dress. . . . Nor attend churches or places where there are stations, pardons, indulgences or feasts, unless by day and with the modesty that befits them, nor occupying the place that must be given to ladies, and other gentlewomen, and honest women, nor committing on the street, and even less in church, dishonest or lascivious acts that bring scandal. . . . On no account to go in carriage or coach, nor wearing a cloak, . . . nor the habit of a nun.23 

In order to make urban space legible, differences of social rank are identified, and the regulation of clothing is very attentive to distinctions within a wide spectrum of women. Lived time, which tends to unsettle the clarity of space, is the primary target, prompting restrictions against movement in carriages or dressing in male attire.24 At 

Figure 1.5. Edict, on prostitutes and dishonest women, November 27,1624. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

night, when differences become particularly difficult to assess, even the appropriate attire was not sufficient. Not surprisingly, this kind of regulation tended to coincide with the time of public festivities, when the increase in number and kinds of people raised the possibilities of confusion and deception on the street.25 But the time period might be as short as the passing of a procession. On June 13, 1656, a poster appeared addressing the procession of the Sandssimo Corpo di Christo: 

[Wjhile the procession lasts, no courtesan or other dishonest woman dare . . . appear in the Borgo under punishment of the  frusta  ... on this day of the feast, from the sun rising till the entire procession has passed, no man dare to be at windows together with women of any sort, even if it is the most honest woman, who happens to be his own wife or sister, or parent or close relative, throughout the street where the procession passes.26 

Within the charged moment of public performance, the perspective of those watching, rather than the actual circumstances, is acknowledged to be paramount. Urban space is reduced to how it is seen, with the aim of erasing all potential ambiguity of identity. 

In prescribing public behavior, then, the overriding strategy is to transform the unstable aspects of space, its ambiguities and modifications, into a fixed and legible appearance. And this was not just in relation to women. If men were forbidden from taking up ecclesiastical habit during carnival, clerics were ordered to be much more strict in their attire, as in a  bando  of November 26,1624: 

That all those who belong to religious orders . . . wear the vestments, which are long cassocks ending at the foot, and with a belt on top . . . not to dress as prelates if not one, nor wear vestments of another color than black. . . . And because it is convenient when rendering respect that lay people be distinguished from ecclesi-asts, we wish and order that those who are not clerics must within the next fifteen days, fix the lace, or as others say the pizzili, on the collar of their shirts to such a size that can easily be seen by all.27 

Bringing coherence and distinction to groups of people through clothing was a primary aim of the  bando.  Pilgrims, who were also forbidden from riding carriages, had to wear the penitential sack of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini in exchange for the privilege of being housed and fed by this charitable confraternity. No people in the city were made more visually explicit and singular than Jewish Romans, who faced restrictions on the use of carriages and other displays of wealth and mobility. But they were also obligated to mark themselves with the color yellow, a cap for men and a veil of cloth for women.28 Yet even in such an extreme case, anxiety about blurred urban identities emerged, as attested by Gigli’s diary entry of September 1636: 

The Jews had reformed their berets, which already, by the order of Paul IV, they wore in yellow as a sign, but soon they began to cover their head with orange silk, 

and little by little the ormesino silk was given more crimson color in such a manner that they almost resembled the caps of the Cardinals. This displeased many but Cardinal di Lione and Cardinal S. Honofrio Cappuccino were the reason that they had to return to a color yellow similar to straw.29 

The close scrutiny of subtle shifts and the recognition of points of intolerable ambiguity were crucial to this vision of urban space, even, it would seem, when dealing with such overtly differentiated identities as Jewish Roman and Catholic cardinal. 

Within a system that sought urban transparency and readability above all else, it is not surprising to find a preoccupation, one might even say an anxiety, about the common practice of wearing costume or disguise on the street. In printed notifications people’s attire is always a highly charged issue, but at the time of the  Sede Vacante  it becomes explicitly defined as a threat to urban security. During the first few days of the explosive papal election of 1644 no less than four edicts were posted prohibiting in the strongest terms the taking up of any kind of disguise: 

Wanting as much as is possible to take away all inventions or ways of committing harm and raising the occasion to disturb the security of quiet living in this Holy City at this time. We order and command that no person dare ... to move in disguise through Rome by day or by night, and for whatever cause. Warning that those found thus disguised will be put in prison and pay the penalties without remission. We declare however that by such a prohibition we do not intend to include those who dress in sacks with faces covered, or uncovered, and accompany the companies or processions guided by their standards or holy crucifix following the orders of their companies and processions.30 

With confraternities obliged to undertake processions during the  Sede Vacante  wearing their customary hooded sacks, official notifications had to introduce all sorts of exceptions in their prohibition of disguise. 

Even more suggestive is what these orders imply, namely that the motivation for taking up costume matters and that the choice of costume was not insignificant or interchangeable. During carnival, for instance, cross-dressing represented the inversion of identity, the assuming of another to mock it or reassert one’s own. In the context of everyday life, however, a woman wanting to move unimpeded through the city might dress as a man because it was more affordable than the costume of a gentlewoman, but such a choice might also imply an extension of identity rather than its denial. Ultimately, the ongoing concern with disguise points to the inability of printed posters to construct clear and autonomous categories of identity. Different combinations of social rank, gender, nationality, and religion sustained these representations of identity, but because they were defined in relation to physical movement and specificity of urban space they introduced the constant blurring of categories and even overt contradictions. As will emerge here, within the criteria of Christian charity, pilgrims and 

mendicants could be interchangeable, but when pressure to control space increased mendicants were linked to vagabonds. Religious difference frequently bound Jewish Romans to Protestants and even Turks within the category of heretic, but in the increasing efforts to control market exchange Jewish Romans could become interchangeable with merchants, especially with second-hand street sellers. The prohibition of women to dress as men, or of Jewish Romans, pilgrims, and prostitutes to ride in carriages, reveals not only that the categories of identity forged through the  bando  always depended on the control of movement, but that superior social status was demarcated through the ability to move unimpeded through the city. 

In the imposition of oppressive categories, the  Sede Vacante  is particularly telling, for at this time the explicit pursuit of urban legibility was accompanied by the revelation that restrictions of movement could be circumvented, at least temporarily. The very first order posted by the  Popolo Romano  upon the death of the pope was one that revoked all special licenses and privileges, especially those that allowed prostitutes to ride in carriages, Jewish Romans to wear a black cap, and foreigners to bear arms.31 Evidently, when the threat to social order was greatest, the  bando s  representation of an unambiguous public space was shown to be just that, a mere representation. Of course, this possibility was facilitated from within the system itself, by its organization around privileges and permissions, and the selling of licenses. Moreover, it required the ability to pay and introduced another form of regulation, one increasingly based on profit since private citizens were encouraged to bid at public auctions for the right to sell these licenses. An exception was the licenses sold to prostitutes, which moved privately through aristocratic circles and in combination with charitable patronage. According to a topical pamphlet of August 30,1645, Olimpia Maidalcini, Pope Innocent X’s sister-in-law, took it upon herself to grant licenses that enabled courtesans 

to appear in a carriage with great solemnity, because the Lady Donna Olimpia, after being honored by them, was pleased to take them under her protection, and gave them permission to put the arms of His Excellency on their door and has conceded them the right to go in carriages without any restrictions, as if they were honorable.32 

What are the implications? First, the increasing intervention of private licenses proved damaging to established forms of authority as people claimed exemptions if not from one source then from another. Second, within this alternative regulatory system, profits and benefits were tied to the life of the pope, for at his death all such licenses were revoked. Third, it is within a trajectory through space that people could elude legibility with these licenses. Women riding in carriages could pass for gentlewomen and dressed in male attire could walk in the city undisturbed. The same is true of Jewish merchants who could become indistinguishable from others in the city conducting trade. Thus the official image of coherent and transparent public space was disrupted in relation to lived time, a time complex for being constantly both open to 

change and in wait for opportunities for change. And, while these licenses do not represent an explicit tactic of resistance, they do suggest that the forms of identity and containment imposed through the  bando  prompted the conscious reworking of identity within daily survival. They thus bring me back to the street and to de Certeau’s notion of people’s everyday tactics, with its recognition of the everyday as a crucial factor in urban struggle and change. 

The Time and Space of the Street 

With its appearance on the street, the  bando  s representation of a transparent stable urban space came under extreme duress. At this moment, the printed poster moved into a complex web of social relations, and its viability depended on the ability to disrupt some and activate others. Questions of constraint became heightened at the time of posting, precisely because it was then that all sorts of unforeseen possibilities emerged. The  bando,  however, sought to articulate a strict and binding legal exchange by fixing its command within specific time and space. Official posters insist on a clear and unbroken process, from the time of the drawing of the order to the time of its appearance on the street. An example prohibiting coach drivers and trash collectors from leaving manure around the church and gate of Piazza del Popolo is typical in specifying: “Wanting that the present, affixed in the office of the masters of the street, on the board of the cursors, in the Campo de’ Fiori, and the obelisk and gate of the Popolo, and other usual places in Rome, have the effect as if personally conveyed to each one. Dated in Rome in the usual residence on the 14th of July 1614.”33 The order represents a conflated notion of access and constraint. Only the will of authority mattered, and its appearance on the street was tantamount to each and every one being personally informed. Thus questions of whether one has actually seen it or is able to read it are rendered irrelevant. 

The crucial moment of the  bando  being affixed on the street is reinscribed as a separate statement below the official signatures. Piere one finds the pledge of those who distributed the poster throughout the city, transposing questions of constraint from the legalistic text to its actual enforcement in space. Some pledges were handwritten, apparently at the time copies of the poster were picked up from the printer, but increasingly these were printed, as in the 1644  Sede Vacante  order from the conservators revoking all licenses and privileges: “I Antonio Trumpeter and companions have publicized the present  bando  through Rome, in the usual and customary places this day of July 29, 1644.”34 These statements, frequently dated a day or two after the order, are precise in linking liability to the specificity of time and space. 

Yet, the  bando ’s circulation on the street introduced all kinds of gaps between access and constraint. While arguing for a citywide public and equal legal constraint, street posters targeted people within local space. When the order pertained to a particular locality, as in the  bando  that prohibited the discarding of manure on Piazza del Popolo, the location was named specifically as a place of publication. The same is true 

if those addressed could be fixed within a particular area. Orders for Jewish Romans were usually affixed on the main gate of the ghetto and nowhere else, although the unusual  bando  of March 24, 1657, asserting the ongoing restrictions of movement was distributed throughout the city. In every instance, and especially when no specificity of space was possible, the  bando  depended on “the usual and customary places,” which included the offices of those who ordered and circulated the order. From the average number of copies distributed, it would seem that there were between fifteen and twenty customary places of posting in the city. Only one of these, Campo de’ Fiori, the location of the city’s central grain market, is consistently mentioned, suggesting that the most overt strategy was to target people in their daily movements. Thus the major markets, especially the vegetable and food market in Piazza Navona, the fish market in Portico di Ottavia, and the second-hand market in Piazza Giudea, along with the piazzas in front of the city’s fourteen gates and two central bridges, were the most recurrent spaces of display. Of course the  bando  presumed shared knowledge of the paths of daily movement, but these were open to change and readjustment and thus introduced a measure of uncertainty into the process. 

The posting of orders within the paths of daily movement certainly impinged on these movements, reshaping their course and charging certain urban spaces with expectation, urgency, and conflict. The trajectory from the drawing of the order to its appearance on the street marked a shift from textual authority to oral practices. Each posting of a new  bando  was followed by the reading of the order, which is what is meant by the term  “publicato.”  The apostolic chamber had cursors who were charged with the duty of going to established locations, affixing the notification to the corner of buildings, and, after striking their drums to get the attention of passersby, reading it. The  Popolo Romano  had  trombetti,  or trumpeters, who performed the same task, and also held prominent ceremonial roles within city festivities and processions. The oral performance of the criers served authorities insofar as it momentarily transformed urban space by interrupting its usual movements. These officers, through their distinctive costume and ritualized practices, brought everyday space into the moment by compelling people to attend to official demands. Yet even this performance could become a spectacle of the fragmentation of urban authority, as cursors and trumpeters vied for the same space to affix competing notifications. Such moments occurred not only during the  Sede Vacante  but also during the plague of 1656-57, when orders were adjusted and reposted within the same day. 

In effect, while authorities gained a great deal from their pursuit of people within their daily movements, the  bando’ s appearance on the street brought the unpredictability of other circuits of communication and exchange. In Campo de’ Fiori, for instance, the practice of reading the  bando  was invariably in competition with market activities and the movements of people, much as it is today. Various printed orders attempted to facilitate circulation in and around this space by prohibiting sellers of second-hand goods from obstructing the established passageways, and thus 

preventing people from reaching certain walls and corners with posted notices.35 Indeed, the question of the  bando  s visibility once on the street was no less of a worry than the question of its citywide distribution. Certainly, the cardinals’ 1644 edict admonishing the  Popolo Romano  for saturating the street with the same orders as their own reveals the dilemma faced by authorities. It implies that the space of display might well impose itself on the legal space of the  bando,  perhaps by being rapidly covered over as a new one was posted, or by raising contradictions because an earlier one was still visible nearby. 

In meeting the challenges of urban space, the printed poster could count on a highly imposing and legalistic appearance. By the end of the sixteenth century the format was very consistent and included a preponderance of text regularized through printing and intended to intimidate, especially those unable to read it. Thus while most of the text could only be accessed by close observation, its overall appearance was directed to arrest movement. The same can be said about the language of the order, which is direct, punctilious, and repetitive, and which seeks to preempt any potential misreading. Relying on the repetition of conventionalized phrases, the text keeps to a recurrent sequence: the problem is identified, the order is stated twice, the punishment outlined, and the binding effect of the act of affixing the  bando  on the street is confirmed. 

A considerable space of the  bando,  between the bold title and the body of neatly printed text, is reserved for the display of coats of arms and insignias. Identifying particular authorities and offices must have served to draw the attention of those passing on the street. Yet the combination of three coats of arms held its disadvantages as claims of authority also revealed constant collusions and adjustments. Other strategies did serve to distinguish authorities. The 1624 poster regulating prostitution (see Figure 1.5) displays the singular papal coat of arms flanked by oval portraits of Peter and Paul, a device that linked an orderly public space more directly to the pope himself. Those circulated by the  Popolo Romano  during the  Sede Vacante  use a central coat of 

Figure 1.6. Edict, against vagabonds, October 8,1621. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

arms surmounted by the bold and simple lettering of the word  bando.  Both are set within a vast white surface and resonate in relation to the usual practice of filling up this void with multiple coats of arms. The decorative form of a coat of arms, particularly if rendered distinctive, worked to combat the visual sameness that must have diminished the presence of yet another printed poster within busy streets and piazzas. Still, an equal or perhaps greater concern was the possibility that imagery might detract from the constraining visual effects of a sober legalistic text. 

Certainly posters that used the most elaborated imagery, those that even departed from the usual coat of arms, were ones that offered religious benefits rather than imposed constraints. The general form of the  bando-was  deployed for religious announcements and proved useful during Holy Year when requirements for indulgences constantly changed. But with such different functions, the two kinds of street notification also had to be distinguished from each other. It is worth considering the relation between text and image in a poster dated October 25, 1655 (see Figure 1.7), in which people are encouraged to attend the new church of Santa Maria Regina Coeli on the Via della Lungara to gain an indulgence.37 An elaborate woodcut reproducing a painting of the Assumption of the Virgin kept in the church holds the viewer’s attention. This image, framed by two silhouetted angels, establishes the  bandos  central message of veneration. The woodcut also serves to break up the solidity of the text, organizing the page in the manner of a decorative printed prayer rather than of an intimidating street order.38 In these announcements the elaboration of visual imagery could even entail the use of engraving, as in the 1625 notice of a Jubilee indulgence granted by Urban VIII to those who took communion in the church of II Gesii on the last Sunday in October. The standard woodblock text is here distinguished from the luminous engraved image of the host held by two angels, which transforms communion into urban spectacle. This is not to say that woodblock images were less effective in generating visual attention. In an edict (see Figure 3.1) from the Company of Santa Caterina dei Funari requesting larger dowries for the impoverished girls kept in its charitable institution, a stark woodblock silhouetted figure of the patron saint confronts the viewer.39 Emerging from the white void of the page, this phantasmal body manages to evoke with considerable poignancy the predicament of these girls. 

For the more conventional  bando,  visibility and urban space were bound together in an uncertain relation that brought forth the idea of public space. The  bando  invariably constructed an audience that subscribed to its representation of urban space, a strategy that became most explicit during times when the question of who occupied that space became fraught. Simone Ruggieri’s 1650 diary of Holy Year reports on the daily affixing of printed orders to protect vast numbers of visitors from local exploitation and corruption. Ruggieri quotes repeatedly from these, including passages that address a vulnerable community: 

In order that each client and passerby have the comfort of knowing what must be 

spent, and the manner in which to have it, we resolve that our present edict must 

I 

Figure 1.7.  Plenary Indulgence,  October 25,1655. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

be affixed by the keepers of hostels, hotels, and inns in their hostels, inns and hotels, and in a public place separate from other  bandi,  where it can be read and seen easily, and the bakers, sellers of prepared meats and butchers have it in their shops under penalty of one  scudo  for each time that it is failed to be done.40 

This  bando,  like that of the cardinals, reveals increasing instability at the site of display, and it seeks to secure it by calling up a Christian public good over the unrestrained forces of the marketplace. 

In fact, the link between access and the public good was consistently deployed when it came to the regulation of trade and commerce in the city.41 Certainly the issue of legibility is most evident in street notifications addressing merchants, traders, sellers, and artisans. These circulated not only within the customary spaces of posting, but also within the space of trade and business where the pertinent poster had to be displayed for all participants to consult.42 An example regulating the sale of hay and straw concludes its list of demands with: “That each seller of hay must have attached to the door of his hay-loft where hay or straw is sold, the present  bando,  with the placard with large letters of the price of the hay and straw, in a place that can be viewed by each one.”43 In the context of commerce, then, the  bando  became intertwined within an intricate system of circulation and display. 

When it came to business and trade, particularly pertaining to food and other necessities, the extended sites of access were accompanied by a multiplication of people implicated in the  bando's  aims. The relations of duty, obligation, and community that frame this process may be observed in printed posters kept by the official printer as receipts, and now held by the Archivio di Stato di Roma. Those emanating from the  Popolo Romano,  and regulating city trades and artisans, have handwritten inscriptions at the bottom of the page or on the back. These testify to the receipt of a designated number of orders from the printer, and to their distribution throughout the city. Some pledges are from the trumpeters of the  Popolo Romano,  but others are from guild representatives who worked closely with the conservators to control members. Certainly the guild held the responsibility of distributing copies of civic regulations, usually from fifteen to fifty in number, and of conveying the most current information orally. But it is the pledges that reveal complications in this process of distribution. A  bando  of March 17,1644, outlining the prices and trade practices of the  pizzicaroli,  the sellers of prepared meats, states: 

I Mariotto Catalani, do in faith for Jacomo Paganelli, in the service of Lord Alfonso Donnini, received 25  bandi  of the  pizzicaroli  from the printer of the chamber ordered by the above Lord Alfonso, and I the above Mariotto have made the present because the named Jacomo does not know how to write; on this day the 22, March 1644.44 

The person in charge of distributing the printed regulations to sellers required a substitute to fulfill the written transaction, and perhaps even to convey the information 

orally. In any case, in this system of printed exchange diversity of literacy and visual skills applied to those who circulated orders as well as to those who received them. 

Of course, constraint was not left with the complex relations between those involved in the circulation of an order and those addressed by it. Officials could always turn to other forms of coercion offered by everyday space. The affixing of a  bando  in urban space was frequently accompanied by a visible demonstration of authority’s ability to charge and even punish offenders on the spot. Newsletters sent out of Rome by foreign ambassadors and pilgrims’ diaries often include detailed accounts of the arrest of prostitutes at the posting of a  bandog  Indeed, trial records of people arrested on the charge of contravening regulations on prostitution are not infrequent.46 Yet given how quickly these displays of official retribution moved out of the local space, through accounts that focus on either the titillating or moralistic aspect of urban scandals, one wonders for whose benefit they were staged. Even so, such interventions of authority charged the moment and location of posting with expectation. 

Where the links between the space of the  bando  and the space of punishment converged with particular urgency was in the market piazza, precisely because of all groups addressed by official regulations merchants and sellers were most frequently prosecuted. While other offenses led to the governor’s tribunal with its complicated procedures of confession and trial, those pertaining to commerce were policed by civic officers who held the right to impose immediate punishment in the location of the transgression. According to the order of June 21, 1656, sellers who obstructed the passages around Campo de’ Fiori faced “a penalty of three strikes of the  corda  to be given in public ipso facto, and of 25 gold scudi and the loss of merchandise.”47 The  corda,  which is imposed in virtually all regulation addressing commercial exchange, was considered to be the harshest and most humiliating form of corporal punishment short of death and was normally restricted to male adults. With feet and hands tied together at the back, the accused was hung upside down on a high wooden pole and pulled back a designated number of times. Stressing the constriction of the body through the binding of limbs, this form of torture symbolically reasserted authority’s power over market excesses. It so happens that the required apparatus, a pole with a pulley, was to be found in all market piazzas.48 In Piazza Navona, for instance, the  corda  was a constant threatening presence at its northern end, as was the much feared  “cavaletto ,”a raised platform upon which offenders were put on display for all to see.49 

In effect, such instruments of torture were interlinked with the space of market exchange and defined particular spaces as in some sense public. Yet this is not the same as the public space of execution.50 In the  bando,  the punishment of death is rare and usually reserved for extraordinary times, especially the plague or the  Sede Vacante.  Otherwise, death was imposed only for treasonous crimes, especially for the production and circulation of illicit writings, which might be posted at the statue of Pasquino or passed from hand to hand. For this transgression punishment was carried out in prison, and then, depending on the authority that had imposed the sentence, 

the corpse or its parts might be displayed in the Campidoglio or in the piazza in front of Ponte Sant’Angelo.51 Even when a particular neighborhood or piazza was chosen for an execution, the event was staged and thus expected by those who might congregate there to witness it. The punishment imposed on merchants and traders had its performative aspects, but these depended on the interruption of daily movements with the sudden and unexpected appearance of corporal torture that literally forced the body to stop. This insertion of a constrained body within the space of everyday exchange may well have encouraged self-regulation, but it was also played out to an audience implicated in the offense through stable relations of local space. Thus it activated a sense of local shame and fear rather than individual guilt or public responsibility. Increasingly, official public space emerged in relation to what threatened it: local interests and the everyday movements of trade. It would be extended and nuanced at the end of the 1640s under the pressure of a food crisis in the city. 

The Conflictual Public Space of Urban Charity 

In December 1647, immediately after the inundation of Rome, Francesco Mancini published an unusual four-page pamphlet claiming to offer a first-hand view of the river’s force.52 Unlike earlier pamphlets on city floods, which tend to focus on the devastation to the city’s physical fabric, this one directs the reader’s attention to people’s struggle for daily survival, raising quite overtly recent issues of poverty and hunger: 

[A]nd the only thing that could be seen in Rome was the carts loaded with flour and bread, as also were many boats. There was great assistance from the Illustrious Monsignor Governor of Rome, Monsignor Thesauriete and Monsignor President of the Grascia with other illustrious prelates, who with great fury rushed to give a hand, together with many ministers; from their company they left one in charge of this bakery, another of that one, one to find boats, one carts, one to distribute the bread and others to move people and things from submerged houses.53 

Imaging the flooding of the city through the flow of bread is highly unusual in this kind of pamphlet and speaks to recent conflicts around the scarcity of food. In fact, one might not even associate the woodcut image (see Figure 1.8) on the title page of the pamphlet with a flood. A family sits passively with outstretched hands in the distinctive gesture of begging, while officials hand out bread from large baskets. Indeed, it is through the resonant image of the distribution of bread that the intervention of authorities in the disaster is conceptualized in terms of orderly Christian charity. 

A notion of citywide charity began to permeate street regulation, and it targeted two forms of urban mobility: the untraceable circuits of commerce and the unpredictable movements of the street. This representation of public space, produced primarily through street posters addressing merchants and vagabonds, spoke for a public connected through a citywide conception of orderly and progressive space but depended on the local classification of people. Yet, as the 1650 Jubilee drew near, an alternative 

Figure 1.8.  Faithful Account. . . of the Rise and Damage Done by the Tiber,  title page, 1647. Biblioteca Corsini. 

kind of public space also gained visibility. The very intensification in the circulation of printed regulation at this moment served to coalesce citywide protest around official policy, further disrupting the predictability of everyday life upon which authorities counted. Moreover, all attempts to produce a charitable public space revealed contradictions in the  bando’s  categorization of people. In effect, distinctions between the worthy mendicant and the threatening vagabond, so crucial to notions of Christian pilgrimage and charitable space, became difficult to sustain. 

In the regulation of commercial exchange, the public good was increasingly contrasted with the concealed paths of unscrupulous market exchange. The  Popolo Romano  adopted this strategy in a series of printed orders that mapped a network of commerce from its point of entry to its internal market spaces, and thus sought to enforce prices and collect taxes.54 For instance, the regulation of the sale of wine, the focus of ongoing conflict between officials, foreign producers, and local retailers, suggests how attempts to constrain merchants rested on the link between the public good and the specificity of urban space. On August 13,1643, the conservators admonished the sale of untaxed foreign wine by arguing that the collusion between locals who transported foreign wine through the city, tavern keepers who sold it, and people who bought it from transients resulted in the watering down of the wine. The threat to diverse sources of income, not only the apostolic chamber’s customs duty taxes and civic wine taxes but also the cut of citizens who held the right to collect taxes for the civic government, became interlinked with a viable consumer product.55 

In fact, transient sellers and retailers in the city, rather than farmers from the country, were the primary targets in these efforts to stabilize the circulation of goods by evoking a citywide public good. In the 1640s no area of official regulation incited more citywide conflict or more appeals to the public good than the sale of grain and bread.56 With the city’s increased dependence on bread, papal, civic, and guild officials sought to control its production and distribution, particularly when grain shortages threatened social order.57 The papal office of the  Annona  intervened to assure the supply of wheat in the city, but to the detriment of rural dwellers. In the seventeenth century all incoming grain was measured and sold through the market in Campo de’ Fiori, which regulated prices. There were restrictions on how much grain could be bought by individuals, for most was acquired by the  Annona,  which distributed it to official bakeries where bread was sold retail following official rules of weight, grain, and cost.58 All stages were closely regulated through a complicated system of printed permits, especially when it pertained to privately owned grain. For instance, on January 18, 1642, the chamberlain posted a  bando  that admonishes bakers and millers for abuses in their trade, but primarily for not paying taxes. It demands that a printed permit recording payment be used, which would be divided in half between the miller and the sack of flour while it was in transit to the bakery. With the increasing scarcity of grain came an even more complicated and restrictive bureaucratic system. An order of March 31, 1645, not only insists on the use of the permit and the display of the 

bando  by millers and distributors of flour, but even regulates the production and distribution of the printed permit itself.59 

Those who did not quickly give notice had their grain or flour taken away by the chamber but now they were paid in conformity with those who had given notice without resistance. And this was done to stop the complaints and outcries of infinite people, who said that in this way the bread was taken out of their mouths, or because a true rumor spread throughout all of Rome, telling that on the day that the bread was cut, a poor woman that lived in Suburra and had one rubbio of grain, while carrying it to be milled was found by officials of the chamber, who denounced her, and took it away because she had disobeyed, and she, full of pain and overwhelmed by desperation, took her three children and threw them in a well, and then threw herself on top of them. This was true and this poor widow had one rubbio of grain that she had earned with her sweat, and believed to have lost a treasure and the very hope of being able to support herself.62 

Gigli’s potent evocation of hunger and desperation was one of many stories circulated not only orally but also through the new topical pamphlets devoted to urban disasters. Indeed, the pressure that forced officials to pay the established price for grain was 

exerted by the citywide dimension of this moment of dissent, in which diverse types of people came together momentarily through a shared concern. 

In producing this citywide public, the circulation of print, especially the street  bando,  was crucial. Yet what is significant about Gigli’s account, which links official action to political expediency, is its view of the  bando  as the site of conflict between the pursuit of social control and the pursuit of everyday survival. This point was not lost on people, for the topical pamphlets on the plight of Rome’s urban poor often took an ironic view of authority’s use of the  bando : 

Already the  bandi  have gone out as everyone has heard and seen that the blind and the lame must run to San Sisto 

whoever is sorrowful and wretched from pain accept perhaps, that this is the ointment in the form of a resolution that only those with a license can beg painful bitter departure 63 

While this poem laments the implications of licensing street begging, it is much more ready to mock the  bando 's presumption of literacy and mobility when addressing the city’s poorer inhabitants. After all, the street poster, by seeking to control people through local space, stable social relations, and a textually based legal system, was at a disadvantage when attempting to coerce transient people to recognize themselves in its oppressive categories. 

“Vagabonds” and “idlers” were declared a threat to social order and accused of robberies and other disturbances on a regular basis, and were ordered to leave the city within three to five days or face prison or forced labor.64 But while vast numbers of street posters were devoted to this issue, the records of the Tribunal of the Governor show that such contraventions were rarely prosecuted.65 What was the purpose of so much printed paper? In satirical pamphlets the  bandos  most ubiquitous character, the vagabond, takes center stage and frequently appears as a kind of rogue character.66 The celebrated tale of the young beggar who, when arrested in San Giacomo degli Spagnoli, reveals the presence of many well-organized companies of thieves and beggars, an imaginary counterpart to the organization of charity confraternities, reveals much about the illicit pleasures as well as the anxieties found in this kind of publication.67 As Jean-Christophe Agnew has argued, the literary image of the vagabond projected onto the actual rise of vagabondage not only the desire for stability but also the imaginative transgression of social boundaries.68 Recent studies argue that early modern European attitudes toward transients shifted in relation to demographic growth, famine, and war, and that locals became increasingly intolerant toward outsiders.69 In Europe much of this conflict focused on the practice of street begging, and authorities 

tended to draw clear distinctions between the so-called true needy, who sustained the notion of a charitable state, and the undeserving, who justified new methods of social control.70 However, as Sandra Cavallo has shown, the implementation of these measures reveal highly ambivalent attitudes toward beggars and outsiders. How did the ubiquitous vagabond  bando  participate and intervene in the public space of charity at this moment of crisis? 

Printed notices on vagabondage usually pertained to particular spaces and times, rather than to a general citywide condition. The  Sede Vacantevtas  one occasion when such edicts were posted on the grounds that mobile people were a threat to urban peace. Otherwise, transients were linked to particular localities. In an edict of April 13, 1622, vagabonds and  passavolanti  (fly-by-night) were said to frequent the area of the port, carry arms, and “make a profession of being without a patron, and call themselves by diverse false names, the majority of which live from robbery.”71 Indeed, the remarkable proliferation of street posters in the 1620s addressing transients is worth interjecting here for it was prompted not only by renewed anxiety over urban security, but also over particular spaces. One such claim was articulated by a group of edicts posted by the apostolic chamber, for instance, in one dated September 12,1626: 

Having come to notice that many vagabonds, scoundrels, beggars faking neediness, and other similar persons, in order to circumvent the present orders that one cannot go begging through Rome if one does not have the license of the Lords Deputies upon the Revision of the Hospitals, or if one does not beg money for the hospital of the Poor Beggars of San Sisto, and for other pious places of Rome, retreat to the porticoes, or to the stairs, or else next to the doors of the churches, hospitals, and other such places, and thus these serve them as security of not being bothered, where then they are gambling with each other, eating, sleeping, and badly consuming the time of day or night.72 

While the  bando  posited the presence of impostors and thus sought to separate the identity of the vagabond from that of the worthy beggar, it also managed to connect them by suggesting that both identities depend on the particularity of space. The space in question is the area of public transit in churches and hospitals, and especially in the Hospital of San Sisto.73 

Only a few months earlier, on March 7,1626, an edict appeared that reasserted the monopoly of the Hospital of San Sisto over the activity of street begging, linking it both to the desire for urban social control and the Christian notion of the worthiness of collecting alms: 

Being the number of poor mendicants so much multiplied throughout the city, churches and places of Rome, and being many of these vagabonds, falsely needy and healthy who could and do not wish to help themselves, but serve to defraud the alms from the truly poor, and give disturbances to people that attend divine offices 

in churches and live with scandal;... pope Sixtus V who for these reasons raised with endowment a hospital called Ponte Sisto, where the truly needy are received . . . but because of greatly multiplied numbers cannot be sustained or perfected without expanding the site of this hospital, and augmenting a larger endowment.74 

Concerned as this  bando  seems to be with a city overrun by bogus beggars, it was much more fixated on the claims of the Hospital of San Sisto over particular spaces. The difference between the true and false poor becomes the difference between the institution’s licensed beggars and all others. But the  bando  also works to validate the hospital as a charitable institution, and thus defines a beggar who is worthy not only due to bodily or mental disabilities, but also due to Christian values of poverty and humility. 

The spaces under pressure were associated with religious practices. After all, implied in every definition of the worthy beggar was the crucial link between Christian charity and humiliating poverty.75 In 1601 Camillo Fanucci published a treatise that was the first to systematize the multiple forms of charity operating in the city. According to Fanucci’s  Treatise on all the Pious Works of the Holy City of Rome,  the incentive to interconnect different forms of charity in the city came from the two most recent Holy Years and was a Catholic response to Protestant critique of the city.76 In Fanucci’s network of charitable Rome the Hospital of San Sisto provided the crucial link between Holy Year pilgrimage and urban charity. This institution appears in the first section of the treatise, a section devoted to the most public forms of charity. The hospital’s origins are traced to the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini, which was put in charge of poor pilgrims during Holy Year, and was given the duty of dealing with Rome’s own poor sick mendicants by Gregory XIII. Through this account of San Sisto, Fanucci connects the influx of pilgrims to the emergence of Christian charity in the city and the care of Rome’s own poor to urban security. Thus he ends with a lament on the decline of charity after the death of Sixtus V and its overt impact on the city itself: 

But this Sixtus having departed from the present century, this work so holy has not been fully pursued. Yet through Rome one cannot see but poor mendicants, and in such numbers that one cannot be or walk on the streets without being continually accosted by these, with many bad consequences for people, and for those poor mendicants, while in this hospital there are only a few, and on this I have information that between the poor, ministers and servants, the numbers ordinarily do not go beyond one hundred and fifty people; but as time passes many less.77 

Such accounts of a chaotic city, vividly evoking fear and disdain in daily encounters with people in need, prompted the reemergence of the Hospital of San Sisto, which gained funding from the taxation of products imported through the ports of Ripa and Ripetta. An even more fruitful source of income was its right to collect taxes on playing cards.78 Consequently, the institution supported the regulation of gambling, especially 

the prohibition of foreign cards, dice, and other kinds of untaxed games, most of which targeted vagabondage. 

Not coincidentally, a surge of printed restrictions against vagabonds accompanied San Sisto’s efforts to gain a monopoly over the practice of begging and its strategic urban spaces.79 In an example of March 17, 1628, women were defined as a separate category and were accused of using theatrical tricks to deceive charitable people and thus extort alms from the truly needy: “And because many women, even young and healthy and able to apply themselves, are seen through the city and churches and borrow children, and with other such means take alms from the needy poor, and are scandalous, finding themselves with these vagabonds and mendicants.”80 When associated with women, the concept of the fake beggar becomes even more resonant since it evokes powerful notions of moral corruption and sexual depravity. Ironically, womens increasing presence in this kind of  bando  can be attributed to the fact that more women went on pilgrimage and were thus more likely to get caught in the ambiguous official classification of mendicancy. 

Definitions of the worthy beggar were established under accelerated measures to institutionalize the poor, but so were those of the vagabond.81 Street posters in the 1620s often ordered people without permanent domicile to present themselves in the Cortile della Sapienza during a three-hour period to be registered and assessed. One such instance from August 26,1627, extends the time granted in a previous  bando  for poor mendicants to present themselves in the “usual place of the Sapienza” or risk being exiled from the city.82 In these interviews, for which there exists printed instructions for officers, all those unable to demonstrate religious and family affiliations and appearing able-bodied were categorized as  ‘‘persona vagabonda”  and ordered to leave the city. Only those who had serious physical problems received the permission to beg, but even so, once on the street their legitimacy as beggars had to be verified by the clear display of the official license pinned onto the body: 

The license to beg will be granted only to the poor and wretched elderly, or blind, or crippled, or weak, and unable to sustain themselves in any other manner except by begging. To these will be given the printed license, underwritten by one of the Lord Deputies, and together with the ordinary mark, with the obligation to carry it in such a way arranged and uncovered on the left shoulder so that it is seen by all clearly.83 

In effect, printed regulation of the poor in the 1620s reflected the expanding claims of charitable institutions but also the symbolic status of the Hospital of San Sisto. Official regulation on vagabonds, then, aimed not only to control and curtail transience for security reasons but also to retain a clear and valid definition of the worthy mendicant and thus justify Christian forms of charity. After all, it was not only the institution of San Sisto that relied on such definitions. A  bando  of August 7,1627, confirmed official desire to produce a public space that privileged the position of the mendicants licensed through San Sisto, and the right of other charities to collect alms: 

It is declared that through the present ordinance it is not intended to prohibit the search for alms by religious mendicants, nor by orphans, nor by the deputy of the Venerable Company of Charity to search for alms for those in jail, nor by the boys of Letterato, nor by the homeless girls, nor by the friars commonly called  Fate ben fratelli,  nor by the Hospital of the Insane, as these are places whose endowments consist of pure mendicancy for the relief of poverty.84 

Ironically, the system of charity intended to get people off the streets was itself propagating a street population in search of alms. 

While the pursuit of alms was linked to an orderly and socially progressive public space, it activated diverse claims over particular spaces, and this revealed increasing conflicts between numerous city charities. The Hospital of San Sisto persisted in its struggle for prominence and in 1640 was granted the much-desired plenary indulgence for seven years.85 And when the institution’s funding through the taxation of playing cards was reendowed on August 27, 1647, for a term of nine years, all shopkeepers who sold playing cards were ordered to turn in all unstamped cards and pay the tax. The consolidation of charitable institutions in early modern Europe proved crucial to the growing links between religious charity, social control, and new forms of trade and commerce.86 

In the 1640s, with the rivalry between charities and the crisis of food shortages, transience was reworked in significant ways. Once again one finds a heightened concern over unstable populations, but the notion of the vagabond was now formed through fears of the outside threat to the city’s internal welfare. For instance, a poster of July 15, 1642, may address vagabonds in the title, but its actual target was unattached soldiers who were said to prompt scandal and conflict.87 Indeed, in a  bando  on soldiers posted on July 27,1643, foreign transients were blamed for local problems, especially the welfare of the city’s artisans and street sellers: 

Having reached our ears the continuing vexation that some soldiers give to all by taking from some sale goods, from others moneys, from some horses, ... we order soldiers not to dare in any manner to bother nor take things of any sort . . . nor moneys . . . particularly from artisans, sellers of food and Jews, nor can they go through the Ghetto, if not without arms, nor go to retrieve some pawn, . . . under penalty of three strikes of the  corda  to be given immediately in public without remission, of jail and life according to the quality of crime.88 

At a time of increasing scarcity of food in the city, the  bando  defined civic officials as the protectors of merchants, and especially of the more vulnerable traders. Piazza Giudea at the entrance to the ghetto, where the selling of pawns had increased significantly, was now put under special protection. In fact, during the 1640s, the customary carnival  bando  prohibiting the harassing of Jewish Romans was posted for a much more extended period of time.89 

In 1649 multiple edicts were posted that attempted to control increasing tensions in the city and conveniently turned to the charitable associations of the upcoming Holy Year.90 On April 22, 1649, dle apostolic chamber issued an unusually elaborate  bando  that addressed the increasing crisis of the lack of bread in the city and argued for a particular notion of the charitable city: 

Having the Holiness of Our Lord from the beginning of the current scarcity of grain applied spirit to the survival of the poor of the city of Rome by having bread made at much less cost than what it costs the apostolic chamber; sustaining by itself all the loss that till now amounts to many hundreds of thousands of scudi. . . . And having also extended a hand to the need of poor families by the distribution of bread two days a week. . . . And proceeding more than ever to extend the compassion of his paternal charity to the aid of wretched people that go begging bread on the street, the large number of whom gather at the good smell of Christian Piety that reigns in this city, and are not only from nearby places but also from distant lands, and generate confusion to the distribution of alms, and cunningly extort the part that is owed to the more needy... his Holiness (to provide that charity will be dispensed with good order) has destined an appropriate place for the reception of the poor that are not capable of earning their bread with their toil, and here they will be supplied with the appropriate sustenance.91 

This  bando  must be understood in relation both to a long campaign to control unpredictable movement in the city, and also to a particular moment of crisis. Within it is the specter of recent unsuccessful attempts to stabilize urban space through the covert relations of poverty and charity. Like many of its predecessors, this notification seeks to define clear boundaries between the worthy and unworthy collector of alms. And it seeks to establish these definitions through the confinement of the poor. But instead of the previous unsuccessful attempts to bring people to the hospital of San Giovanni Laterano to record their condition and street activities, this edict orders people to the hospital for the charitable provision of basic necessities. This would become a strategy adopted during times of crisis in the city,92 as would the drawing of clear distinctions between insiders and outsiders. But the  bando  also departs from previous ones by being less willing to presume the worthiness of all incoming foreigners attracted to the charitable city of Holy Year. In fact, it concludes with the conventional proviso for foreigners wishing to enter the city, but unlike earlier instances, in which these are defined as worthy pilgrims, they are now regarded as suspect in their search for alms.93 As Gigli reports, this strategy was hardly effective: 

On the 23 of April an edict came out, that the pope wishing to rescue the wretched poor of Rome, wished that the crippled and ill go to the palace of San Giovanni Laterano, and that those that are healthy go to work to Civita vecchia, and due to this many poor left from Rome, while others lamented and unwillingly reduced themselves to go into that place.94 

At the brink of the Holy Year of 1650, the interlinked issues of poverty and charity, as well as the definition of the worthy beggar, became difficult to sustain, particularly as both became increasingly focused on the complex of San Giovanni Laterano. It was here, where the poor were inspected and granted the right to collect alms, and where the preparations for the Holy Year included the refurbishment of the basilica, that international pilgrims would soon converge. In the years immediately following Holy Year San Giovanni became the primary site for the collections of alms. Many edicts dealt with this increasingly volatile space of charity, for example, one posted June 20, 1656, which defines the space very precisely: 

Wishing the holiness of our Lord to avoid the disturbances, and other inconveniences and disorders that occur from the congregation of poor mendicants, vagabonds and those collecting alms of every sort, who wanting alms gather at the Scala Santa, under the porticoes and other places in the vicinity of San Giovanni Laterano, not without the admiration of many faithful that visit that holy place. . . . [W]e command all, and whatever sort of poor, collector of alms and mendicants of whatever condition, even if regulars, hermits, women and children, that they cannot nor should move through the entry ways, nor be in the said Scala Santa, nor there assemble for effect. . . . It is . . . permissible to the Poor Mendicants of San Sisto to walk and be under the said porticoes and places in the vicinity to request and receive alms in support of a work and a place so pious, with greater reward and spiritual profit to the faithful who according to their means contribute to the support of so many disabled poor that here live.95 

The mendicants of San Sisto are once again declared the exception to official restrictions over public space. The printed  bando  needed to facilitate the visual spectacle of Christian charity, at least as much as it needed to remove the confusion and inconvenience generated by people asking for alms. After all, poverty was not only the focus of urban containment but also of the eloquent performances that were on view and thus sustained the urban theater of charity. Those begging enacted an expected dramatization of their abject identity no less consciously, it would seem, than those who undertook penance as part of their pilgrimage duties. On the street, all attempts to reassert differences between these performances were bound to fail. 

Figure 2.1.  Roman Walks,  Route  2,  Rome, 1989. Photograph by the author. 

“Roma ricercata” 

2  The Pocket Guidebook 

and the City’s Tourist Itineraries 

We traverse the centre of Rome as if it was a corridor and the shop windows marked our only horizon.These  Roman Walks  send a signal, an invitation to slow one's pace, raise one's head, live the values of history, art and culture that stone by stone, wall by wall, palace, church or fountain, the city offers, beyond its greatest and most famous monuments.This is a way to reappropriate, while in the course of shopping, the materials and work, the projects and achievements that can be and are the intact values of a life not consigned to the rituals of consumerism. After all, Rome is for the tourist not simply the Coliseum, cheap clothing stores, the Vatican and fast food, or an embalmed series of perfect colour photographs, but is to be found in each experience and lived in everyday life. 

Roman Walks 1 

W ith the indispensable guidebook in hand, the traveler acquires purpose, direction, and access, even while moving through familiar streets. When Rome’s tourist office recently circulated a set of pamphlets entitled  Roman Walks,  it proposed to disclose a city not found within the usual itinerary of monuments. Each pamphlet outlines a walk, which is visualized as a linear route in a map (see Figure 2.1) but is reworked into multiple possibilities in the textual account. Taking its cue from Italo Calvino, whose words on the transformation of cities through history and the imagination are quoted in each pamphlet, the text combines unusual historical anecdote with constant prompters to read the urban fabric for the physical traces of time.2 In effect, it seeks to spark the imagination, raise unexpected memories, and enable the intuitive and personal to intermingle with established histories of the city.3 Thus, rather than sustaining a predetermined itinerary or a detached view, the guide offers the reader a way of moving though the city that disregards some of tourism’s most persistent boundaries. There is little distinction between tourists and locals, between tourism and the everyday, or even between past and present. In fact, the account has no qualms about conjoining tourism’s usual quest for an authentic past with urban life’s daily pursuit of consumerism. 

Roman Walks  registers recent dissatisfaction with tourism as well as with urban life, 

57 

but in its attempts to reinvigorate both it is less prepared to reconsider tourism’s established use of visual imagery.4 As well as map and text, the pamphlets include numerous topographical engravings which, during the time that Rome’s tourist office circulated the pamphlets, were also displayed on strategically located street signposts. Just how might these images, without exception seventeenth-century perspectival views of elegant urban spaces lined with palaces and churches, participate in the alternative experience offered to readers? Interestingly enough, this kind of print was once crucial to the formation of touristic viewership, bringing legibility to urban space through the hierarchical organization of architecture. Now relocated within a very different cityscape and offered as an alternative to the heightened effects of photography deployed in contemporary tourism, the prints strike one as quaint or even authentic in the sense of a historical document. In other words, they serve as an appealing antidote to a fragmented and consumer-oriented urban environment. Given the care of the text not to separate the past from the present, or the time of discovering the city from the time of the everyday, it is surprising to be thus returned to a distinct and orderly Rome, free not only of consumerism but also of risk and random encounters. 

The modern guidebook’s promise of physical independence and social possibilities cannot be separated from its ways of producing access. The reader may be encouraged to focus on one aspect of urban space over others, or to recapture a historical past from its contemporary remains. Indeed, the city only emerges in the tension exerted between the guidebook’s explicit claims to reveal and implicit attempts to control. Yet while the guidebook cannot be regarded as a transparent intermediary between the reader and the city, it is also not a false representation serving to obstruct a more authentic urban experience. The guidebook nurtures the notion of the city as coherent and legible and thus exerts intentional and unpredictable consequences. Attitudes about the city that might otherwise remain implicit and fragmented are rendered explicit and cohesive and gain further resonance from the success of a given guidebook in forging an audience for itself. Moreover, the relationship between guidebooks and touring is itself more complicated than most guidebooks or theories of tourism would suggest. Readers invariably rework these textual and visual representations in all sorts of ways, and may well take up a specific guidebook but use it selectively, or in combination with others. If readers attempt to keep to an itinerary, this is usually achieved in spite of rather than because of the city, which tends to contradict and disrupt any prescribed representation. The point is that this encounter, while not always reflective, can prove difficult, surprising, and provoking, and thus decisive to the ways people think about their relation to the city. I am thus drawing a distinction between the representations of the city produced in guidebooks and those that emerge within the exchange between reader, guidebook, and the street. However, these are inextricably interconnected since touristic literature itself, always seeking to revitalize its potential markets, is quick to respond to changing expectations of readers and carries within it the traces of its usage as well as of its competing representations. 

In early modern Rome the reconceptualization of urban space was largely prompted by efforts to nurture a rapidly changing touring trade. Tourism’s new ways of infiltrating the city, combining physical and intellectual command of space, held profound consequences for both urban space and the workings of representation, bringing about what Michel de Certeau has called the concept of “the city” as a coherent, knowable subject.5 Notions of urban modernity, change, and progress can initially be gauged on the surface of representation, especially in the sudden inclination to attach the term  modern  or  new  to the name of Rome in all sorts of images that argue for a readable city. Such visual strategies of urban coherence are now very familiar to us and, as Henri Lefebvre has argued, served to fragment urban space in all sorts of unforeseen ways.6 But it is important to recall that there was no pretouristic coherent city. Pilgrimage itself set up divisions between sacred and secular space, while blurring those between past and present. It is precisely these distinctions that new forms of touring respectively challenged and reasserted, and in the process offered potential readers new social opportunities. The production of urban knowledge through travel now became an important means to reorganize urban space and its hierarchies, and its most effective tool turned out to be an entirely new kind of guidebook.7 

During the first half of the seventeenth century the format of the pocket travel book was transformed and took on its most distinctive modern features and functions. Until the 1630s the only type of guide produced in Rome intended for visitors to use while touring the city was  The Marvels of the Holy City of Rome.  This guide for pilgrims, published in a pocketbook format from the 1550s, both in Italian and in Spanish and French translations, was to remain virtually unchanged until the end of the sixteenth century.8 At that time, publishers revised sections of the text, altered the title, and, perhaps most significantly, added illustrations. While these publications all traded on the guide’s established reputation by reusing the text, the two known sets of illustrations proved more decisive in bringing distinctiveness to some of these guides. One, first published in 1588 in Venice by the Franzini family, remained in the hands of its heirs, who produced several editions in Rome under different titles. The other, first published in 1622 in Rome by Giacomo Mascardi, was reprinted under the original title.9 

Such an acceleration and fragmentation in the production of the pilgrim’s guidebook cannot be attributed only to internal changes within pilgrimage. In fact, the appearance of two entirely new pocket guidebooks within a few years of each other indicates a challenge from without, and one, moreover, with broad social implications.  Portrait of Modern Rome —published first in 1638 by Pamphilo Totti in an edition dedicated to Cardinal Antonio Barberini, and three times during the next fifty years— provided one possible alternative to visitors.10 More substantial in size than the pilgrim’s guide but still portable, and with a large number of illustrations, this guide offered a comprehensive view of the modern city, both physical and social, and was intended to be of use both during and after touring the city. Fioravante Martinelli’s  In Search of Rome in Its Site and in the School of All Antiquarians,  first available in the 

1644 edition dedicated to the antiquarian Cassiano dal Pozzo, was marketed as a miniature pocketbook without illustrations, and was to be used only while visiting the city’s antiquities and artistic attractions.11 Its remarkable success, indicated by the production of fourteen editions before 1700, further eroded the dominant position of the pilgrim’s guide, but ultimately it was at the expense of  Portrait of Modern Rome,  which, unlike the pilgrim’s guide, was discontinued after 1689. 

How did these guidebooks represent the city and what kinds of opportunities did they open for readers? In this chapter I will explore the diverse urban itineraries offered by the guidebooks and the ways their opportunities as well as constraints increasingly hinged on the relation between visual observation and urban knowledge. In the competition to market a persuasive itinerary of the modern city, the organization of visual practices and sites of display proved decisive, impinging not only on the formation of new privileged urban identities but also on the objectification and classification of urban space. It is for this reason that I will argue for the importance of considering local stakes in emergent forms of tourism, something that scholarly studies, focusing on pilgrimage or on the “Grand Tour,” tend all too readily to ignore.12 Thus, rather than locating travel to the city within existing demands, I will concentrate on attempts to mobilize new kinds of tourist audiences and to privilege certain kinds of urban space and knowledge over others. These shifts, far from being gradual or imposed from above, were bound up with internal struggles for the right to represent Rome. 

While counter-Reformation efforts to regularize pilgrimage practices may have prompted the initial proliferation of pilgrims’ guidebooks, the ensuing competition within the marketplace disrupted church control over foreigners’ perception of the city.13 By the beginning of the seventeenth century, when Rome supplanted Venice as the center for the publication of city guides,14 this type of publication opened up social and economic advantages to a multiplicity of peoples and interests. Publishers, who vied for marketable texts and formats, now forged links with professional intellectuals who wrote and revised guides. This production also served to bolster the network of booksellers congregated in the district of Parione, especially along the western side of Piazza Navona and the streets around the statue of Pasquino. Moreover, the publishing trade, which itself employed many people in the Parione district, increased its economic alliances with merchants and services that also catered to travelers, forming something of a tourist industry. 

Of course, the relation of printed materials to the marketplace was anything but direct. In fact, publishing offered opportunities for social control that were not only quickly recognized by authoritarian bodies, but, as Roger Chartier has argued, were also at the core of the early modern formation of publishing practices in Europe.15 If a strong bond was forged between publishing and the state, it was because book and print publishers desired the security afforded by powerful patrons more than the possibility of conducting business without interference. This analysis can be usefully applied to the situation in Rome, but there are significant differences. Whereas in France 

printers increasingly came under the strict control of the monarch, in Rome the printing trade developed as independent businesses and depended much more on the marketplace. State control was felt primarily in the form of a strong system of censorship. All publications had to be registered with the Holy Apostolic Palace, which scrutinized these for illicit or dangerous elements. In addition, publishers and printmakers in Rome, as in France, increasingly turned to members of the elite and by dedicating their works to prominent individuals sought protection against copyists as well as censorship.16 But these networks of support remained much more precarious and could shift unexpectedly. Most disruptive were changes prompted by the unpredictable end of a pontificate, although even in this instance printing offered a way to forge new alliances, and publishers did not waste any opportunity to dedicate their works to those who now entered positions of authority. 

While this unprecedented production of guidebooks brought into circulation coherent accounts of the city, it also altered and reworked urban alliances . Th ese contradictions shaped the very format of the guidebooks and thus participated in the ways potential readers were addressed. In their surface appearance, the new guidebooks seem almost indistinguishable and suggest a direct fit between established papal authority and new claims for representing the city. The title page of the 1638 edition of  Portrait of Modern Rome,  for instance, adopts the well-established trope of Rome as a personification of both Roman and Catholic empires (see Figure 2.2). This formidable female figure, surrounded by the accumulated trophies and instruments of both modes of world conquest, reasserts the permanence of the modern city. Indeed, the term  modern  might mean no more than the supplanting of one absolutist authority for another. But all is not stable. The Barberini coat of arms and the dedication to Antonio Barberini occupy a more transitory space, to be displaced by others in subsequent editions.17- ' ’    1    ‘    /t- 

The personification of Rome in the frontispiece of the 1658 edition of  In Search of Rome  conveys the modernity of the city in a different way (see Figure 2.3).18 Flanked by statues of Peter and Paul, and worshipped by four representatives of different parts of the world, Rome now appears as a centralized monument within an idealized piazza. This city binds the world into a whole and is not only the repository of papal world domination  but  also an unreachable repository for all desire. Thus in different ways both guidebooks signal divided orientations between allegiance to an external authority and recognition of an internal self.19 Paradoxically, it is the 1637 edition of the pilgrim’s guide that in its title page (see Figure 2.4) sidesteps the usual image of papal authority in favor of an architectural display of topographical views of the city’s antiquities, including a surmounting panoramic view from the Ponte Sant’Angelo toward the Vatican.20 Thus the promise of marvels, with its implied overpowering experience of the unfathomable, is linked initially to ancient rather than religious sites.21 Yet it is precisely this unsettling relationship between readers and the city that the new guidebooks challenge, ak is succinctly suggested in their titles. The reader of  Portrait of 

w-vl w V 

Modern Rome  might well expect a city that is legible, recognizable, and knowable through its likeness. As for  In Search of Rome,  it is the reader’s own skills in the search for an authentic Rome that are foregrounded. 

Indeed, the new guides may uphold papal authority, but they also go out of their way to bring about the presence of a resourceful reader. Both new guidebooks introduce an elaborate preface to the reader, which argues for changes to established ways of touring the city. In the 1644 edition of  In Search of Rome  Fioravante Martinelli confronts the reader with the complexity of urban space and the necessity of organizing it through the guidebook: 

Walking quite frequently through this city for amusement or for devotion, and observing it in all parts rendered illustrious with noble ancient deeds, and sanctified with illustrious memories and buildings, which due to their multitude cannot without danger to truth be entrusted to the memory of spectators, I resolved to record briefly all, in an order that to me seems easiest to travel through it. This was seen by friends, and judged necessary for foreigners, who without a guide often wander confusedly through the city, departing from it confused due to the magnificence of chaos—I am certain not to expound on things that I have not read from writers, or seen with my own eyes; or heard from people worthy of faith, or established through the shared opinion of the public; I protest against all who do not &gt; profess to speak with such assertion that it can take away the liberty of someone more knowledgeable to believe or hold an opinion that to him seems superior.22 

What the guide promises, then, is the ability to escape the chaos and disorder of actual urban experience through the representation of a coherent overall view of the city. In its newly configured form the guide becomes a direct representation of the experience of touring the city, in fact, its only possible truthful representation. The “truthful” representation of the city is now open to debate, and under such unprecedented scrutiny cannot be left with diverse sources of evidence, be these books, visual verification, or expert opinion. It must be verified by the reader himself, even if the guidebook provides structure to this knowledge. The preface, with its references to the encouragement of friends and its use of personalized language, brings the reader into an elite learned circle. So Martinelli’s assertion that the guide rescues the reader from the chaos of the city must be seen to operate in at least two contradictory ways. On the one hand, the guide offers the visitor the physical independence and conceptual outlook with which to order the city for himself. On the other hand, this position is only possible if the guide’s particular representation of the city is taken as truth.23 

I refer to the reader as “he” because it is among male intellectuals situated at the top of papal and civic bureaucracy that one can locate both the author and imagined readers of this new guidebook. The antiquarian circle around Cassiano dal Pozzo was only the most visible group within a much larger network of highly educated church administrators and academics who undertook a variety of related but frequently independent 

writing and publishing projects.24 With the insecurities of abrupt political change at the end of a papal regime, many professional intellectuals diversified their source of employment, so that through involvement in more stable institutions—the university, the publishing trade—they pursued alliances with the city’s wealthy elite as well as with business interests. In certain respects, the possibilities offered to the reader of the new guidebook are a projection of the position that many in this loosely interconnected network would claim for themselves. After all, the more self-conscious shaping of identity, privileging intellectual skills and endeavors rather than family status and wealth, depended on knowledge produced not only through texts but also through first-hand observation.25 Moreover, the production of self through the production of knowledge entailed, in the words of Stephen Greenblatt, “an interpretive community with an interest in establishing a fixed point beyond the ceaseless oscillation of irreconcilable perspectives.”26 The publisher Bernardino Tani, in his dedication to Cassiano dal Pozzo in the first edition of  In Search of Rome,  declares the intended reader to be as much the  habitanti  of the city as the  forastieri.  Apparently, this rationalized conception of the city was not an outsider’s view but rather a new detached view from within. Given that the new guides, unlike those for pilgrims, were not initially translated into other languages, they must have addressed a circumscribed range of readers, many of whom were permanent or long-term residents of the city. Of course, publishers, by adapting the guide’s itineraries to a short time-frame, also targeted a larger but more undefined market. 

While the fit between reader and guidebook was not necessarily that precise, one decisive way in which such a fit was pursued was through the technological claims of printing to bring new legibility to urban space. In contrast to the early editions of  In Search of Rome, Portrait of Modern Rome  banks on the reader’s interest in the new possibilities offered by the printed image, and it is this component that is highlighted in publisher Pamphilo Totti’s preface to the reader: 

Now I cannot fail to proceed and gather more passages from writers, and send out the present Modern Rome that by others is in various guides written; but it seems to me not copious enough to satisfy the curious Reader. I have seized this venture with the special assistance of well-informed and erudite people; to enrich it with many things by me omitted; and to do this I have not spared the expense of having engraved in copper diverse churches, palaces and other very famous things, as will be seen here.27 

Through comprehensive rather than selective knowledge of the city, the reader is constituted as knowledgeable, discriminating, and physically independent. Visual evidence, by way of copper engravings, brings access to all that had previously been excluded. A similar strategy becomes increasingly evident in seventeenth-century editions of the pilgrim’s guide. Introducing only minor changes, these books were marketed as new and up-to-date simply through the addition of images. Some came 

from extant sets of woodcuts, but for “improved” versions, such as the 1637 edition, the Mascardi woodcuts were engraved and given the precision of a clarified line. The title page (see Figure 2.4) of this edition, already noted for its display of Rome’s celebrated antiquities, serves to flag a certain kind of reader, doing some of the work that in the new guides is performed by the preface. In it, the new engravings are said to reveal both antiquities and modern buildings  delineati al naturale,  thus claiming to provide a direct, unmediated view. 

But the question of how visual imagery was to be part of a touristic urban itinerary remained unsettled, and each guide deploys diverse strategies. In contrast to the pilgrim’s guidebook, in which visual images are used to form coherent sets—the seven major basilicas, the most famous antiquities— Portrait of Modern Rome  has all kinds of images interspersed throughout its lengthy text. While some keep to established types—antiquities, churches, palaces, fountains—others are more idiosyncratic. Images of city processions, street insignias, and urban panoramas evoke a multiplicity of perspectives. Those that adopt an overview tend to delineate spatial relationships as much as particular sites. A case in point is the image of the area around the Acqua Felice in the district of Trevi, which encourages spectators to locate themselves within a scheme of various churches and buildings rather than be tied to any one location (see Figure 2.5).28 The images claim not only specificity of space but also of time, registering changes to the urban fabric from one edition to the next.29 By 1689 the guide included a map of the city, encouraging the reader to visualize the whole even as itineraries pursue distinctive parts. 

What might have prompted someone to choose one of the new guidebooks rather than  The Marvels of Rome,  given that the latter already offered access to the city’s antiquities, and particularly their visualization through printed images? And how did the new rival guidebooks, sharing claims of comprehensive, verifiable, and up-to-dare urban knowledge, still seek to develop significantly different kinds of readerships? As will emerge here, opting for any one guide over another did not necessarily mean a choice between tourism and pilgrimage, or between the ancient and modern city, since all guides allowed for considerable overlap of interests. Yet, the effort to draw differences between particular perspectives on the city and between readers was decisive, and once on the street any confusion between itineraries quickly disappeared. I turn now to these itineraries in order to explore their diverse takes on urban modernity. 

Three Urban Itineraries 

Given our tendency to presume that a guidebook’s very purpose is to facilitate physical movement, the established pilgrim’s guide proves something of a surprise.30 In fact, there is virtually no topographical information with which to locate the hundreds of churches listed in two distinct sections. In the 1637 edition entitled  The Marvels of Rome,  the major basilicas of Rome appear first, systematized into an itinerary of seven, each with its own discrete account.31 These are not interlinked by anything 

external within the urban environment; rather, what brings coherence to the itinerary and what prompts the visitors movements from one to the other is a hierarchical system of relics and indulgences.32 Thus the sequence of churches is symbolic rather than geographic, and pertains to how they must be conceptualized rather than visited. In other words, the churches, like the Seven Wonders of the World featured in the Mas-cardi editions from 1622, form an imaginary itinerary, one that evokes the true city of heaven.33 

The reader encounters the first basilica of San Giovanni Laterano as an internal space produced from an overwhelming accumulation of mystifying detail. The basilicas primacy is justified by a thorough account of its centrality in early church history and in the establishment of papal jurisdiction. A list of more than twenty-five major relics and a detailed explanation of the indulgences related to each of these relics follows.34 San Giovanni’s most holy relics, the heads of Peter and Paul, provide a revealing instance: 

On the papal altar, inside the iron grates made by the orders of Urban V, are the glorious heads of the Apostles Peter and Paul, and each time that these are shown an indulgence of three thousand years is granted to the inhabitants of Rome who are present, to those from nearby six thousand years, and to those who come from distant countries twelve thousand years, and as many quarantines and the remission of a third part of sins; these are shown on Tuesday, Thursday and Holy Saturday, Easter Monday, the Sunday during the octave of Corpus Domini, and on the 9th of November day of the Dedication.35 

Thus the display of relics was closely linked to the pilgrim’s physical movement, whereby distance from Rome became the main way to gauge the pilgrim’s progress toward the heavenly city. In fact, in order to seek this imaginary city, the pilgrim had to overcome through considerable physical hardship and mental effort not only the route to Rome, and the logic of the city’s topography, but also experiential time. Pilgrims were obliged to visit all seven major churches within the course of a day and to repeat this process between fifteen and thirty times.36 The number was determined not only by the distance already covered, but also by papal discretion. In fact, physical suffering and political contingency were routinely conflated in the new manuals on pilgrimage, for instance,  Declaration of the Jubilee of Holy Year  written by the Sil-vestrine monk Sebastiano Fabrini and published in Rome in 1600: 

With much reason then pilgrims are assigned half the time to visit the churches in comparison to the Romans, because through the bother, exhaustion, cost, danger, sweat, and work of pilgrimage they come to satisfy those missing fifteen days that are obligatory in visiting these churches. Because it is in the power of the Pontiff to impose more or less days; and to mutate and transfer the time of the Jubilee at his wish. Another thing that seems to be just is that if poor pilgrims are forced to stay 

many days in Rome, they are not much burdened by expenses necessary for their living; and also to give room to others, that continually tend to gather at this time in that Holy City.37 

This representation of the pilgrims road as one of bodily suffering and denial was crucial to a symbolic system in which its participants were defined within broad geographical categories; those within Rome, within the peninsula, and beyond the mountains. In the seventeenth century, editions of the pilgrim’s guide concluded with a new section, “The Principal Places of Italy,” which outlines the four major routes from Rome to different parts of the peninsula. These routes initially linked Rome to destinations as far as Ancona, Genova, Venice, and Naples, and after 1637 were extended further north and south.38 Distance was measured as covered on foot, with a day’s walk estimated between each city, village, or country shelter that forms each route’s continuous chain. Differences between pilgrims in their ability to move across this ground, especially those pertaining to rank and wealth, were incorporated within a system of reciprocal suffering and obligation. Thus the lack of funds or physical infirmities were not regarded as obstacles but as a means of gaining more credit. As for pilgrims with resources, they could use these to facilitate movement, as long as they atoned for their privileges by contributing to worthy beggars along the road.39 Evidently, equality between pilgrims could only remain an abstract concept, but one that reasserted all sorts of differences, especially those between poverty and charity. 

The hierarchy of relics had a crucial spatial dimension, both in the struggle to reach the sites of display and in the experience of the sites themselves, which were presented as a sequence of increasingly secluded and exclusive internal spaces. In the case of San Giovanni Laterano, the culminating point was the Scala Santa and the surmounting repository of Christ’s relics and miraculous image, the Sancta Sanctorum.40 The stairs, said to be from Pontius Pilate’s palace, and the pope’s private chapel were the only remaining parts of the pontifical palace demolished at the end of the sixteenth century. Their promotion in guidebooks dates from the reorganization of the Lateran complex and the building of a new palace in the 1580s, with subsequent editions embellishing their significance, rewards, and rituals.41 In the 1637 edition a new section entitled “Method of Visiting the Scala Santa” sought to regulate the pilgrim’s , visit to this site.42 Significantly, the relics kept in the chapel, including the column of Christ’s flagellation, are identified and verified through discussions in eight other publications, which are themselves organized according to date of publication and include three guidebooks.43 Instead of accepting the authority of the Church Fathers, the reader of the guidebook is encouraged to verify, clarify, and extend the information through a network of interrelated publications, including versions of the same guidebook. In the latter the climax of the visit, the upper sanctuary itself, becomes the prerogative of male ecclesiastical authority, fashioned through increasingly attenuated rituals and the very paradox of women being encouraged to climb the stairs on their knees but prohibited from actually crossing its threshold.44 

In the second section of  The Marvels of Rome  other churches, over three hundred in all, are listed and divided into six broad areas of the city.45 This geographical organization, however, is ultimately insignificant to the reader’s movements, since each entry records the relics to be seen in a given church as well as the particular feast day on which these visits must take place for indulgences to be granted. Evidently, it was the time-frame of the church calendar that overrode any consideration of geographical specificity if pilgrims were to achieve their goal. This is confirmed by the inclusion of the church calendar itself immediately after the list of churches, which facilitates the finding of just what stations, indulgences, and spiritual graces could be gained on a given day. The particular time of year that the pilgrim came to Rome would then determine which of these churches were worth visiting. And indeed, the liturgical calendar—as well as the especially designated Holy Years—prompted the physical movement of pilgrims around Rome and their very presence in the city at different times of the year, and during certain years.46 

Indeed, the pilgrim’s guide provides no practical information on how to find churches or how many times to visit them because it presumes that pilgrimage would always be collective. Certainly the manuals published to coincide with Holy Year describe pilgrimage to Rome by conflating not only individual and collective interests but also local and global space.49 In these manuals pilgrimage is shown to operate within the established networks of local communities and involves all members of a given community, even those who did not ultimately undertake the journey to Rome. Initiatives move strictly hierarchically from top to bottom, with local clergy promoting pilgrimage in their local area and acting as intermediaries by being both participants in and interpreters of the journey. Fabrini’s  Declaration of the Jubilee of Holy Year  urges local clergy to assist in the formation of a company and even to take the responsibility 

of ensuring that social bonds within the local community would not be ruptured while those away were unable to fulfill their familial roles.50 A crucial part of pilgrimage obligations was the recounting of the experience to others, and thus instilling in the young the desire to undertake a similar expedition to Rome. 

But what desires were stimulated by the tales of those who returned from Rome? After all, the guide offers more than a penitential journey. Of particular interest is a section entitled “Roman Guide for Foreigners Who Wish to See the Antiquities of Rome One by One,” which provides a short tour of the city’s antiquities (see Figure 2.6).51 Addressing the same readers but now as foreigners rather than as pilgrims, this itinerary, divided into three days, takes in the most celebrated antiquities in expedient geographical order. Within this section the reader is detached from the collective, although the information on antiquities is conveyed in more or less the same unequivocal voice as that on the relics. Even the itinerary is not entirely detached from the religious geography since its most detailed parts are precisely those that follow familiar pilgrimage paths: 

And walk this route until San Giovanni Laterano, where you will see the ancient fabric embellished, and in the middle of the piazza is an enormous carved obelisk that came from Egypt, and nearby is a beautiful fountain. Take then the street of Santa Croce in Gerusalemme, and in front of the door of the church you will find a subterranean place, where once was the Temple of Venus, in which the courtesans of that time celebrated their feast each year on the 20th of August.52 

Significantly, the first day, which starts at the Ponte Sant’Angelo with Hadrian’s Mausoleum, and ends with the pilgrimage churches of San Giovanni Laterano and Santa Croce in Gerusalemme, receives the most attention, certainly in comparison to the third day, which is devoted to Piazza Colonna, the Pantheon, and Piazza Navona. Within this separate eternal city, the reader may retrace the same ground and consider the same sites through its ancient components. As in the case of San Giovanni Laterano, where the visitor is directed to contemplate the ancient parts even as these are enfolded within the pilgrimage church, this itinerary could quite easily envelop Roman antiquities with the bewilderment and stupefaction fostered through the display of relics. Of course, the division of Rome into two closely integrated cities had a long history. As early as 1450 Giovanni Rucellai recorded that during his sojourn in Rome he rode on horseback to all four main basilicas each morning to comply with Jubilee obligations, and to different antiquities each afternoon for his own pleasure.53 

The motivation for viewing antiquities is what seems to disrupt the guidebook’s assumption of a coherent readership. Whereas religious and ancient sites were linked through experiences of veneration, awe, and even transcendence, the guidebook could accommodate scholarly interest in antiquities. It so happens that one could buy the pilgrim’s guide bound together with Andrea Palladio’s  The Antiquities of the Holy City of Rome.  This text, while published in a similar format as the pilgrim’s guide, consists 

Figure 2.6.  The Marvels of Rome, Roman Guide for Foreigners,  Rome, 1637, p. 69. British Library. 

of extended accounts of famous antiquities listed according to type of monument rather than geographical location.54 Yet the symbolic urban geography by which pilgrimage reasserted the centrality of papal Rome depended on the subjection of a cohesive community to its claims, and thus negotiating between the two became increasingly trying. The itinerary of antiquities, moreover, introduced unexpected interests, not only encouraging a more intellectual approach to the city and its topography, but also drawing some attention to the contemporary city. In fact, aspects of the contemporary city had never been entirely extricated from the tour of antiquities, with bits of information, for example, on the weekly market of Piazza Navona, slipping into its narrative.55 And even though the itinerary remained unchanged throughout 150 years of publishing, the introduction of images in 1622, some of which provide the reconstruction of the antiquities, encouraged comparisons between the then and now, and brought the past and the present into juxtaposition at the very moment of viewing antiquities. 

In this section of the pilgrim’s guidebook, with its offer of physical independence and access tbjough knowledge, one anticipates the reader of the new guidebooks. Yet what ultimately separates the new guidebooks from those addressing pilgrimage or the city’s antiquities is the link now forged between physical independence and verifiable urban knowledge. In other words, in the new guidebooks the production of a sense of self is predicated on the production of a particular city and vice versa. I turn once again to the reader’s preface of the 1644  In Search of Rome,  in which Fioravante Martinelli argues for the priority of efficient movement if one is to arrive at a comprehensive understanding of the city: 

I realize that in practice it is not possible to view everything, particularly places that are shut and cannot be shown, unless with the graciousness of patrons or officials who are in charge of them; but this can be remedied by observing the opportune time of viewing, without impeding the order of the journey./My intention is to note briefly what is enough for the speed of your peregrination, not tending to the numerous holy bodies, the celebrated relics, the sepulchers of illustrious men, the beautiful ornaments, and the indulgences, even though I propose to conduct you through each place where these are.56 

The reader’s independence, both physical and intellectual, becomes possible by way of a clearly organized itinerary of sites, now presented in the order in which they are to be seen and including only the amount of information appropriate to physical movement. The items discussed and their order are not there to make sense of what the viewer might encounter along the way. On the contrary, they are there to exclude aspects of urban space in order to reassert a particular perspective through the pursuit of a fixed trajectory. 

One of the most significant shifts found in both new guides is the adoption of a single integrated itinerary pinned down to a specific topographical route and a specific 

number of days. In other words, the desire to keep to a linear route and time-frame takes precedence over, and is given as the reason for, what will be viewed and what is said about it. It is this daily itinerary that now would structure the guidebook, with the  Portrait of Modern Rome  initially divided into six days and  In Search of Rome  into ten. In contrast to the pilgrim’s guide with its multiple sections, the new guidebooks feature only one component apart from the main itinerary, a lengthy index of notable places and people listed in alphabetical order. The information of a given site, however, is entirely overdetermined by the demands of time and space of the overall itinerary, and thus the index, rather than offering ways to alter the tour, becomes another means to reassert the ultimate authority of the prescribed itinerary. 

While both new guidebooks insist on the primacy of the itinerary, each seeks to produce a specific city from its itinerary.  Portrait of Modern Rome  is unique among seventeenth-century printed guides in focusing on the social fabric of the city and the desire for its improvement. It is also the only guide that orders its tour in relation to Rome’s own local districts, the  rion f. The urge to provide full coverage of each of these districts, which being of varying sizes result in itineraries of vastly different lengths, introduces a problem between the physical demands of the tour and its designated time. While the twelve  rione  are divided into six days roughly in relation to the length of each itinerary, the time allotted is both uneven and in every instance inadequate.57 This division of the itineraries into days, introduced by the publisher to address shortterm visitors, is by the final 1689 edition entirely omitted, leaving it to readers to delimit the time of the tour. 

Each  rione  s itinerary, distinguished initially through the display of its insignia, is introduced by an overall description.  As  emerges in the case of Trastevere, this description signals the guide’s attempts to negotiate between the particularities of the local and the conceptualization of the city as a coherent entity: 

With all that this was as one of the ancient  Rioni  of Rome, it was not inhabited by noble people, but those of low condition who practiced vile trades. Here also foreigners and soldiers that went vagabonding through Rome were confined upon 

suspicion of any insurrection____At the time that Augustus reigned, Trastevere was 

given to the habitation of the Jews, and here gathered the generation of the Jews when in this ancient Holy City: but now the Roman Pontiffs have enclosed them in another area; and even today in this same Trastevere are their sepulchers. . . . Trastevere has the noble palace called of the Corgna inhabited by the Excellent Duke of Branciano, that of the Riario with its villa, and the other of the ghisi passed to the Farnese, extremely famous for the painting that can be seen of Raffaello, of Baldassarre, and other extremely celebrated painters of that time.58 

While each  rione  presents a different challenge to the guidebooks organization, the introductory comments always manage to intertwine the particular area within a coherent whole through the visual spectacle afforded by palatial and fountain architecture. 

Once the itinerary begins, the text foregrounds local specificities, providing lengthy accounts of social conditions and interactions. Such an insistent focus on social problems and conflicts is unexpected in the representation of the city for the print market. Each itinerary moves the reader from neighborhood to neighborhood, and these are organized around an institution, usually a church, which is defined not as a repository for relics and indulgences but as the nucleus of a neighborhood. These subsections, numbered sequentially and headed by the name of the particular institution, are linked to each other through geographical proximity and the guide’s precise directions. Indeed, one of the most striking aspects of the discussion is the way it conducts the reader across unfamiliar urban space. Again quoting from a section within the  none  of Trastevere: 

To come from San Pancrazio to this church [Santa Prassede], you need to turn back at the gate and outside the wall, then turning come to the gate of Ripa, once Portuense; and walking on the main street, you will find it beside the river; but before turning to this side, on the same street can be seen the shape of a square well that was called the well of San Pantaleo, now shut and full of earth. The water of the well was apparently used by the Gentiles in various of their superstitions, as is said of another well in the church of San Giorgio. Yet the common people have found another name, which now drowns the undiluted one.59 

The narrative is directed through the specificities of physical movement and through the verification of certain markers by what can be seen. There is no insistent focus on the monumental, but rather a turn to the everyday and the changing aspects of the city. At the same time, what invariably drives the text is the assessment of different ways' of knowing the city, and the juxtaposition of the language and beliefs of the street with knowledge based on historical texts and visual observation. This intellectual approach pervades even the discussion of religious institutions, which are usually considered in relation to their local history, and, when possible, linked to visual observations. Instead of the exclusive sacred space produced in the pilgrims guidebook, the account of the Santa Maria in Trastevere opts to differentiate between historical moments, bringing weight to recent histories and evoking a continuous process of change: 

Where this church is now is where once was the meritorious tavern in which food was given by the Senate to the soldiers at the end of their lives, who due to age or due to imperfections could not do military service ... in 1564 ... a barber called Giovanni Colli prompted the courtiers of the Cardinal and the canons of this church to form a Company of the Santissimo Sacramento, so that the church and the ill of the parish could be maintained decently. . . . The Assumption that is seen on the ceiling is the painting of Domenichini. . . . This Church, and its door was substituted in the year 1625 and visited by the people in the place of the church and holy door of San Paolo, where one could not move liberally, since commerce out- 

side of Rome was prohibited for suspicion of the plague. . . . The Fountain that is in the piazza, is said to have been built by Pope Adrian I, who (as we have written) renewed the aqueducts of the Waters Alsietina, and redirected it to Rome. . . . Then Alessandro VI redid it in a better way; and Clement VIII with beautiful design embellished it; but due to a lack of water, it remains abandoned and begins to go into ruin.60 

The sites, then, generate a remarkably broad discussion, interweaving the histories of prominent and unknown people, the physical and social fabric of the city, the artistic and the social, and the changes of the past and the present. This impressive range of issues is raised in relation to a highly demanding physical tour of the district. In the case of Trastevere, the reader is guided through virtually all areas, starting on the outer Gianicolo, winding around the more densely built internal parts, and ending at the southern boundary of the river. All kinds of sites—churches, hospitals, classical antiquities, street shrines, fountains, bridges—are included, but the guide, being especially adamant about confronting social problems, saves its lengthier accounts for charitable and educational institutions devoted to the poor and ill. 

In most of these respects,  In Search of Rome  is different. It is not the  none  that dictates the itinerary, but a series of antiquarian and artistic sites organized in a topographically logical sequence. This sequence not only disregards local orientations and boundaries, but also is clearly directed to a precise time-frame. Unlike the  Portrait of Modern Rome,  this guide offers pared-down daily itineraries, each including roughly the same number of sites. The ten itineraries provide wide coverage of the city and do not exclude any area in particular, although the interest in efficient movement means that the more densely built neighborhoods tend to be bypassed in favor of direct routes from one point of observation to the next. Each day’s tour starts at a different location, but most are initiated in one of the small piazzas—Pasquino, Nicosia, S. Apollinare, S. Lorenzo in Damaso, S. Salvatore in Lauro—within the vicinity of Piazza Navona, not coincidentally the area of print sellers and booksellers. The prescribed route swiftly moves the reader from this densely urbanized area toward different hills, and it is here, where a more rural setting and the proliferation of antiquities meet, that the majority of time is spent. This movement is not merely organized, as in the  Portrait of Modern Rome,  rather, there is an urge to move, propelled by the onward pull of the street and the rotational force of the piazza. An example from the fourth day: 

Pass across the street of Catinari, and go to the piazza Mattei observing there the fountain with the dolphins and statues in metal made by the order of the  Popolo Romano  at the cost of one thousand two hundred scudi in 1585 by Taddeo Landini Fiorentino . . . and from here through the little alley go to the church, and the Monastery of the Monks of S. Ambrogio della Massima, and to the fish market. Here find the most ancient temple of S. Angelo. . . . Leave the fish market and pass in front of the palace of the Savelli adapted to the ancient theater of Marcellus; and 

then on the street behind the church of S. Nicola in Carcere where the ancient fish market of the Romans was, and from this side you will arrive at the broken bridge.61 

The text is directed to move the body and focus the eye. What prompts this movement is, relative to the  Portrait of Modern Rome,  narrow in range, for the reader must verify all given information through visual observation. Within its focus on intellectual and artistic matters, however, the guidebook is expansive, encompassing esoteric materials as well as celebrated antiquities and contemporary art and architecture. Private collections of antiquities, contemporary painting, and curiosities are of primary interest, and the particular configuration of a group of objects fills many passages of this text. Moreover, no opportunity is missed to discuss printing, books, and the discernible reader.62 

While its itineraries rarely reveal contemporary social life, the guide does offer practical information for the visitor, concluding with a list of Rome’s streets and piazzas and their particular services and consumer goods.63 For instance, Monte Giordano is associated with secondhand sellers, Piazza Giudea with Jewish pawnbrokers, and Piazza Navona with booksellers and the market. This interest in identifying goods and services within urban space is also connected to the ordering of space through punitive authority: “Campo de’ Fiori: in here reside shoemakers, armouries, retailers of old clothes, the excisemen of custom on horses and straw. FI ere grains, corn, horses and asses are brought to be sold, and justice is carried out on those condemned to death for reasons of religion.”64 In the piazzas, the trades and activities seem directed toward consumption through visual observation rather than the acquisition of the products themselves. Within the list of streets, however, more is made of the availability of certain kinds of luxury items, and locations are described in terms of official institutions and permanent shops rather than temporary stalls and everyday trades.65 

In search of particular spaces of observation,  In Search of Rome  redraws urban boundaries in new ways. The guide reasserts the ancient/modern divide through its rigorous scholarly approach and divides intellectual pursuits of touring from market consumption. It is, however, less preoccupied with the separation of secular and religious interests. Authority, be it that of the church, state, or nobility, is constantly evoked, but so is the reader’s ability to transform all possible obstructions into intellectual knowledge and order external space from within. Even when the itinerary stops at churches, as in the case of San Giovanni Laterano, it is to access its parts through strategic viewing points and rework them into a new ensemble of verifiable knowledge.66 Given how  In Search of Rome  insists on a reader embodied through selfrecognition in relation to an externalized terrain, it may come as a surprise to find that the tenth and final day of the itinerary retraces the circuit of the city’s nine primary pilgrimage churches.67 In this return to pilgrimage, the author of the guide takes on a highly authoritarian tone and, after listing the various publications that dictate the 

proper way to visit the churches, warns the reader not to undertake such an itinerary without the preparation of confession and communion. Of course, at this penultimate moment in the guidebook’s tour of the city, the pilgrimage to the basilicas proves to be a different kind of journey. First of all, it is located within the linear time scheme of the overall itinerary, and like its other parts the sites are organized according to geographical efficiency rather than symbolic hierarchy, with San Pietro, not surprisingly, as the starting point.68 The path to the churches is now transformed from an abstract space of bodily suffering to a comprehensible terrain, measured, segmented, and named: 

To go to San Paolo, move on the street that is called the Lungara, then towards Santa Maria in Trastevere, and from here go directly to the bridge of the Quattro Capi, and passing the island of San Bartolomeo, and the other bridge, turn on the right hand to conduct yourself to Santa Maria di Scuola Greca, to the Marmorata, piazza of Testaccio, and to the gate of San Paolo, otherwise called Trigemma and Ostiense.69 

Once again, similar paths reveal different ways of moving on city streets. If the pilgrim’s guide increasingly offers opportunities to expand its own take on city antiquities, this new guide forges a sense of physical independence and a separation of mind and body that enables readers to rejoin, on different terms, the community of Christian pilgrims. And both, in turn, encounter the urban spaces traversed by the reader of the third guide,  Portrait of Modern Rome.  In order to explore further how printed guidebooks altered people’s relation to the street, I turn to the different approaches to visual observation. While the sites of visual display—relics, antiquities, works of charity, contemporary art and architecture, public space—overlap, the ways visual observation reorganized the body’s relation to urban space do not. 

Bodies and Visual Practices on the Street 

Definitions of the pilgrim, unstable at the most stable times, came under particular pressure at the end of the sixteenth century when the deployment of new forms of print intensified religious conflict. Within the Roman Catholic Church, the publication of guides and diaries of Holy Year became an occasion in which to argue for a consistent notion of pilgrimage and thus to counter the objections of reformers. Holy Year manuals keep to a strict and unwavering concept of pilgrimage, in which a universal collective body is underpinned by the struggle waged within the flesh, spirit, and mind of each and every participant.70 Fabrini, in his widely circulated 1600  Declaration of the Jubilee of Holy Year,  maintains that the goal of pilgrimage is the infliction of physical suffering, which is to be in accordance with the level of impurity of the soul.71 While physical pain is associated with the internal body through the sense of touch,72 pleasure is associated with the external body through the sense of sight: 

[T]he common people deceive themselves greatly in undertaking holy pilgrimage for amusement and recreation with much cheerfulness, even though the days of pilgrimage must be spent harshly, with contribution, with weeping and with tears of true penitence . . . those people who enter the church to see, or to be seen, and for other such vanities, and who do not earn the benefits of Jubilee, but more strongly offend God.73 

With the pilgrim located outside ordinary time and local space, the question of visual attention was hard to avoid, and here it is associated with the vulnerability of particular bodies who wish to see and be seen. According to Fabrini the uneducated fail to understand the abstract philosophical arguments that sustain the journey and its deferred rewards. Indeed, he justifies the intermediary role of the clergy by the presence of pilgrims that are open to corruption. Women, and especially the young and unmarried, are regarded as particularly susceptible to external gratifications and are required to travel with older women as well as under the protection of clerics. 

The strategy of attributing suspect visual interest to the guileless pilgrim was not new, but now it was reactivated as both Protestant detractors and Catholic defenders focused on the current inclination to externalize penitential pilgrimage practices.74 A Calvinist engraving published in the Netherlands in 1606 (see Figure 2.7) sets as its target the objectification of religious belief, and particularly Catholic claims for the sacred status of relics and other objects.75 Angels draw curtains to reveal an apocalyptic vision: the interior of a church overrun by corruption and greed as well as crawling locusts with gold crowns, human faces, lion’s teeth, and scorpion’s tails.76 In this church monetary gain and rampant superstition intersect, as the material substitutes for indulgences, pardons, and other benefits are displayed on tables and sold by a church official with multiple arms. Objectification, however, is not limited to these exchanges. Roman Catholic institutional hierarchy is itself ridiculed and trivialized by being reduced to its outer symbols, the miters and caps hanging on a pillar, worn on a slant or replaced with a feathered headdress, an allusion to indigenous authority in the “New World.” 

If church officials are successful in their deceitful practices, it is because they are able to take advantage of a gullible populace, which the image identifies as poor, rural, and degraded. Forming a disjointed procession along the foreground, each pilgrim is shown as distorted and even monstrous, with no separation between deformed flesh and carnivalesque costume. This body is as grotesque and disjointed as the reliquary of a twisted hand that one carries, becoming a mirror of the sacred object upon which it is fixated. This fixation on the trivial is mocked as pilgrims clutch spoons, water jars, and moneybags with no less fervor than rosaries, little statues of saints, and reliquaries. Inside the church the accumulation of objects is repeated, in the form of ex-votoes, which evoke rampant belief in temporal favors and now clutter the shrine of the Virgin. Some of these, the many distinctive obelisks that hang from the rafters, even call up the pilgrimage to Rome and the superstition surrounding pagan objects. 

The bedraggled and disoriented pilgrims are propelled to follow their banner by 

Figure 2.7. Apocalyptic vision of the Roman Catholic Church (detail), Netherlands, 1606. Copyright The British Museum. 

clerics that coax them into the church, but theirs is a hopelessly disjointed procession. Indeed, if the fixation on the external world dooms individuals to blindness, it also fragments the pilgrimage community. By thus linking a diminished Christian community to the objectification of belief, the image locates its critique squarely with miracle-working images, popular superstitions, and, of course, a particular social sector. In fact, the dependence of pilgrimage on the immediate rewards of miraculous objects had long been discouraged by the Roman Catholic Church, especially because it threatened a centralized system of indulgences. In Rome the pilgrimage topography was defined by the icon more than the relic, and its powers configured in relation to processional performances of civic collectivity.77 When relics were promoted in the fifteenth century, it was on the basis of humanist arguments for its unique place in the history of the early martyrs and the inextricable links between relic and geographical site.78 The pilgrim’s guide itself increasingly discards icons and relics not attached to the history of primary churches and is particularly attentive to those flagged by papal 

projects of building and refurbishment.79 The basilicas of San Giovanni Laterano and San Pietro are the most obvious examples, and Holy Year books assiduously promote these grandiose projects of embellishments while simultaneously admonishing pilgrims for pursuing visual interests and pleasures. 

A crucial distinction was now drawn between the humble objects of popular belief and the large-scale visual effects that linked the history of particular sites to a universal Christian community.80 It is useful to compare the Calvinist print with one that, serving as the title page of Simone Ruggieri’s 1650 Holy Year diary, offers a very different image of the pilgrim (see Figure 2.8).81 Once again an angel draws a curtain to reveal the interior of a church, but this interior is kept tantalizingly out of reach. Sacred space, it would seem, cannot be pictured and must be approached through an oblique glance at genuflecting pilgrims and the twisting columns of the baldacchino of San Pietro. Its effects, however, are rendered explicit. As the pilgrim reaches the threshold, he bows down, overwhelmed by his desire for that which we cannot see. This withholding of visual confirmation only makes more palpable a promise of excess that conflates material luxury and religious fervor. 

This approach to the external demarcators of pilgrimage brings the community into a whole, but it does not necessarily leave viewership undifferentiated, as is the case with the Calvinist print. In fact, even Fabrini acknowledges that the question of how people engage with visual imagery is neither uniform nor coherent: 

[I]t is a thing worthy of tears that those wicked and depraved will go to Rome in Holy Year, not to see what is so lauded by Holy Fathers, and with the piety recommended in that city for visiting and honoring the memory and sepulcher of the Martyrs and other saints, not to see the innumerable works of piety and devotion that are carried out in diverse Hospitals and pious places to help the poor and sick, not to acquaint oneself with the modesty and grave religiosity of the Romans when visiting sacred places . .. but only to have eyes on exterior things, and some defects, to note them diligently, or to be looking for the bad and imperfections that are almost necessary, that are tolerated for the multitude of so many diverse people that in this city gather; . . . and this is done particularly by the Heretics to slander and dishonor and say bad of the true Christians and Catholics.82 

Fabrini is concerned with the contradictions made visible in the city, particularly with the increasing presence of non-Catholics. And he argues for a kind of willful viewing in which a fixation on religious and charitable works must overcome all visible evidence of moral corruption. The burden is now on the pilgrim to  make d istinctions within a complicated and contradictory urban space. Holy Year books continue a long tradition of defining outside space—the open road, the open road at night, the unknown hostel—as a threat to the pilgrim’s struggle, but Fabrini focuses more overtly on the encroachment of urban space, and especially Rome, which he claims must allow for a greater diversity and conflict due to its very centrality.83 This urban space, 

Figure 2.8. Simone Ruggieri,  Diary of the Year of the Holy Jubilee, 1650,  title page. Biblioteca Casanatense. 

moreover, has the potential to reveal contradiction not only through overt acts of corruption but also by exposing the visitor to pleasure. Antiquities are one aspect of the city that gives Fabrini the most trouble for he cannot endorse or deny their attraction: 

[I]t must be well warned, that there is no need to go to Rome only or principally, with the intention of seeing antique things and marvels of this city, such as the 

baths, circuses, amphitheaters, the extremely tall columns, the marvelous pyramids, or the obelisks, the Campidoglio, Adrian’s tomb, and other curiosities, that are there.84 

In comparison,  The Marvels of Rome  is prepared to open up such external interests, perhaps because it could count on modes of observation appropriate to relics. Yet the changes introduced to the pilgrim’s guide from 1622 certainly attempt to tone down the penitentiary aspects of pilgrimage. The list that quantifies eternal time to be gained from indulgences is now omitted, and its title page highlights the city’s works of charity as much as its relics.85 While in the past many argued for church wealth to be used in service of the poor, charity itself becomes a viable spectacle, one that serves as moral exemplum and could avoid the charges of objectification directed at relics. The pilgrim’s guidebook, however, is selective in its promotion of works of charity, concentrating almost exclusively on the work of local companies, especially the street processions and church ceremonies in which young poor women were put on display. These gatherings of large numbers of young women, unified through their identical white sacks, generated, as will be discussed in the following chapter, diverse and even illicit viewing exchanges. In the pilgrim’s guidebook, however, the spectacle of poverty and virginity is left tantalizingly undefined. But it begins to infiltrate the description of churches, and even, as in the case of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, which had five charity companies, to upstage the relics.86 Whether prompting unacknowledged pleasures or penitential fervor, or a mixture of both, these performances certainly altered the pilgrim’s position in the field of vision. Rather than serving to sublimate difference for the sake of the universal community, they encouraged a sense of self apart from the focus of observation by asserting differences of gender and social rank. 

If the pilgrim’s guide is very selective in its presentation of pious works in the city, the new guidebook  Portrait of Modern Rome  argues for the need to observe every aspect of charitable work in order to comprehend the whole through its parts. This new claim for comprehensive knowledge is underpinned by the power of the eye to bring access to urban space, yet the ceremonial displays so prominent in the pilgrim’s guide are entirely omitted. I turn to the description of the church of Santa Caterina dei Funari, the headquarters of a prominent charitable company for young women: 

The charity carried out in the monastery adjoining this church for poor virgins in peril was began by St. Ignatius founder of the Company of Jesus, with the help of some devoted and noble persons who felt compassion for the many women who, for necessity or bad example and worse care by their mothers, faced danger to their honor; in order for this work to continue a congregation was formed around 1543 between these gentlemen . . . and God was so pleased with this pious and holy work that he inspired two very rich men in Rome to leave it half of their wealth, and the other half to orphans and lost women. One was Cosimo Giustino in 1605, the other Antonio Pietra in 1614. 

And because the Augustinian nuns are good teachers, they were put in charge . . . those who do not have a calling for religion are married and each is given a dowry of 50 scudi and 10 for a dress . . . Particular care is taken in visiting the married, and the widows, and when it is found that they do not have an honest life, or that the widows have fallen into poverty and have nowhere to retire to, they have a house near the monastery, equipped in the manner of the monastery, with its chapel, where each day mass is celebrated, and with diverse cells where those who are found to have a dishonest life are put, and other rooms for the purpose and equipped with all that is necessary for those who spontaneously, or due to poverty, or due to quarrels with their husbands, come there . . . and for those that are widows there is an attempt to find another husband, those that are married to reunite with their husband, and those that live licentiously in absence of their husbands, are kept in this house and are not released if not after time it is seen that 

they have emended their life and changed their bad customs.87 

\y'‘  /vvj    *     \ C  o v.'*- t''i' 

Access to charity is not by way of visum observation. There is no encouragement to attend the celebrated annual procession of the girls of Santa Caterina, in part because the itinerary is tied to linear time rather than to the church calendar. Access is achieved through the guide’s remarkable account of the charity’s workings, aims, procedures, benefactors, and social effects. 

Portrait of Modern Rome  presses the reader to consider the control and improvement of the local social fabric, and thus the city’s problems and conflicts are raised, investigated, and turned into an alien force that must be combated. Visual observation, however, is reserved for the pleasing appearances of palaces and fountains and stands apart from the guide’s accumulation of social knowledge. This is true of the tour of the district of Sant’Angelo, in which Santa Caterina dei Funari is located and which held precious few examples of grandiose architecture. Indeed the only image included in the section, an engraving of the Mattei fountain, underscores the links between visual observation and aesthetic pleasures.88 The cohesion forged through a visual field comprised of palaces and fountains is crucial, for it is from this position of intellectual and social distinction that the reader takes up the city’s social circumstances head-on. The small district of Sant’Angelo generates some of the most sustained accounts of Rome’s social conflicts and problems, defining the reader’s relation to the city in terms of intellectual struggle over its inner workings. The poor women of Santa Caterina provide an overt way of drawing difference between the presumed well-off, morally upright male reader of the guidebook and the object of knowledge. This knowledge, however, is always reinserted within a citywide conception of social progress and disassociated from any direct encounter. The reader of the guidebook, moreover, can take up this privileged position assured by the fact that what is conveyed is not accessible to all, since it is revealed by the guidebook and not the site. Within this comparative viewpoint, not all local areas are the same, and the reader 

is encouraged to shift between strategies of intervention and of segregation, thus forging a hierarchy of marginalization and containment. In Sant’ Angelo there is no more extreme example than the Jewish Ghetto, the focus of a lengthy account that seeks to reassert the boundaries that ultimately frame this type of urban knowledge: 

This piazza was thus called for being in front of the enclosure of the Jews. There was great abuse to Christianity before the Pontificate of Paul IV when the Jews were intermixed with Christians, and were not only not distinguished by their dress, but they also took rooms and bought land next to our churches, and had Christian servants and wet-nurses. When they were introduced to Christ, they abused the favor in order to drive out the Christians and appropriate their goods, as recounts the bull of this pontiff. 

With all this it can be said that this holy pope used mercy in not exiling them from the state, as have done the King of France and Spain. He ordered that they wear a yellow beret as a sign of their religion. 

He also commanded that, since they are contaminated, they be enclosed in a separate place, where there should be no more than one synagogue; and if they owned property, all would be sold to Christians, and that they keep themselves in the trade that in Rome is called  Ferrovicchi,  that is the buying and selling of old and used things. 

Another concession was that they could lend money one month of the year, but in our feast days there was to be no usury and none of their vile trades. . . . [I] t is commanded again to all Christians that they not converse in familiar ways with these people, nor eat or play with them, nor rear their children, although some of these things today are not observed, and in part the rigor against them has disappeared.89 

In this account of the recent history of Jewish Romans there is an attempt to take on, certainly in comparison with other accounts, a tone of detachment. Comprehensive knowledge covering official policy and everyday life is mixed with comparative information, with Rome emerging as more tolerant than France and Spain. But anxieties abound, and seem to emerge especially in relation to Christian dependence on Jewish moneylenders and the inability to secure segregation policies. Interestingly, while the account presumes the reader to be standing on Piazza Giudea and thus at the main entrance to the ghetto itself, there is no encouragement to actually enter and verify the information. 

There is perhaps no more startling comparison than the description of Piazza Giudea in the rival  In Search of Rome: 

In the Jewish piazza you can observe an antiquity that Lucio Muro describes as a ruined portico built by Emperor Severus, called by the common people Cevra; but from the plan which is found in the third book of Serlio s work on architecture one 

could argue that this entire area, surrounded by the house of the Santacroci and the churches of Cacabaij and the Pianto, stands on the ruins of the sumptuous portico of Pompeus. Enter the ghetto of the Jews and come out on the bridge of Quattro Capi, by which you can walk to the island.90 

This itinerary does not exclude any area of the city on the basis that it might prove difficult to negotiate, either physically or socially, for its search for scholarly truth permits no such compromises. While in Piazza Giudea, defined by a large fountain, a second-hand market, and the offices of many pawnbrokers, the reader’s search for visually verifiable knowledge is restricted to antiquities that are themselves extricated from common knowledge or social contingency. Unlike  Portrait of Modern Rome,  the guide directs the reader straight through the ghetto, transgressing social and official city boundaries while managing to pay no heed to the specificity of this or any other neighborhood. The only reason to enter the ghetto is to keep to the most physically efficient route, and thus to exert physical command over the entire urban terrain. 

For a guidebook that is so insistent on the links between urban knowledge and visual observation, its omission, certainly in the early editions, of images is intriguing. Perhaps its readers would be expected to turn to the more sophisticated large-scale prints and maps on the market. But more to the point, ocular practice itself, rather than what that practice reveals, or its two-dimensional representation, has primacy in this guidebook. In other words, it offers a representation of urban space that has no existence outside of what Lefebvre has called an aggressive and repressive visualization. First, the act of viewing organizes urban space in a particular way and permits no obstructions. Thus urban space is marked out in terms of social boundaries, those of the ghetto as well as those of exclusive social interiors, in order for these to then be crossed. A considerable number of private collections, some already accessible to visitors, now become an indispensable site of achievement in this itinerary. Just one telling instance is Palazzo Farnese, which the reader is prompted to enter and organize for expanded readability: 

Pass the church of the Confraternity of Death, and enter the palace of the Farnese making an effort to see that famous statue of Dirce tied to the bull brought from Rhodes, which is the work of Apollonius and Tauriscus, as recounts Pliny in chapter 5 of book 36. It was placed by Emperor Marcus Antonius Pigus, called Caracalla, in his baths under the Aventine hill near the public pool, and found at the time of Paul III, it was brought to this palace. In the same baths was found the great Hercules, which has the head and one leg that are modern, and is nude leaning on a trunk with the skin of the lion.91 

The intellectual challenges raised by the close observation of antiquities (questions of origin, authorship, textual source, site of excavation, and restoration) establish a coherent, rarefied, and stable space of knowledge. Its very clarity serves to conceal all 

contingencies of space. Indeed, the second aspect of this type of viewing is that the very search to seek out hidden evidence holds the unpredictable and unreadable at bay. This becomes particularly crucial when traversing public space, for it is here that social difference is most in evidence, and the object of viewing is accessible to all. As in the instance of the Coliseum, it is in public space that the viewpoint must be differentiated: 

You have in view the most superb amphitheater of Titus Vespasian, partly deformed, called the Coliseum and more celebrated for the trophies acquired by the holy martyrs than for the excellence of the fabric. You will see that on the structure are infinite perforated places, and if inside the hole you observe well, you will find another smaller one, almost round, with the width of a nut that served for the metal hinges, of steel or of iron, that conjoined the upper travertine with the lower; you can observe the same in the Arch of Constantine and elsewhere;... Paul II extracting that part which is against SS. Giovanni and Paolo, used the travertine in the building of the palace of San Marco, and then Cardinal Raffaelle Riario built with the same the palazzo della Cancelleria in San Lorenzo in Damaso, and the Cardinal Farnese (who was Paolo III) his palace in the Campo de’ Fiori, all the most noble buildings that Rome had.92 

The viewer emerges as an autonomous entity through dynamic viewpoints, each enumerated and located with precision. But the supremacy of antiquities is already entangled with private aristocratic interests. Thus a third component of this approach to urban space is that the visual ordering of the outer world is ultimately unsettled by contradictions between dependency and the pursuit of independence. 

The attempt to produce an image of the modern city through this kind of perspective remained a precarious proposition, as is eloquently articulated in Francesco Villamena’s 1628 print of Giovanni Alto, the Swiss guard and professional guide to the city’s antiquities (see Figure 2.9).93 Two aspects of this image seem pertinent, the body of the guide with all that shapes and threatens it, and the fashioning of the modern city from the fragments of the ancient past. Giovanni Alto is presented as embodied confidence. The lavish costume, which includes lace collar, slashed doublet, decorative breeches, and tall-feathered hat, defines the contours of a masculine physicality that is as coherent as the city is fragmented. Initially the city, viewed from Monte Cavallo, confronts the viewer of the print with an impressive but daunting perspective. It abounds with celebrated antiquities and the contemporary monumental architecture of papal authority, but its pathways are as numerous as they are complex. This city, moreover, is defined by its irregularity, both physical and social, and presents no separation between antiquities and contemporary life, or between the maintenance of social order and the possibility for transgression. Indeed, although anecdotal detail is not allowed to detract from the grandeur of this city, it is used to reveal the ephemeral and chaotic aspects of everyday life, including its laborers, beggars, pilgrims, soldiers, 

Figure 2.9. Francesco Villamena,  Giovanni Alto,  1623. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

sellers, and loiterers. Thus the print itself presumes a fascination with urban diversity, but it also suggests that such a view stands in direct contrast to the elegant embodiment of Giovanni Alto himself, as does a curious array of objects—an overturned plinth, the marble fragment of a foot, a skull invaded by a snake, and a mangy skeletal dog—that frame the imposing body of the guide, reminding the viewer that the dangers of the urban surface are multiple but they all pertain to time, unpredictability, and the diminishment of the body. Loss seems to activate the desire to control the urban surface, for echoing Alto’s elegant feet is the ancient marble foot, the remnant of a once ideal beauty. The reconstruction of this dismembered body is what Alto offers clients, and it is by controlling how one is viewed that this goal may be achieved. If he draws on physical posture, rational knowledge, and self-conscious visual scrutiny, it is not just to project an urban space in which incoherence and unpredictability have been stamped out. It is also to produce a self all too aware of being on display and even aware of colluding with the very modes of authority that threaten his autonomy. 

A very different relation between visuality and antiquities is suggested by the other guidebooks.  The Marvels of Rome  offers an image of Monte Cavallo already entirely 

ordered for the viewer and in very particular ways (see Figure 2.10). The vista presumes a disembodied viewer who can contemplate the imposing rectangular shape of the papal palace as it gives shape and legibility to urban space. This is not a walkable space, but one rigidly organized for the eye, blurring the line between antiquities and the contemporary city, and insisting on the links between antiquities and papal authority. And, of course, it leaves the position of the viewer at best undefined. In the 1638 edition of  Portrait of Modern Rome,  two images of Monte Cavallo conjoin to deploy yet another strategy. One of these offers a vast orderly overview of the papal palace not unlike that used in the pilgrim’s guidebook, but the other brings the eye to ground level and to the entanglements around the fountain (see Figure 2.11). Adapting the image of urban exchange around the fountain from Villamenas print,  '  this view insists on the bodily movement activated by the space but also contained by its visual pull. Thus for public space to be pictured, it had to be divided between the 

Figure 2.10.  The Marvels of Rome,  1637, Monte Cavallo. British Library. 

Figure 2.11.  Portrait of Modem Rome,  1638, Monte Cavallo. British Library. 

overview facilitating coherence and the close-up view facilitating containment. What cannot be visualized is the relationship between the two. 

While all three itineraries address an increasingly fractured social order, fhey seek to reconstitute a fixed perspective in very different ways. All activate visual modes of accessing urban space and even shift the status of visual evidence in the production of a truthful view of the modern city. For the reader of  The Marvels of Rome,  options expanded within fraught debates on how visual observation and the contradictions within urban space could be acknowledged without diminishing the authority of the city of relics. But the burden was now with the pilgrim, who was to consciously enact a kind of visual self-censorship, indicating perhaps a split between the overt controls of the system and the opportunities opened up within it to secure its interests through the marketplace. 

By expanding and externalizing ocular practices, the two new guidebooks prompt the production of the self in relation to a comprehensive and coherent image of the city, but they also demand modes of self-censorship, although imposed much more through repression and displacement.  In Search of Rome  has the distinction of being the only guide in which there is no discrepancy between what is described in the text, verified by the eye, and shaped through the particular achievements of a given reader. All knowledge is linked to visual observation, which reveals and objectifies the city in relation to both the production of scholarly discourse on classical antiquities and the dictates of the law over the body. Through this lens the image of the city was extricated from changing conflictual social relations, but only if the reader struggled to keep such a tight focus. Toward this end, the reader is assisted a great deal by the guidebook, which is entirely in keeping with the body’s movements on the street. Paradoxically, the very suitability of this itinerary also lessens the possibility that it might be reworked or readjusted in some way. It is the ability of the reader to bring forth this clarified urban space that forms a new sense of self but also self-estrangement; after all, this sense of self is imaginary, internal, and due to its level of repression constantly in need of being maintained. The threat of failure could not be far off, and thus the desire to fulfill it could only increase. 

The illusion of disinterest offered to the reader of  In Search of Rome  is not available to the reader of  Portrait of Modern Rome,  who orders the outer world but as a participant in and promoter of the social procedures necessary to a coherent modern city. Indeed, the attempt to counter an unruly terrain only turns this terrain into an evergrowing foe that prompts excessive reaction. The guidebook itself registers this excess, concerned as it is to follow every possible path of social transgression around every corner of the city. Thus it obliges readers to make choices and reconfigure for themselves a viable tour from the overwhelming range of possibilities. The imagery in the guidebook is both in excess of the categories under consideration and not able to address its social aims. In fact, the visual imagery and visual observations in 

the city serve to conceal the palpable anxiety raised by the guidebook about urban conflict and diversity, which is displaced onto the containment of local institutions, but which must also be concealed with the visual splendor that brings coherence to the city as a whole. Too much remains unsettled in this encounter between reader and city, and too much anxiety turns back onto the very attempt to clarify a new urban social hierarchy. 



“Andando processionalmente per Roma” 

3  Street Processions and the Imprints of Urban Charity 

O n only one day of the entire year were the pupils of Santa Caterina dei Funari allowed to step outside the confines of their convent, and only for the express purpose of undertaking a street procession along a prescribed circular route. The diarist Giacinto Gigli recounts how each year on the feast of their patron saint, November 25, about 150 girls covered from head to foot in sturdy white cloth ventured onto the narrow crooked streets just north of the ghetto and walked from their residence as far as Santa Maria sopra Minerva (see Figure 4.3 in chapter 4).1 In this church officials of the Company of Santa Caterina presented the oldest girls with a dowry.2 The entire group then processed directly back to their convent to escape the street for yet another year. What did it mean for girls as young as seven and no older than fourteen to walk together through streets that for them were otherwise totally out of bounds, and defined by their institutional education as holding the greatest of dangers? What were the implications of being watched through a complete encasement of white cloth by large gatherings of peoples, not only those local to the streets of the procession, but also those from other parts of the city, and even pilgrims and tourists who were encouraged by certain guidebooks to stand in key locations and observe the girls as they passed by? In what ways did this performance with its prescribed rituals address and even implicate people on the street, compelling them to become not merely inadvertent spectators but participating actors? Gigli leaves no doubt that the performances very purpose was to prompt an encounter between spectators and actors, or that, paradoxically, this exchange became the cause of its own undoing: 

On the first day of May the Zitelle came out of the Monasterio di Santa Caterina de’ Funari, and went in procession to the Basilica de’ Santi Apostoli, and then returned to the said monastery; they were all dressed in  roverso leonato  with a white cloth on the head, and they were 157, and not all came out. At another time they would come out on the day of S. Caterina, the 25th of November, and the very smallest went dressed as angels and saints; but since one of them was missing, or abducted, after the year 1610 they were not allowed to come out again. But the reason that now after 

95 

29 years they are made to come out to be on display, is that they were not marrying, and no one was requesting them for wives.3 

Although Gigli is not prepared to reflect upon his own pleasure in watching the display of a collective body of girls on the street, he offers an astute analysis of the central conflict of the procession: the street presented a threat to the girls’ virtue and safety but it was imperative to the charity’s goal of generating marriage proposals for the girls. If processional ritual, as Louis Marin has claimed,4 seeks to interrupt and restructure both existing space and ordinary time in ways appropriate to its internal aims, then one might propose that the space of the procession and the space of the street had become too uncomfortably intertwined. Gigli certainly confirms that the diverse exchanges between performers and spectators, rather than being contained within ritual, provoked conflict and unleashed clashing viewing points to such an extent that the institution decided to cancel the event altogether, at least for a time.5 

In seventeenth-century Rome no street practice activated and marked out urban space in more resonant ways than the penitential processions undertaken by local companies and confraternities. Processing was, in fact, the main activity through which these numerous lay and religious organizations, attached to churches and devoted to particular charities, registered their purposes and achievements within the city.6 On the street, procession was temporal, ephemeral, and invariably tied to the time of the church calendar. Even so, this kind of performance, with its sheer number of motivated bodies and repetitive rituals suddenly clearing city space of everyday trajectories, managed to saturate an imaginary urban space. Few contemporary accounts of the city fail to mention this practice, either its magical momentary transformation of space or its insistent and disruptive claim to the street.7 Print publishers, who counted on city processions as a steady source of imagery, recognized the particular fascination generated by the distinctive functions, rituals, and routes of local processions. Yet these fleeting performances, forged through time and repetition, and frequently inciting unexpected conflict, raised problems for visual representation. 

Even printed pamphlets, the main source for our view of street procession, rarely take up local processions, and when they do they tend to acknowledge the difficulties of conveying their transitory effects to the reader. One such instance is the 1625 printed  avviso  entitled  The Solemn and Devotional Processions undertaken in the Holy City of Rome,  written by Giovanni Briccio and sold during Holy Year from a bookshop on the Lungara. In order to capture these elusive processions, the author of this pamphlet takes advantage of the one opportune moment, Easter Week of Holy Year, when they could be encountered in a sequence at one place and time: 

Many processions are done in the Holy City of Rome in any year, but many many more in the years of the Holy Jubilee called Holy Years, which for the great devotion rendered merit being amply described; even so for now I did not want to exert myself with other than those that are seen during Holy Week, leaving the exertion 

of the rest to people more suitable than me, and who have had more ease in observing them.8 

Describing the processions for the readers of the pamphlet, Briccio focuses on the relationship between processors and spectators, and particularly on the ways this encounter was produced through the space and time of the performance. The procession of the confraternity of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini provides one of the best examples: 

There came then around three and a half hours of the night the Company of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini, and convalescents, and the order was this: In front moved a row of large torches and another of white torches, and then came three large lanterns in gold, one of which was bigger than the others, and more beautiful, and after many numbers of white torches the standard with the image of the SS. Trinitä was carried, and after that, in between two rows of white and yellow torches moved all the pilgrims that were received at that time by this company according to its custom. And because the number of these pilgrims was around sixteen thousand it lasted a large part of an hour while it passed, not indeed in order for that was not possible, but the formation continued according to the capacity of the street. Now I lack the energy, and I confess that it is not possible to describe how much devotion they demonstrated, and how great was the delight and the piety of those who watched them, so that many, many people cried in tenderness seeing such a large number of foreign pilgrims from diverse parts with diverse habits, most with staffs decorated with a blessed olive branch, carried high due to the lack of space between them, and all happy to be singing the litany in diverse ways and air, according to the custom of their countries, some starting, others responding, and the voices for being so numerous filled the air with devoted accents.9 

Briccio draws on theatrical effects to convey the processional cortege’s success in forming a collectivity as it moves through urban space. With the night shattered by a blaze of torches, and the street obliterated by thousands of bodies, the procession interrupts ordinary time and space, and diversity is transformed into unity. But the author is particularly attentive to those watching the procession and insists that no words can describe the astonishment experienced by him and others when 16,000 pilgrims of diverse origins became conjoined before their very eyes. Onlookers, overwhelmed by the extraordinary numbers of people, the length of time it took for them to pass by, and the filling up of the entire width of the street, are said to be roused to tears. Thus the success of the procession is attributed to the ways it transforms spectators into actors who become part of the performance. The success of the textual account, however, depends on a reader whose interest is with the performance’s theatrical relations, that is to say, with the ways it prompts a dynamic relation between viewer and viewed. 

The theatricality underpinning street procession frequently threatened to undermine the credibility of the event, particularly as audiences took on diverse viewing 

perspectives. In his 1580 account of Rome’s Easter processions Michel Montaigne can call up a magical image of citywide collectivity and simultaneously reveal its contradictions: 

The grandest and most magnificent thing I have seen, either here or elsewhere, was the incredible number of people scattered about the city on this day at their devotions, and especially in these companies; . . . when night commenced the whole city appeared to be in flames; these companies marching in regular order towards San Pietro, every man bearing a torch, and almost always of white wax. I believe that there passed before me twelve thousand torches at least; for, from eight o’clock in the evening till midnight the street was constantly full of this pageantry, marshaled in good order, and so well regulated that, although they were different companies and had started from different places, you never saw any break or interruption. . . . [I] n the middle of the ranks a file of penitents, who scourge themselves with cords, of whom there were five hundred at least, their backs all flayed and bleeding in a piteous manner. . . . [T]hose who carry the wine take some of it into their mouths and then blow it out and moisten with it the ends of their scourges, which are of cord and become so clotted and glued together with the blood that they have to wet them in order to untwist them, some of them have the same wine blows upon their sores. ... To look at their shoes and hose it is very evident that they are people of very low degree, who sell themselves for this service, at least most of them, I was told indeed that their shoulders were greased with something or other; but I saw that the wound was so raw and the scourging so lengthy that no medicament could prevent their feeling it; and then, as to those who hire them, what good could it do them, if it was just a mockery?10 

Montaigne engages the reader through his critical observation of details, the scourges clotted with blood, the shoes and hose of the processors, and the raw flesh. Such attentive observations do not simply interrupt the performance’s magical effects, they purposely pierce theatrical assumptions in order to reveal the author’s own informed and critical appraisal. They also serve to separate the viewer from the event and thus increase the latter’s foreignness and appeal. Within Briccio’s account, this kind of visual dissection must be repressed if spectators are to be implicated within the procession and forge a single body. Yet for both authors the modes of viewing have become as much of a focal point as the street performance itself. 

Indeed, Briccio is even attentive to the ways different kinds of penitent processions generate different relations between actors and spectators. In the instance of a procession of impoverished young women, the writer invokes a somewhat more conflictual relation between the processors and those watching on the street: 

On the morning of Good Friday the virgins of the Monastery of S. Eusemia, called the dispersed or abandoned girls, of whom the said Monastery is in charge, went to visit the church of S. Pietro. Two by two these followed the cross held by clerics, 

with many officials who had charge of them on the street. All were dressed almost as nuns with grey twill and linen cloth over the head, and they walked with such devotion that they certainly looked as if elevated in saintliness. There were more than 360 of these and the youngest close to the cross sang the litany melodiously but with stirring and devoted notes, and they were accompanied by her Most Excellent Duchess Fiano for the whole journey on foot.11 

Once again the collective emerges from the spectacle of large numbers of processors, now joined together from distinctly diverse social positions. But this processional body of vulnerable girls is presented as if under siege, shielded through layers of clothing and protective official bodies that seek to keep obtrusive eyes from invading its space, even as it attracts them. Still this body succeeds in its struggle, gaining coherence as it appears to detach itself from the street. 

In restaging street processions for the reader of print, the performance’s diverse and conflicting ways of viewing are usually suppressed, as one form of viewing is privileged over others. It is within this process, in which practice and representation are entirely intertwined, although frequently at odds with each other, that I propose to consider how print and procession worked together to redefine and claim urban space in Rome. In the seventeenth century the complicated relation between practice and print proved unequal when taking up local relations, urban networks, and city coherence, and this chapter takes up these different orientations of procession. 

The Conflictual Space of Procession:The Girls of Santa Caterina dei Funari 

The street performances of impoverished girls generated an unusual level of citywide scrutiny. These are increasingly foregrounded in pilgrims’ guidebooks where they emerge as a legitimate source of moral exemplum. Yet their ubiquitous presence in official regulation defines them as dangerous especially due to the persistent and illicit participation of spectators.12 None was awaited with as much anticipation and apprehension as the annual procession of the girls of Santa Caterina dei Funari. There are many references to this procession in diaries of the time, and its conflicts frequently spilled onto the charity’s institutional paperwork. The very failure of the procession to appear one year is recorded in Gigli’s diary, becoming an absence as resonant as the most controversial of its performances.13 It is these traces that enable me to examine a local procession in relation to the multiple and conflictual viewpoints through which it operated on the street. 

Within procession, the act of walking is removed from the unpredictable paths of the everyday. Through consistency and repetition of movement, the processors articulate a symbolic journey, one in which their ability to become a single coherent body is regarded as a triumph over the obstacles along the route.14 This struggle entails the performance of one’s social position in relation to urban space. The girls of Santa Caterina were obliged to move in a highly prescribed manner, in pairs, head down to signify modesty and devotion, and entirely detached from whatever might present 

itself during the course of the journey.15 Their prescribed route held particular stages and consequences. They walked to a local shrine by Piazza Mattei, then to the church of II Gesü, and finally the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva.16 Here, at the turning point of the journey, the presentation of a dowry denoted the securing of the vulnerable female body within the larger social body. Even so, the struggle for transformation continued to be pursued throughout the entire performance, during which the processors underwent change as they moved from one place of securement to the next and were always becoming, or conversely unbecoming, a collective body. 

The shift from individual body to collectivity may be part of most processions, but what makes the shift distinctive is that it is produced through the particularities of time and space. The route alone inflects the collective body in distinctive ways, and the performance serves in turn to transform that space.17 On the return to their convent the pupils of Santa Caterina did not simply retrace their steps but moved a few streets westward, this time passing behind rather than in front of II Gesü, and then approaching their convent from the side of the residences rather than the church. Marin writes that when a circular procession is brought full circle, the place of completion is no longer the place of departure, for although the physical location may be the same, it is changed by the collective triumph over all actual and implied obstacles. By completing something of a circle that held within it not only the entire complex of Santa Caterina but also its parent Jesuit church, the pupils circumscribed an urban space in terms of Jesuit institutional relations.18 

Yet the processional walk also opened up a highly fraught relation with the street itself. Via dei Funari and other streets around the convent of Santa Caterina were crowded with the warehouses and shops of woodworkers and ropemakers.19 A short street led directly from the convent to the nearby fish market, located where Portico di Ottavia and one of the entrances into the ghetto met. This market as well as the one in the nearby Piazza Giudea prompted constant street movement and were the focus of printed regulation that warned of the threat of roaming mercenary soldiers, working prostitutes, and fake mendicants. The procession of the girls of Santa Caterina was directed in very precise ways to the everyday movements of these particular streets. While official regulation prohibited all changes to the customary route of any procession, usually with the intention of avoiding unexpected interruptions and complications of the street, this procession relied on the unpredictable flow of people in this district and even raised the specter of disruptive encounters.20 My claim applies only to this one instance, for part of what I am arguing is that processional rituals always operated in relation to the specificities of urban space. 

The repetitive aspects of processional performances make each instance seem the same, repeated yet again, either in relation to other instances of the same procession or even to other processions. The pilgrim’s guidebook, with its emphasis on the proliferation of poor young girls, multiplied through performances, costumes, and gestures, tends to interlink all such processions. One might surmise that for certain sec- 

tors of the audience, pilgrims and tourists for instance, the collective body formed by the girls of Santa Caterina was indistinguishable from all those on display throughout the city. This, however, was not the intention of the institution, which insisted on the continuity of its procession but went to great lengths to demonstrate its uniqueness. Of course, the formation of the processional body invariably depended on the actual actors and spectators of a given performance and on particular viewing points, some permitted by the street, others restaged through the circulation of printed accounts. For some spectators, especially those attuned to the particularities of the route, the disruptive exchanges on the street, or even the strategies of institutional officials, the collective body became differentiated, not only from other processional bodies but also from its own past performances. According to Gilles Deleuze, each instance of repetition is not a mere duplication of the primary instance but a more urgent attempt to take it further and fulfill the performance.21 Each successive performance, then, works harder to mask incompleteness, disruption, and fragmentation, raising the specter of what must be suppressed for signification to be achieved. In other words, the unconscious aspects of the performance hold increasingly greater potential to be revealed through the unpredictability that is part of bodily repetition. 

The Company of Santa Caterina dei Funari, like most small local charitable institutions, increasingly deployed diverse forms of printed paper to regularize its operations as well as to define the collectivity that would ultimately unfold on the street. Printing thus altered relations within the institution and also validated its charitable project to a broader constituency. Keeping to Jesuit practices and constantly short of funds, the company counted on the efficacy of pamphlets to outline the purposes, obligations, and regulations of the charity. The  Constitution of the Company of the Wretched Virgins of Santa Caterina della Rosa of Rome  was revised and reprinted in increasingly elaborate editions.22 The 1601 edition starts by explaining the origins and purposes of the company: 

At the time of the happy memory of Pope Paul III, some prelates and curates were inspired by the Holy Spirit to provide and avoid the many scandals that occurred due to the daughters of courtesans and poor men, who were taken to a bad life, and upon the wish of the said Paul III instituted a company in the church of Santa Caterina in Roma called the Company of the Wretched Virgins of Santa Caterina della Rosa, in which are received these virgin daughters. And in order for them to be nurtured and raised with fear of God, and instructed in exercises convenient for them, some professed nuns were put in charge of them, and in this way they could in time marry or become nuns.23 

The rescue and reformation of daughters of prostitutes remained the company’s defining identity, even though by the early seventeenth century it also took in paying pupils from the artisan class. The duties of members and officials of the company, meticulously outlined in the pamphlet, focus on two interconnected aspects of the 

charity, the running of the convent and adjacent houses, and the acquisition of alms to operate the convent and provide the girls with dowries.24 In addition to a cardinal protector, nine deputies elected from the company’s general membership oversaw the progress of the girls. They were obliged to visit the girls at least twice a year and to select the prioress who, together with other nuns, was actually charged with the girls’ education. 

From the entry requirements it is evident that a girl’s impending moral danger did not override other considerations: 

[T]he girls that are taken in or apply to the company to be accepted cannot have less than ten years, nor more than twelve completed, and be fit to be seen and healthy, not lame or cross-eyed, or another kind of bad indisposition, and be daughters of courtesans or women of wicked living, or of extreme poverty, and of those who have lived in Rome for at least the space of two years, and still live there, and in a manner that is manifestly known that if they are not accepted will fall into sin.25 

Entrance is restricted to girls from the local area, and young enough to be both virginal and malleable. Moreover, demands pertaining to physical appearance and state of health suggest a preoccupation with sexual desirability and fertility. Interestingly enough, Fanucci, in his account of these requirements, claims that girls who are too appealing to the eye are excluded on the grounds that they might corrupt the others. After all, the girls were educated to be part of the working environment of artisans and traders, and had to balance modesty with desirability as much as religious instruction with working skills.26 

In the pamphlet the virtuous female body is put in constant tension between inside and outside, with the inside being the physical institution and its opportunities, and the outside being the street and family bonds. After outlining the girl’s passage through the institution—entrance, education, dowry, and arrangement to enter marriage or a convent—the pamphlet turns to a detailed account of the keys to the convent. If the previous sections suggest a process of change and transformation, this one brings symbolic weight to physical containment.27 The pamphlet explains that the gate of the convent must have three locks, one locking from the inside and two from the outside. The only inside key was held by the prioress, while the chaplain of the company and the deputy had those to the outside. This was a highly marked boundary, and one that held fast. During the plague of 1656-57, when the Congregation of Flealth ordered its officers to inspect all internal spaces for identification and removal of the infected, this convent could only be accessed directly by the cardinal vicario.28 In securing this gate, a complicated system of checks and balances operated at all times, but especially in the everyday movements of bringing in supplies or taking out rubbish. Ultimately, this account has the function of assuring containment but also of heightening the resonance of this boundary by linking the street to unexpected and threatening opportunity. 

The strategy of assuring confinement while constantly raising the possibility that it 

might be breached is also used in the representation of the individual body, a body that is under protection yet remains vulnerable. Indeed, the physical enclosure of the convent is constantly reinscribed in terms of the physical contours of each girl. The final chapter of the  Constitution  deals explicitly with the question of the girls’ access to the outside, and the threat of city streets now takes second place to the threat of family bonds. No request for the return home of a daughter, even for a short time, was to be entertained.29 Given such an uncompromising set of regulations, it is surprising to turn to the company’s archive and find that movement between inside and outside was always up for negotiation. While the pamphlet states that dowries were acquired through the collection of different kinds of available alms, the archive reveals the activities of private donors, especially local well-off women who directed their funds to particular girls.30 The company encouraged this informed network of local supporters by being increasingly attentive to the ways their funds were administered. Women donors, however, enacted their charitable work in familial terms, seeking to assist a particular girl for whom there was already some attachment and exerting pressure for the institution to be vigilant about what might befall her once married.31 They requested and were frequently granted permission to take a girl to their own church to receive the dowry, although only under the most exact restrictions of time and place, and after signing a pledge witnessed by a notary to return the girl “ intacta ,”32 Some wealthy women were even allowed to take girls into their service with the obligation of keeping them for six years and then providing them with a generous dowry.33 

The gate of the convent was much more tightly closed to parents, who, encouraged by local donors to secure a place for their daughters in the convent, frequently found themselves at odds with the institution on the question of access. The archive includes many poignant requests from mothers for pupils to be allowed to return home temporarily, usually to help at a time of family illness. All were refused. Equally fraught was the exclusion of families seeking to arrange marriages, which had to be negotiated through company representatives. As early as 1583 the company circulated a  bando  among its officials that requests increased endowments for dowries in order to encourage marriage offers for the older girls (see Figure 3.1). In the pamphlet the size of dowry remains a primary focus, as does the necessity to readjust the amount for girls who remained in the convent beyond seven years.34 While this is not unusual for marriage transactions in artisan and trade communities, the restrictions encountered by families negotiating with the convent brought greater urgency to the moment of procession itself. Gigli attributes the company’s lack of success in attracting marriage offers to the cancellation of the procession, implying that it was the street performance that brought the charity local visibility and that this moment was imbued with the intrigue of impending marriage arrangements. Certainly for some viewers the central appeal of this procession was that it presented the girls as potential virginal “brides” involved in an ongoing struggle to retain their virtue. In other words, embedded within this kind of marriage transaction were tantalizing and disturbing 

Figure 3.1. Notification, on dowries, Santa Caterina dei Funari, 1583. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

notions of illicit sexuality. Whatever the actual motivations for seeking such a marriage, the family and the girl in question had to contend with the unpredictable local perception of such marriages as well as with the close scrutiny of the institution and its donors.35 

Within these unequal and frequently conflictual relations, printing became a means to extend the boundaries of the convent while sustaining the impression of their impenetrability. And, of course, printed materials did not simply control this border but also gave it particular resonance. For instance, the printed entry form used from the 1630s addresses exclusively the definition of the body while inside the convent: 

[T]he entire time that they are in the convent, the girls must dress in clothes of wool or another pure material that is not silk, of modest color, whether in winter or in summer, without curls, ribbons and necklaces, nor any other vanity, and must completely observe the orders given now, and those that will be given in the future, as much on the modesty of dress, and of costume, as on not going to the window grate.36 

In considering the Catholic fashioning of the virtuous female body, scholars have long noticed the obsessive attention given not merely to a lack of bodily ornament but to its removal.37 This moral transformation was not gauged by the boundaries of the body or even of the convent, but by a diversified urban space. The regulations prohibiting young women in charity houses from wearing rich materials, or any color, were set in relation to broader definitions of women, be it as prostitutes, market sellers, mendicants, or members of the nobility. Sumptuary laws operated along an intersection of gender, class, and religion, and it is through the stripping of surface ornament that the girls of Santa Caterina were to be distinguished, not only from the superior position of their donors but also from the moral degradation implied by their mothers. Significantly enough, it is in relation to street processions that church officials became concerned with regulating the clothing worn by girls from charity institutions, prohibiting the use of silk and strongly limiting any display of pure color.38 While this stripping of ornament pertains to self-discipline, it also turns attention back to urban space and to the impact that such a spectacle might have on those who beheld it on the street. 

I thus return to the most resonant movement between inside and outside, namely the annual departure of the girls from the confines of the convent to the street. How did this procession situate and inflect the exchanges between its participants in ways that Gigli,describes as being at once perilous, yet full of desirable opportunity? The street not only cast attention to the bodily transformation of the girls of Santa Caterina but also functioned as its ultimate testing ground. While these bodies may have undergone internal transformation, they could only demonstrate it through the exter-nalization of this virtue. A change of clothing, from the rough colorless tunics worn in the convent to the white tunics and veil used during procession, served both to mark 

this transition and submit it to the ultimate test.39 Preventing the girls themselves from having an unobstructed view of their route, the costume reinscribed the street as illicit space necessitating the detachment of the virtuous woman. It also allowed spectators a more decisive look and the illusion of uniformity and anonymity within the processional body. When Gigli describes the procession of Santa Caterina held November 25, 1611, it is attire that distinguishes the girls, with the youngest in costumes of different saints and the oldest in penitential sacks.40 Apparently, the inability of these different bodies to become indistinctive was regarded as an important factor in the disturbances that accompanied this performance and resulted in its cancellation. When the procession was finally reinstated in 1640, the youngest girls were no longer included. After all, they were not only more vulnerable during the course of the walk but also had to be distinguished from the older ones through costume, and thus weakened the impression of a singular collective body. 

Louis Marin has noted that the processional body moves through preexisting space articulated by certain markers, manipulates it by choosing some over others, and in the process produces another kind of space. In the case of triumphal processions, the route was usually physically transformed through the use of temporary decorations. Moreover, urban space was prepared through printed regulation that delimited its usage during the time of the procession. One of the distinctive aspects of the penitential procession is that urban space was not set up in expectation of its presence. Processors unexpectedly interrupt the space of the everyday and, in some crucial ways, retain a more dynamic relation to it. Indeed, an unusual pair of street posters ordered by the Company of Santa Caterina during the last days of April 1640, and seeking to regulate the procession planned for May 1, seems to be preparing the way for a controlled performance (see Figure 3.2).41 Yet these orders also served to heighten expectations of the procession’s return after twenty-nine years of absence, reconfirming the dangers and unpredictability of the street and the extraordinary effort facing the young women. 

The two posters are mirror images, one addressing processors, the other addressing spectators, reflecting each other while enforcing their complete separation. Indeed, they present the performance as a clash between two converging forces: 

Where on the first day of May, feast of SS. Apostoli Filippo and Giacomo, the girls from the Venerable Monastery of the Nuns and Virgins of Santa Caterina della Rosa of Rome will come out and from here they will go in procession to the church of SS. Apostoli to acquire an indulgence; thus it is ordered and expressly prohibited to all of whatever rank and condition to approach, or speak, or make gestures, or present and hand out whatever thing even if it is flowers or things to eat, to our girls while they are in this procession, or in the church or on the return from there, as in the time that they are detained in our church of S. Caterina, under penalty to women of the whip, and men three pulls of the  corda  and twenty-five  scudi  to be applied immediately without remission to this pious place.42 

Figure 3.2. Edicts, on the Santa Caterina dei Funari procession, April 1640. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

Exchanges of any sort, whether through illicit gestures or the seemingly more benign offers of flowers and food, are disallowed, for the space of procession can be shattered with the slightest penetration of familiarity, temptation, and seduction. Thus family, neighbors, shopworkers, donors, potential husbands, and all other onlookers are turned into a formidable foe, as indistinguishable in kind and number as the collective body of the procession. It is the penalties to be imposed on transgressors that bring distinctiveness to onlookers. Women are mentioned first, which is unusual, and threatened with the whip, a punishment usually applied to women charged with prostitution. Men are linked to a wider range of punishments, implying perhaps the ex--v pectation of diverse kinds of perpetrators, although the  corda  points directly to artisans and traders, the primary occupants of the streets around Santa Caterina. It comes as no surprise that the  bando  calls up the threat of an unruly and undifferentiated crowd while also pinpointing very particular constituencies. 

Implicit in these printed notifications is the need to confirm the transformation of the girls by submitting them to the most trying and challenging conditions. The girls were obliged to walk the very streets that their mothers walked, with a route that implied the ultimate severing of these bonds as they struggled from one point of 

institutional securement to the next. Considered within this pivotal relation, the  bando  directed to the girls, ordering them with the one crucial task of registering no response regardless of what might come their way, takes on particular local resonance. The success of this procession, certainly for local spectators, hinged on the constant comparison of mother and daughter. In printed representations, where the effect on spectators was of primary interest, this relationship could also be used to assert the procession’s ultimate triumph. It is no mere coincidence that in Simone Ruggieri’s 1650 Holy Year diary the May 1 account of the procession of the girls of Santa Caterina dei Funari to the church of SS. Apostoli is followed by a particularly pertinent anecdote: 

There appeared on this day an amazing effect of holy mercy, and of good edification . . . and a certain famous courtesan called Annuccia Napolitana that lived in the parish of S. Luigi dei Francesi, where there was not another public prostitute ... returned home full of repentance, and taking off the clothing of worldly life went, together with her virginal sister, dressed in a big sack of grey tied with a cord in the manner of Cappuccini and crying copiously, through her neighborhood from house to house asking forgiveness op her knees to all of the scandals that she had given in the past.43 

The sudden conversion of a sinner at the very sight of a penitent procession was a common trope of textual accounts, and Ruggieri himself includes many instances of procession during which Jews and Turks suddenly were overcome with the urge to become Christian. In this instance, the dramatic transformation of a courtesan could only confirm the power of the processional body itself to intervene on the street. 

In setting up such a conflictual relation between the procession and the street, the institution of Santa Caterina attempted to hold in tension contrasting forms of femininity, one defined through Christian purity and vulnerability, the other through illicit sexuality and the street. In effect, the procession reinscribed the Christian notion of the precariousness of the female body always vacillating between the binary polarities of pollution and purity.44 The juxtaposition, however, had the potential to slip out of this particular moral paradigm and make the spectacle vulnerable to other forms of appropriation, especially by activating the titillating pleasures of viewing young vulnerable female bodies. Indeed, such associations as well as the actual abduction or even escape of some girls led to the cancellation of the procession after 1611. The distinction between collectivity as an achievement of penitentiary struggle and as source of voyeuristic pleasure was not easy to maintain, particularly when viewers were encouraged to displace desires and fears of the individual body onto its collective performance. When, after almost thirty years, the institution was obliged to reinstate the annual procession in order to salvage the charity, officials apparently tried to neutralize the most threatening forms of viewing by circumventing the spectacles overt relations of power and sexuality. The procession changed not only its destination from 

Santa Maria sopra Minerva to SS. Apostoli, but also its pretext, which now was the acquisition of an indulgence rather than a dowry. Yet it is questionable how successful these attempts were in shifting the procession’s overt sexual associations to a more broadly defined penitential practice. Printed materials, so useful to the institution in conveying some of the contradictory aspects of the procession, could not finally be put to the task of imposing one particular viewpoint over others. The problem of the performances visibility lingered, with the Company of Santa Caterina caught in a losing struggle to secure coherence and legitimacy, and to do so again and again. 

The Repetitive Time of Procession: The Archconfraternity of SS.Trinitä dei Pellegrini 

The street procession of Santa Caterina, with its repetitious bodily movements and fragile collectivity, revealed not only conflictual claims within local space, but also the difficulty of fixing a temporal processional performance within the forms of representation offered by printing. Yet charitable institutions, increasingly competitive in their efforts to procure support, turned more and more to prints, broadsides, and pamphlets to extend the possibilities of these street performances beyond local concerns, and particularly to argue for a viable form of urban charity. The processional practices of the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini provide a particularly interesting example, serving both to localize a charity project and to forward, through print, the representation of urban modernity and progress at large.45 Some of these printed representations can be linked to the shift in mid-century from separate charities to a citywide system of welfare. Others pertain to the publishing industry’s own incentives to expand and diversify the print market. 

From its earliest publications, the Archconfraternity of the SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini defined its charitable work as excessive, immeasurable, and thus outside established boundaries. In charge of needy pilgrims during their sojourn in Rome, this lay brotherhood, founded by the church reformer Filippo Neri, differed from other charities devoted to pilgrims in not being restricted by nationality and language. In fact, it upheld the unusual mandate of caring for those who could not be accommodated by existing institutions and offered hospitality to people of different religions as well as different nations, actively boasting of its many “heretics from the other side of the Alps.” The archconfraternity did have a very particular restriction, but it pertained to time. Its work with pilgrims was strictly limited to the duration of Holy Year, a privilege acquired after an impressive performance caring for visitors during the 1550 celebrations. If the street procession of the Company of Santa Caterina is interesting for its failure to produce a viable and stable viewpoint, the street rituals of this institution are interesting for their resounding success in reshaping and bringing new resonance to the time of Holy Year. It is, in fact, the institution’s own statistics that have led scholars to regard the peak of Holy Year to be those between 1575 and 1650.46 

A case in point is the small pamphlet published soon after 1575 entitled  Report on the Number of Pilgrims, and on the Method Applied in Receiving and Governing Them in 

While the archconfraternity kept meticulous records of those hosted, and in 1575 tallied up an impressive total of 174,467 of the roughly 400,000 pilgrims that visited the city, the pamphlet tends to refer to these numbers always in relation to precise moments, for example, the hundreds fed at one sitting in makeshift refectories, the arduous task of the daily ceremonial washing of the pilgrims’ feet, or the boast that “between 15 and 18 thousand congregated in this place and not a single scandal was heard.”48 The account, moreover, vacillates between these fragmentary moments of congregation and the elaborate bureaucratic procedures through which pilgrims were both interrogated and distinguished. Printing is shown to facilitate not only the counting of heads, but also the identification of fraudulent pilgrims and the administration of the designated days of support.49 

The archconfraternity itself, adhering to conceptions of universality, did not confine its work within its own members. The 1575  Report,  offering the recurrent moments of everyday struggle, argues for the necessity of expanding this work outward to encompass other sources of support and other spaces of care. Thus the pamphlet lauds the contribution of the  Popolo Romano,  which is said to have donated the much-needed breviaries for poor priests to carry out offices with the pilgrims. Women from the nobility are also mentioned, not for their monetary donations but for washing the feet of women pilgrims.50 

It is revealing to turn to Fanucci’s 1601  Pious Works,  in which the archconfraternity’s notion of the marvels of charity is used to argue for a citywide enterprise: 

If in the Holy Year of one thousand five hundred and seventy five I marveled at the great charity done in Rome for all kinds of people that came to Rome to acquire the most Holy Jubilee. In this of sixteen hundred I remain astonished and stupefied and almost beside myself having seen the enormous and immense works of charity and piety done by the confraternities of the city, and particularly by that of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini and Convalescents, and by almost all the inhabitants of this city, towards all the people poor and rich, of all sexes, quality, quantity, and 

nation that came to the above city to acquire the same Holy Jubilee. And if in that year of one thousand five hundred and seventy five, the Holy City of Rome showed itself a pious mother, in this one of one thousand six hundred it shows itself pious outside any measurement.51 

Fanucci, moreover, links the archconfraternity’s actions in Holy Year to its central role in establishing the Hospital of San Sisto to care for and license mendicants. He does so by evoking the celebrated procession staged by the archconfraternity that led the mendicants to their new institutional destination: 

[T]he holy crucifix was carried by people dressed only in red sacks and barefoot, accompanied by great number of burning torches of white wax, a great quantity of the brothers of the company wearing the same red sack, and diverse choruses singing hymns and psalms in good music and strong song. Completed this order, there followed that of the poor mendicants, with necessary accommodation and distinction, and there could be seen those who walked in pairs, the blind guided, and those that were lame lying in carts of the same mendicants, and there followed fourteen carriages loaded with many so crippled and ill that they could not proceed otherwise. A truly pious and marvelous spectacle, and perhaps the same never more seen.52 

Organizers and officials from the archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä overcome the difficulties of the journey through rituals and clothing that stress their dynamic coherent movement. And their potent physicality serves in turn to spectacularize the paralyzed, decrepit, and suffering bodies of the poor, described in such terms as to produce an unpredictable mixture of fascination and revulsion. 

With such transgressions of boundaries, both by those in need of care and by those who provide care, Fanucci shifts the interests of charity from local to citywide space. In this he is not alone. Accounts of Holy Year, published from the beginning of the seventeenth century to encourage local clerics to organize pilgrims, also turn to this conceptualization of the highly organized city system of welfare.53 In Fabrini’s 1600  Declaration of the Jubilee,  the wide network of support requested for pilgrims culminates within the city itself and calls for the joint contributions of civic and church authorities as well as of all charitable confraternities in providing for everyday needs: 

It will be necessary to provide so that the holy city will be copious and abundant in all things necessary to life, and that the streets of this city are mended and clean. That the Roman Senate instates and publicizes very good orders for the hoteliers and other sellers of things for the comfort of pilgrims. That the venerable Archconfraternity of the SS. Trinitä, and all the others that are instituted in that city, particularly those of the nations, have houses and places with more capacity than usual to receive the pilgrims, and give them charity not only for one day but for more days in accordance to need.54 

The stable coherent system of charity proposed by Fabrini, in which the parts add up to a coherent whole, was at odds with the ways in which the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä promoted its charitable work, and nowhere was this more evident than in its processional practices. In this instance procession did not mean an annual walk along a particular circuit. Rather, procession was repeated many times a day, every day for an entire year. Once the year ended, it would not be repeated again for twenty-five years. The processional form was required in the daily visits to the four basilicas to gain the Jubilee indulgence, and the archconfraternity s role in organizing these visits was crucial. Indeed, its multiple processions simultaneously activated city streets. Those from the gates of the city to the archconfraternity headquarters could include, aside from members of SS. Trinitä, a visiting confraternity that had the privilege to carry its standard, civic authorities, and important male citizens. Women, both visitors and hosts, processed separately and were followed by animals and carts used to carry belongings, or even those who could not walk.55 But within the street there was no singular circuit, and movement was characterized by its reversibility, through the relentless back and forth between the archconfraternity headquarters and the gates of the city, or the headquarters and the four basilicas. Excess was given particularity through the fragmentation of space into fleeting moments extended by their very repetition. As the 1575  Report  attests, the struggle for collectivity was constant, from the efforts to transform penitents into worthy visitors for the basilicas to the efforts to move countless bodies from one church to the next: 

Early in the morning under the guidance of the little standard of the SS. Trinitä and accompanied by various of our brothers, they were guided processionally to the theater of the Vatican where our Lord, neglecting more important offices conducted from his window, gave them his holy blessing and then they were accompanied to San Pietro’s where they were shown the sudario and the lance, and then attended to their confession and communion according to the devotion of each, and these would then go in the best way on the rest of the journey to the four churches. . . . Each morning when that procession ended at San Pietro, it was a beautiful thing to hear those pilgrims of each nation (that separately were accommodated) sing in their tongue the Italian Litany and Psalms; French, Spanish, Hungarians, Slavonians, Swiss, Germans, Armenians, and even the Italians, of so many diverse accents that truly raising a hand to Heaven each one said  Omnis Spiritus lauder dominum ,56 

These moments of unity—and one must recall that the pilgrims were obliged to wear the distinctive red sack of the archconfraternity—are woven out of countless small actions and struggles. Within the fleeting sounds of singing, all difference vanished, transformed through the universality implied by the Latin refrain and a unified heavenly sphere. 

How could such a fragmented and ephemeral form of processional performance be reenacted through the print forms that now became crucial to the promotion of 

Holy Year? The technology of printing certainly offered opportunities beyond the textual accounts published in the years just before and after Jubilee Year. In fact, it was market-oriented prints that brought some measure of continuity to the recent success of Holy Year, both by promoting its recurrence and regularizing its rituals. Rome’s printing industry took the opportunity of an upcoming Holy Year to reprint, usually after some reworking, prints that had sold well during the previous one.57 The very successful print entitled  The Seven Churches of Rome,  first published by Antonio Lafrery in 1575, would reappear, in slightly altered forms, the very same year, in subsequent Holy Years, and even in special interim years such as the version published by Giacomo Gherardi in 1590 (see Figure 3.3).58 

Two distinct ways of mapping intermingle in this image of Rome’s seven major pilgrimage churches. The churches, rendered in meticulous illusionistic perspective, are situated within a topographical map. This map inscribes their physical relation to each other and to the city’s most distinctive boundaries, the city walls and the trajectory of 

Figure 3.3.  The Seven Churches of Rome,  Rome, Giacomo Gherardi, 1590. Biblioteca Angelica. 

the river. Other topographical markers, for instance, the Castel Sant’Angelo and the pyramid of Cestius, are integrated into these boundaries and reassert their demarcations. Even the accompanying inscription focuses attention on the spatial layout and appeals to the viewer’s understanding that the pictorial representation is conceptual and necessitates distortion.59 The pilgrimage churches, however, are also located in a symbolic geography through the hierarchy established by the interlinked chain of pilgrims. The circuit that conjoins the four main basilicas is the most concentrated route, with the pilgrims becoming one body, even if made up of many parts. Bodily performance also articulates the second rank of churches, but now the collective body is less dense and coherent. The hierarchy even incorporates new sites, although in the case of Santa Maria del Popolo, the church is located within the center, yet is reduced in scale, and thus its lesser rank is somewhat at odds with the image’s descriptive priorities. 

These two representations of the city work on each other. The descriptive components—the churches, their spatial organization and orientation—serve to produce a space that conflates institutional hierarchy with urban topography. The narrative components—the accumulative processions of pilgrims—serve to articulate a sequence of time that resonates in relation to the opportunities defined by the descriptive elements.60 Thus while one maps out the limits of space through the boundaries of wall and river, the other opens up possible paths of movement by bodily performance that inscribe paths on the urban terrain. 

The processors come together to forge a privileged space that is as clearly demarcated as the space defined by the continuous city wall. In fact, it is even more decisively produced. In order for this space to emerge, the pilgrims must breach all physical boundaries, crossing gates and bridges to impose another order. And they must struggle for unity. The distinctive groupings of pilgrims are organized by confraternity banners, and interrupted by a secular procession of nobles on horseback led by foot soldiers. Members of SS. Trinitä in their hooded sacks keep the processors in line, even prodding them into place with their distinctive staffs. The act of walking is in fact what activates the city’s topography. Rome may be evacuated of most urban elements, but this only serves to stress the very physicality of its terrain, which in its irregularity and emptiness is undifferentiated from the terrain that lies beyond the city walls. Interestingly enough, the second version of the print, published in 1575 by Peter Noblis, intensifies the symbolic mapping of the city by heightening the harsh aspect of the urban surface.61 

The intensification of the body of procession produces a moment of unity at the center, but paradoxically this moment is also the point of the procession’s dispersal. In front of each of the four major basilicas, pilgrims shed their unifying confraternity sacks and emerge as individuals, enlarged as they encounter the sacred body. The body of the saint imposes its presence precisely by disrupting the flow of processional movement, in the same way as the city gates disrupt the continuity of the wall. This 

saintly body, through the relics held at the four basilicas, offers entrance to the heavenly city in the same way as the city gate offers entrance to Rome. 

But if this sacred space is produced through the disruption of processional collectivity, it is also extended by the topographical specificity of each basilica. In fact, the descriptive components—the always already there—turn out to be most dynamic. It is precisely here that changes are introduced in each edition of the print, with the 1590 example inserting the recently completed dome of San Pietro and the reorganized complex of San Giovanni Laterano, including the newly installed Scala Santa. Evidently, the renovation, improvement, and reorganization of these basilicas convey change, and even intervene in their changing status. In the 1590 edition the prominence of Santa Maria del Popolo can be attributed to the addition of the obelisk, which as a marker otherwise reserved for the major basilicas had to be removed in 1625 when the church was once again demoted.62 

This print invests all possibility of progress and change within the grandiose physical fabric of the basilicas, rather than with the bodies that move between them. In this it resembles tourist prints of the modern city, which organize and update physical structures and by transforming a sequence of time into a single moment bring legibility and coherence to urban space. With its curious reversal of descriptive and narrative elements, this image negates the fragmentary and repetitive in bodily performance. The physical space is in the process of becoming, while the processional form is unchanging, failing to convey the intensification of collective movement and unable to compete with the increasingly concentrated sites of visual attention.63 

Conflicts between processional modes and printed representation become even more vehement during the 1650 Holy Year, when an expanding print market intersected with an expanding system of charity. In 1649 Francesco Cavalli printed the  Treasures of Holy Year,  a small booklet dedicated to the director of the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä, in which the activities of the last Holy Year are described within three distinctive time frames.64 The first section outlines the rituals of opening and closing the Holy Gates at all four basilicas enacted at the beginning and end of the year, and defined as traditional and unchanging.65 The second section is devoted to the indulgences given at the main basilicas, but it becomes a pretext to promote the improvement of the pilgrimage basilicas, especially the recent refurbishment of San Giovanni Laterano by Innocent X. This continuity of ritual and the changing urban fabric is finally juxtaposed with a third conceptualization of time, one produced through the account of the 1625 effort by the entire city, but especially by the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä, to provide hospitality to pilgrims.66 In describing the company’s work, the text manages to activate notions of excess and immeasurability; yet it is precisely in the repetitive humbling tasks of the everyday that a citywide network of charity is reasserted and associated explicitly with prominent wealthy families. Instead of a collective effort that ruptures boundaries, these are actually reinstated through the juxtaposition of extremes of social rank, as in the task of washing of the feet of poor women pilgrims by 

female members of the Roman nobility. Even the participation of diverse sectors of the city, for instance, the contributions of the  Popolo Romano,  of the Monte della Pieta, and of the Jewish community, are said to be enforced by the pope and thus are distinguished from the willingness of the upper ranks to attend to the most basic everyday needs.67 

In Simone Ruggieri’s  Diary of the Year of the Holy Jubilee of 1650,  printed in 1651 and written in the form of a personal diary, the participation of female members of the aristocracy is foregrounded. At the very beginning of the diary, Ruggieri recounts that in preparation for Holy Year Olimpia Pamphili, “sister-in-law of His Holiness and Prioress of the hospice of the Santissima Trinitä dei Pellegrini,” invited all the Roman ladies to its church to hear a rousing sermon by the Jesuit priest Nicolo Zucchi on the duty of serving the expected pilgrims: 

When the sermon was finished her Excellency begged the same ladies to cooperate jointly and in private for the assistance of this holy place; and found them to be most ready, so that each offered their work and assistance, and for this three of the most important ladies from each  rioni  were elected from the fourteen  rioni  of Rome, with the purpose of searching in all of the houses of the city for alms for the lodging of the pilgrims, which they started and continued with much diligence and charity for many days, taking not only money but bedding, foods and all that was offered by Roman piety.68 

This account is followed by a list of prominent women divided by district and linked to the alms collected, both in money but mostly in everyday objects, including barrels of wine, meat, dishes, jugs, and used shirts. This meticulous elaboration of the struggle to provide basic necessities has resonance in this text in at least three ways. First, it is set in direct contrast to the treatment of visitors to the city by merchants and trades, since the diary moves directly from this section to a discussion of the regulations posted to protect visitors.69 Second, the organization of charity, encompassing all districts, brings to the forefront a citywide effort in conjunction with the archconfraternity but largely led by the aristocracy. And, of course, it registers the expansion of women as patrons of the archconfraternity. 

Ruggieri’s daily entries focus on the street, from the repeated posting of orders to the constant presence of processions. These always conclude with a summary of the effort to provide hospitality to increasingly larger numbers of people. In the entry for April 15, Good Friday, no less than 13,300 pilgrims are said to be accommodated by SS. Trinitä. Each entry also includes the names of those who funded the nightly meal, thus retaining a notion of communal effort based on minuteness of the moment while constantly giving presence to particular individuals. This is a strategy that Ruggieri shares with the 1649  Treasures,  which also breaks down each small task by day and week, and by the names of those eminent people who performed it.76 And if the repetition of the everyday now seems less the prerogative of the members of the 

archconfraternity, this is no less evident on the street. In the same entry Ruggieri describes the archconfraternity’s Easter procession, but with a decidedly different orientation than Briccio’s 1625 account quoted earlier: 

Around the hour of three at night the venerable Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä dei Pellegrini walked for the same reason to San Pietro; the crucifix was carried by the most eminent Pallotta, Orsino, and Raggi; other eminencies Verospi, Gabrielli, Ludovisi, and Maidalchino, Colonna, Cenci, Vidman, Barberino, de Lugo favored the procession with their participation, as did the Roman magistrate, before whom three gentlemen carried the lit torches in hand with their supporters and after whom followed the most excellent Lord Prince Ludovisi together with other major officials of this archconfraternity all dressed in sacks; at the head of the procession went the Gentleman Prince of Gallicano, and after the mob of pilgrims, which in this procession was almost infinite, so that it is said that it reached almost fourteen to fifteen thousand people, and there were 2,500 torches of white wax.71 

At the crucial moment of collectivity, it is the distinctiveness of aristocratic identity rather than the anonymity of participants that is foregrounded. 

For the Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä s own response to the changes in the urban organization of charity, one can turn to an unusual broadside printed by Francesco Moneta and entitled  Account of the Principal Functions Undertaken by the Most Noble Archconfraternity ofSS. Trinitä ofRome in Lodging the Pilgrims of the Holy Year of 1650  (see Figure 3.4). The text, by Francesco Bosoni, locates the work of the archconfraternity within a genealogy of Roman hospitality, which includes the work of Abbot Girolamo Gastaldi to whom the broadside is dedicated and who would soon be put in charge of the systematization of city hospitals during the plague. Serving further to normalize the archconfraternity’s activities, its devotion to convalescents throughout the year is no less prominent than the exceptional work of PFoly Year. Yet, the visual components, unusual in dividing the upper part of the broadside into twelve separate compartments, convey discrete and repetitive moments of collectivity and thus work against the continuous textual narrative to reaffirm the archconfraternity’s identity around notions of excess and universality. 

The arrangement of the twelve scenes serves to underscore a relation between repetition and congregation. Six scenes in the upper tiers are paired into three mirror images, a repetition of bodily movements stress their centralized location. The entire bottom register is taken up with four scenes that in orientation and resonance are virtually identical. In contrast to Lefrery’s print, these images conceive of collectivity not as a single moment, and not even as a sequence of moments leading to a climax (as does the text), but as a series of repetitions that extends each moment. Starting at the upper left, the first scene initiates the cycle with the classification of pilgrims and includes the writing tools and books that attest to the bureaucratic process of differentiation and accountability. In the next scene differences of nation, rank, and faith 

Figure 3.4.  Account of the Principal Functions Undertaken by the Most Noble Archconfraternity of SS. Trinitä,  1650, broadside. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

disappear and the image insists on two other distinctions, those of gender among pilgrims and those of rank between pilgrims and hosts. It is the gender divide that generates the three mirror images, with men and women in seemingly identical scenes of feet washing, feeding, and the provision of sleeping facilities. The attention to differences of details in the rooms suggests that they are the same act but different, taking place not only separately but also simultaneously. Yet this strict gender divide is not entirely maintained, since women are shown serving in the male refectory. Perhaps this is because even within acts of hospitality some were considered more resonant than others. Indeed, the ritual of feet washing, as the act of greatest humility and thus most able to register a dichotomy of rank, is located at the center of the top tier.72 As for the pair of dormitory scenes directly below, these also respond to current concerns, namely the anxiety that increasing number of women pilgrims brought to the Christian journey of penitence and redemption. These are strategies of segregation imposed within other charitable institutions, an issue that will be taken up more directly in the context of the epidemic of 1656 when Girolamo Castaldi would pursue many of the same goals. 

In the broadside, then, the archconfraternity’s role as facilitator of the universal community of Holy Year depends on repetition that both extends each act but also divides and orders it. It is this division that produces, as the text asserts, not only physical comfort but also morally pure bodies, and thus the possibility of a particular kind of collectivity. Indeed, the repetitive everyday acts, registering gender and class in specific ways, give way to the final four scenes in which moments of street procession chart out the route between the four basilicas. The text explains these scenes in terms of spiritual guidance, taking into account differences of language and knowledge, and leading to a unified community. And it locates the procession within a sequence of rituals: the taking of communion, the viewing of relics, the eating of breakfast, the pope’s benediction, and finally learning about the value of indulgences. But the visual images focus on the repeatable rather than the sequential, as each scene is enacted through a duplication of format, and a collective not only coherent and undifferentiated from within, but implying the inclusion of the viewer. This is not a single moment but it is also not a narrative incorporating different moments. Instead, it is the repetitive and simultaneous acts through which a new universal collectivity is forged. 

The Space and Time of the Printed Page:The Processional Prints of Santa Francesca Romana and Queen Christina of Sweden 

The technology of print multiplied imagery, but in marketing these images it asserted the unique rather than the repetitive. In effect, the topical pamphlet, the broadside, and the single-sheet print proved to be very strategic in the representation of street procession. Topical pamphlets offered within hastily assembled texts access to the extraordinary occurrence, conveyed with the immediacy of an eyewitness. Thus when called upon to represent recurrent performances, pamphlets favored just those aspects that could be situated within specific time. The annual procession of SS. Annunziata, 

for instance, although highly visible within the city, was rarely the focus of printed representation, with the exception of the performance staged in 1632.73 It so happens that on this year it coincided with the end of a threat of bubonic plague and was reconceived as a citywide thanksgiving that included the carrying of the new standard of Urban VIII.74 The moment of potential urban disaster extricated this one occurrence from all others, precisely by offering a more specific context in which to enact the usual rituals of citywide collectivity. In the pamphlet published by Lodovico Grignani and sold from a bookshop on Piazza Navona, the procession is recounted as a performance of city unity but the most lengthy and animated description is reserved for the new standard painted by Pietro da Cortona. 

The unique and more lavish processions, then, and these were triumphal rather than penitential, would now be ensconced within the collective memory through print. In the process printing introduced a new way of conceiving of citywide unity, perhaps the only viable one. I will consider two particularly suggestive instances: the 1608 canonization of Francesca Romana, who was at the center of a strong civic-oriented cult, and the 1655 triumphal entry of Queen Christina of Sweden, who made her entrance into the city as a penitent convert to Catholicism.75 

The transition of the body of Francesca Romana from cult heroine to saint in 1608 came to be imagined through the form of a procession. By imagined, I mean that this procession was both a powerfully shared evocation and a strangely dislocated fiction. The canonization of Francesca Romana, the founder of the charitable order of the Oblates of Tor de’ Specchi and the focus of much local veneration after her death in 1440, was, according to Gigli, particularly lavish and both initiated and concluded with processional rituals.76 The beginning was marked by a procession that moved around the entire circumference of the basilica of San Pietro, and the end by a procession that carried the standard from San Pietro to Santa Francesca’s own church, Santa Maria Nova in Campo Vaccino. Already by this time Santa Francesca’s feast day was celebrated by sectors of the local population and the  Popolo Romano,  which had pursued her case for sainthood assiduously. Among the prints and broadsides that accompanied the festivities, the most lavish is a broadside engraved by Antonio Tempesta and entitled  Minute Ceremonies Observed in the Process of Canonization ofSanta Francesca Romana  (see Figure 3.5).77 Through the interrelation of image and text, this print represents Santa Francesca’s transformation into sainthood within the circuit of the initial procession around San Pietro, and as a journey that begins and ends within the space of papal authority. 

The entrance of Queen Christina of Sweden into the city almost fifty years later also came to be collectively imagined as a processional cavalcade. Queen Christina had actually entered Rome three days before December 23, 1655, the date of her much-anticipated triumphal entry, and had to reenter for such a lavish public performance to be possible. When this staging was itself restaged in print, for instance, in the 1655  Solemn Entrance in Rome of the Majesty of the Queen of Sweden,7* 

Figure 3.5. Antonio Tempesta,  Minute Ceremonies Observed in the Process of the Canonization of Santa Francesca Romana,  1608, broadside. Biblioteca Angelica. 

the representation worked to transform the citywide urban space of the performance (see Figure 3.6). It is perhaps not surprising to find that Queen Christina’s processional point of arrival is San Pietro.79 After all, her resolution to settle in Rome, following her abdication and lengthy travels through Europe, had been orchestrated by Alexander VII. What is perhaps more unexpected is how the visual vocabulary of procession was readjusted to produce a papal Rome animated through touristic journeys and destinations. 

Whose narratives do these journeys actually delineate? Ostensibly, they are about the movements of two particular women: Santa Francesca, whose devotion to the poor of Rome had already situated her at the center of a local cult, and Queen 

:igure 3.6.  Solemn Entrance into Rome of Her Majesty the Queen of Sweden,  1655. Gabinetto Comunale del le itampe. 

Christina, who in abdicating her throne, converting to Catholicism, and transgressing gender constraints had generated a great deal of interest throughout Europe.80 But such citywide events also offered certain sectors a unique opportunity to advance their interests. Few in the city had more to gain than print publishers and sellers. In the case of Queen Christina, materials featuring the queen’s entrance into the city are found in print sellers’ stock lists for well over twenty years.81 For authorities, be it the Roman Curia or the  Popolo Romano,  these occasions activated rivalries and brought pressure to their already volatile relations with the urban communities that resided in the processional route and thus were obliged to participate. Finally, the processional form of the journeys speaks to broader sets of social relations. Both journeys prompt encounters of monarchical power, the first between the local saintly body and the temporal papal court, the second between the royal body with all its complications of tarnished authority and the city with all its internal conflicts and contestations.82 And both offer different representations of citywide Roman collectivity, forged, moreover, in relation to the female body. 

In the broadside of Francesca Romana’s canonization engraved by Antonio Tempesta the processional collective encircles and extends the body of the saint. The overall scheme of the image recalls the familiar form of pilgrimage prints, in particular those in which the female personification of Rome is circumscribed, first by scenes of charity, and then by a procession of pilgrims that moves between the four major basilicas.83 At the center of the broadside is the monumental embodiment of Santa Francesca herself, but also serving as the personification of Charitable Rome. This double body, anchored through coats of arms that si gnal an unea sy alliance between the papacy and the  Popolo Romano,  overwhelms all others. In fact, the body is formed and extended through all that surrounds it: the acts of charity, the repetitive rituals of canonization, and the persistent movements of the processors. The relationship of this saintly body to the people of Rome is articulated in the accompanying text, which after offering a brief account of Santa Francescas life states: 

The year 1440 on the 9th of March she yields her soul to her Creator being 5 6  years of age. So great was the multitude of people that from every part converged to see and honor her body, from which emitted fragrance of most delicate odor and innumerable graces, that there was a need to leave that precious treasure upon the earth for three nights and two days and a half; having left on earth desire for her in all of Rome, which for her, and for her merits while alive and after death has received and receives continuously singular gratitude.84 

The body of the saint, then, demonstrates its sanctity through the emission of a sweet odor instead of the usual reek of bodily deterioration, and it is this eruption of the body that prompts desire on the part of the people. It is a desire that produces the charitable city, merging differences within notions of charity, good works, and the social well-being of the city. 

Initially, a visual inventory of the saint’s own achievements within the city animates this image of Rome. These scenes appear immediately around the central figure and position the viewer as witness. They display the life and afterlife of the saint, situating her within her Roman neighborhood and monastery of the Tor de’ Specchi, and within a local mission of charitable work. Thus Santa Francesca appears feeding the poor, collecting alms, and healing bodies struck with injury or the plague. A second sequence of compartments validates the first with its extraordinarily detailed account of canonization rituals. By keeping to a repetitious format and changing the viewpoint only slightly from frame to frame, these reassert the intensification of papal ritual but also the veracity of its disclosure. Organized as a concentric sequence of abstract spaces, all of the compartments that surround the saint could work within didactic objectives, regularizing multiple oral stories into an official sequence of deeds and miracles and clarifying the newly reorganized canonization practices. 

At the margins of the image, providing an unbroken frame through which to view all acts and rituals, is an unusual representation of procession. As the text makes 

explicit, this is the procession that initiated canonization procedures. It is thus composed of all those who participated in these rituals: clerics, monks, penitents, abbots, bishops, archbishops, cardinals, and finally the pope himself. The groups, organized in strict church hierarchy, become one in an unbroken chain that curves in and out of the narrow border of the broadside suggesting the physical movement around its edges. San Pietro and its piazza provide the space of departure and arrival, but the view of the basilica itself is obstructed. Thus the procession provides an unbroken frame, containing the saint as well as the broadside. Locked into an eternal circular route, the processors safeguard the boundaries of charitable Rome by extricating it from actual urban space. Initially, they rework the body of Santa Francesca from a physical entity to a social and religious presence. Ultimately, they transpose this body from its local urban situation to a universal sacred realm through a collective that comes together not as its struggles against difference, but as it imposes a clear political hierarchy. 

Yet the broadside’s claims of accuracy could not permit the complete omission of the procession that brought closure to Santa Francescas canonization ceremonies (see Figure 3.7). The church of Santa Maria Nova in Campo Vaccino where, as the text explains, the saint’s body was kept and where her cult was situated, was the destination of the standard carried by this procession. This church would soon take on the saint’s name and become prominent within the system of citywide charity, serving to impose social control during the bubonic epidemic of 1656.85 In effect, this church represented Santa Francescas ultimate point of arrival. By contrast, the print shows this procession as a scene of departure. The piazza of San Pietro with its obelisk provides the marker against which the procession recedes, moving across Ponte Sant’Angelo and beyond witnessed by clerics, nobles, and Swiss guards. The saint’s own church and convent are present only through their implied distance. 

Queen Christina’s processional prints deploy a more conventional visual form.  Solemn Entrance  (see Figure 3.6), for instance, presents a single unified processional body unfolding as it crosses and curves across the page. Queen Christina herself does not take the role of central actor with everyone else as supporting cast. In fact, it is even difficult to locate her in these prints, for they offer very little in terms of the individual body of the queen. This, of course, is precisely what distinguished processional prints from other types of images marketed on the occasion of the queen’s arrival. In the 1677 index of prints held by the shop of Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi, this particular print appears under the category of “Roma Moderna,” while the images of the queen herself are listed under “Ritratti.”86 The processional image, then, opens some perspective onto the contemporary city rather than simply onto the queen. 

The ruler’s entry was, as Louis Marin has noted, “both a means of maintaining the monarchical aura and of ritually opening a political and institutional dialogue between sovereign and city’s inhabitants,” usually a city the ruler claimed as his own.87 Thus traditionally the entry was enacted as an encounter of two corteges—one royal, the other civic—with the purpose of mutual recognition. The magnificence of the 

I 

Figure 3.7. Antonio Tempesta,  Minute Ceremonies Observed in the Process of the Canonization of Santa Francesca Romans,  1608, broadside (detail). Biblioteca Angelica. 

While the procession does keep to the traditional divide between civic and royal display, this is also where tradition starts to break down, for the papal presence appears to infiltrate both parts of the cortege. Not only do cardinals and Swiss guards accompany the queen, but also the queen’s very magnificence is increased by lavish papal gifts. Moreover, civic representation is not only limited to ceremonial duties, but these are also intermeshed with those carried out by papal counterparts. With the musicians of the  Popolo Romano  march the trumpeters of the ambassador cardinals and the drummers of the papal Swiss guards. Evidently, for certain sectors of the audience this was not a satisfactory representation. I refer to those who directly or indirectly participated in the event, and saw in these prints an erasure of their presence. More than one instance of prints annotated with corrections is found in the diary of Carlo Cartari now kept in the Archivio di Stato di Roma. Cartari’s diary, which describes public events in the city over a fifty-year period, starting in the late 1630s, includes many of the topical prints that came into the market.89 He collected six singlesheet prints and three pamphlets on the entrance of Queen Christina alone. In his copy of  Cavalcade Undertaken in Rome for the Solemn Entrance of the Queen of 

-igure 3.8. Horatio Marinari,  Cavalcade Undertaken in Rome for the Solemn Entrance of the Queen of Sweden,  Rome, on December 23,1655. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

Sweden, 90 published by Horatio Marinari (see Figure 3.8), Cartari wrote referring to a specific part of the procession: “It was not the stewards of honor. From here are missing the consistorial solicitors.”91 Evidently Cartari, who was deacon of the consis-torial solicitors, a participant in the procession, and fully informed in matters of ceremony, wished to counter the exclusion of his own office. Thus self-interest is justified by a claim to accuracy and realized by the ability to intervene in the event through its restaging in print. 

If the representations of the city and monarch are brought into question by conflicting claims of authority, then the question of who is recognizing whom can no longer be taken for granted. In this respect, it is important to turn back to the image of monarchical power. While tradition equates royal authority with the splendor of display, the queens personal appearance, departing from expectations raised by both status and gender, was used to construct a particular relation between her royal authority and that of the papacy.92 In the pamphlet  True Account of the Journey Undertaken by the Majesty of the Queen of Sweden  published by Francesco Cavalli, the queen is thus described: 

She is the very portrait of virtue in the cavalcade, a woman riding dressed only with a vestment embellished in front with gold stitching, and the overcoat covered with the same, a habit without pomp, though rich, and she also wore a black veil behind her back, with black hair and a simple little gold cord.93 

In the pamphlets Queen Christina’s simple attire is repeatedly juxtaposed with the pope’s lavish retinue (as well as with the colorful display of the Roman nobility). The queen is said to humble herself as she recognizes a greater power, namely that of the heavenly kingdom. One must assume that for a large part of the print audience this was an aspect of meaning that virtually shifted the traditional terms of exchange between the monarch and the city. Thus the queen’s position is both reasserted as partaking of monarchical authority and simultaneously subsumed in an exchange that not only circumvents civic interests but also is ultimately unequal. What these prints call up are viewers compelled to articulate their allegiances, say between Protestant and Catholic politics, between papal and civic authorities, or within the female body and its conflictual femininities. 

The 1655 entry of Queen Christina covered considerable ground. According to the official edict on the decoration of the route, the procession started at Porta del Popolo, moved down the Corso to Piazza Venezia, and turned to pass in front of the church of II Gesü;94 continuing to the piazza of Pasquino and Monte Giordano, it crossed Ponte Sant’Angelo to arrive finally at San Pietro. The restaging in print always entailed strategic choices of urban sites. Whatever diversity the actual route suggested, the prints narrow these down and invariably focus on the monumental papal city. In the print  Solemn Entrance  the point of departure for the royal entry is Piazza del Popolo, which is shown with its distinctive gate and church crowded with people and 

carriages. While during the actual entry this was the crucial site for the exchange of honors between the two parts of the cortege, in the print it serves only as a point of departure, one marked out by the Chigi insignia of the monti. The papal family arms, a prominent part of the temporary decoration, are shown in all the prints as permanent and were indeed to become permanent along with the city’s greeting to Queen Christina, which has subsequently greeted all visitors to the city.95 At the next urban marker, the procession is already on the other side of the Ponte Sant’Angelo. The Castel Sant’Angelo provides a resonant image of celebration with its spray of fireworks calling up countless papal festivities, and here literally spraying over and blocking the view of the procession. The point of climax, the Piazza of San Pietro, received the most extended representation, rupturing the two-dimensional organization of the procession and intruding into its path with a vast expansion of space. In fact, it is this void that will soon subsume the entire body of the procession. Does this theatrical space, with the basilica, obelisk, and fountain providing the stage and the congregations of people providing the audience, suggest the presence of another kind of participant? 

Interestingly, the conflict between the representation of Rome in the cavalcade and the assertion of Vatican Rome in the setting has a parallel in the print’s hybrid visual vocabulary. An overt clash emerges between the two-dimensional surface upon which the procession is located and the piercing of this surface through brief and strategic glimpses into the urban topography. It is precisely here that a new site of conflict would emerge, with viewers demanding the spatial basis of access to the modern city, and this in turn raising the presence of multiple and conflicting views. Although much effort was given to the presence of supportive spectators for the event itself, all signs of this kind of participation are omitted from the prints.96 The witness to the printed restaging of Queen Christina’s triumphal entry is elsewhere. In these prints San Pietro is not simply the climax of her journeys, it is also the arrival point of the viewer of the print. Offering people the power to command space through the eye, these printed images facilitated economic enterprise, and even sustained papal authority, but they also produced a print public with divergent interests and allegiances. Thus in these symbolic journeys one finds multiple destinations, a particular woman’s search for significant participation, the larger struggles of authority over the city, and, above all, the attempts to attract and find room for a crucial yet unpredictable participant, namely the viewer of the print. 

Water’s Overflow 

Contamination, Cleanliness, 

and the Location of the Fountain Piazza 

CIDt [the river] seized at once in an equivalent manner 

the piazza of the Jews that has no equivalent 

... It seized piazza Margana and the beautiful 

piazza Altieri at the same time, 

and seized suddenly from behind and front 

the piazza of San Marco, and seized as well 

the elegant piazza of San Apostolo— 

Then it went inside the ghetto to find the false, wicked and fraudulent Jews and if naked, naked made them leave their beds to save their cloaks and overcoats to these it would do damage and disrespect and carry away even their matches, because they deserve it these Jewish dogs that are the enemies of all Christians.1 

I n early modern Rome, the flow of water anchored urban space. As a metaphor, water’s temporal movements, its surge, fluidity, and overflow, barely disguise a preoccupation with urban boundaries. And this unease is by no means unqualified. The poem published immediately after the devastating inundation of the city on the evening of December 24, 1598, points to just those boundaries that are deemed most threatened. It is the piazza that opens the entire city to water’s overflow. And the particular instance of Piazza Giudea, located outside the main entrance to the ghetto, opens up the complicated and troubled relations between Jewish and Catholic Romans.2 

While printed guidebooks and processional prints served to bring order and coherence to urban space, the pamphlets prompted by the flooding of the river Tiber disrupted established urban boundaries, be these physical or social.3 Water’s dynamic but unpredictable overflow brought to readers a very different view of the modern 

129 

city, one that counted on the pleasures of breaching obstructions and confronting repressed conflicts. If these texts sought to transgress the boundaries of Piazza Giudea, it was to reveal the ghetto itself. By 1663, when Filippo Bonini published a treatise on the flood of three years before, the representation of flowing water that vacillated between pollution and cleanliness and called up the ghetto as a site of propitious and conflictual encounter was all too familiar: 

[T]he ghetto of the Jews was the part that remained largely immersed; undetected the water rose from the side of the river to the second level of the windows, and from the side of the city washed against the first. Nevertheless this obstinate people derived some benefit from the inundation of the river, while where it refuses to wash off the impurity of soul in the water of baptism, the waters of the Tiber cleansed the filth of the body, and the habitations, which in places had become little short of uninhabitable through the dirty habits and stench of those people. 

Still the officers taking compassion on these rejected people, commanded that an opening be made to the ghetto on the side of Lords Cenci, in order that they could be provided through that part with all that they needed, since the others were covered in water. Humorous but filled with the rancor of the innate arrogance of the Jews was the response of a wretched woman of these people, who finding herself almost immersed in the water was comforted by a Catholic cleric, who urged her to free herself from danger with his help, and put her life in safety. . . . She answered that she had no need of the help of Christians, for suffice it for the Jews to invoke the name of God that they are all immediately and in every place answered. The Catholic smiled and left her in the water. It was fortunate for these unfortunates that the inundation did not occur on Saturday, because they would from obsti-nence let themselves perish.4 

Within the extraordinary moment, water brought both punishment and redemption, and in the process made explicit urban conflict operating at other times. The encounter between Jew and Christian was reworked, not coincidentally, into a clash between superstition and rational thought. After all, Bonini did not intend simply to activate fears and pleasures around unexpected urban encounters but also to propose new solutions to the city’s recurrent flooding by arguing for objective evidence and social responsibility. 

Indeed, Bonini s 1663 treatise entitled  The Tiber Enchained, or The Art of Arresting Running Water  could hardly be confused with contemporaneous pamphlets on urban disasters.5 Rather, this lengthy and lavishly illustrated scholarly publication draws on the currency of disaster pamphlets but redirects their interests toward a scientific argument for dealing with the ongoing problem of flooding in the city. In particular, Bonini’s treatise takes up but also challenges the notion of a sequential history of flooding. The 1598 flood provided Bonini with the excessive instance against which the normality of recurrent flooding could be questioned: 

The fame of the great inundation that occurred in Rome under the pontificate of Clement the eighth is incomparable, occurring in the 1586 year of our health, and ceasing the day 24 of December, and of which the memories are so fresh, and the circumstances described and the harm enumerated so exactly, that one would repeat that which others have taken entire volumes to write. . . . Of this great flood there is no lack of memories in diverse plaques that will be described here.6 

Collective memory, animated by the ubiquitous street markers of the height reached by the water, ruptured a sense of cyclical recurrence by catapulting this exceptional moment into the present and keeping it in the here and now of the street.7 The need to maintain a repository of collective memory was initially raised in the unprecedented number of publications that accompanied the 1598 flood, for example, Jacomo Castiglione’s 1599  Treatise on the Inundation of the Tiber: 

The works that conserve the memory of whatever accident must be embraced with desire because they serve in other similar occasions to take an opportune solution. ... I therefore with much promptness have produced in print this Treatise of Castiglione of the deluge of the Tiber that flooded Rome the past month of December finding displayed in this not only every circumstance of this deluge and time, but also an account of past deluges taken from historians, and inscriptions conserved in different places of Rome, with the measurement and height.8 

In this pamphlet, which offers both topical and scientific observations, memory serves to prompt invention and change by being located in the urban specificity of particular street markers. 

Bonini’s treatise distinguished itself from the widely read topical pamphlets not only by finding the particular within cyclical time, but also by displacing local memories onto urban space at large. The engraving that introduces the section on the 1660 flood is a case in point (see Figure 4.1). This unusual image interweaves three different sites in Rome—-the Castel Sant’Angelo, the church of Santa Maria sopra Minerva, and the custom office of Ripa Grande—into a new cityscape.9 In effect, it is a concentrated space that stands for the whole. The choice of sites certainly suggests as much. Not only are these public buildings and traditional locations for the measurement of water, but they are roughly distributed along the river and across the city. Measurement is registered with a disembodied hand, a familiar sign that on the street brought resonance to the continuity between body and urban space. Yet the image shifts from the bodily and the local to a conceptualization of measurement that can only emerge, as the accompanying text explains, through a spatial abstraction understood by the eye: 

But so that everyone can see at one glance all the floods of the Tiber, of which the memory of the height of the water is perpetuated in Rome, I have had delineated the following figure that demonstrates the measurements of Castel S. Angelo, of 

Figure 4.1. F. M. Bonini,  The Tiber Enchained,  Measurements of City Floods, 1663. British Library. 

I 

the Minerva and of Ripa Grande, noting also the years of the pontificates in which 

the river exceeded its banks.10 

The reorganization of urban space within a visual surface enables the recognition of discrepancies between local spaces. Only the 1598 flood is consistent to all urban locations, registering the highest point reached by the water. In the custom office of Ripa Grande measurements began in 1598, and only here were the most recent instances of 1637 and 1647 recorded at all. Moreover, Ripa Grande registered the most recent flood of 1660 as second highest, while at Santa Maria sopra Minerva this measurement was the lowest one recorded. Thus the area around the port of Ripa emerges as the focus of Bonini’s contemporary history of city floods, explained by the author through the contingencies of nature’s force. It led him to propose actual changes around the edges of the river, from raising bridges and cutting into urban areas that protrude into the river itself to installing gates and sealers to protect private property and houses.11 Ultimately the treatise, feeding into current concepts of progress, argues for the need to consider urban change in relation to coherent city space rather than particular areas, moving memories of the flood out of the specificities of the local and into the city as a whole. 

Bonini’s 1663 treatise,  The Tiber Enchained,  was the culmination of many scientific publications that argued for the containment of the force of the river and defined urban space as always improving upon the past.12 In these, the metaphor of the waters overflow in disaster pamphlets is reversed, with the arrest of the flow challenging cyclical time in favor of a conception of time as constantly changing toward the future. This is not to say that the river’s dynamic force, which, after all, is what necessitates the imposition of control through scientific knowledge, is negated. In fact, the image that serves as the title page of Bonini’s treatise foregrounds this issue by presenting the personification of the river as unbridled masculinity barely restrained by four female personifications of reason. In Greuter’s 1618 large map entitled  New Design of Modern Rome,  the uncontrolled physicality of the aged male personification of the Tiber is differentiated from the three young female personifications of the city’s newly restored aqueducts (see Figure 4.2).13 It so happens that scientific debates on how to control flooding were linked to the late-sixteenth-century restoration of three ancient aqueducts, which began to change the city’s dependency on the river by channeling water across Rome through underground passages.14 In the map the rambunctious old Tevere, together with its northern artery, the Teverone, and Romulus and Remus are strategically situated at the river’s curve along the central and most vulnerable flat land. The group stands for the power of Rome, constant but unpredictable. Over it, however, looms change by way of orderly aqueducts, the urban routes of which are clearly articulated in the accompanying text. Interestingly enough, the youthful women may take their usual place as malleable and contained, but it is they who, supported by the ruins of an ancient aqueduct, direct our attention to the crucial link between the constancy of Rome and its improved future. 

-igure 4.2. J. Greuter,  New Design of Modem Rome,  1618 (detail). Gabinetto Nazionale del le Stampe. 

Thus waters overflow offered a powerful metaphor for the possibilities of change and progress, especially since it was so closely tied to its inversion, the alarming possibility of the forces of nature unraveling social order. The conscious and unconscious fear of water’s unpredictable trajectories emerges in all kinds of representations of urban space. Official sanitary regulation, for instance, increasingly drew on accounts of floods to reinvest particular boundaries with resonance. Each recurrence of the Tiber’s overflow was met with the usual  bando  ordering property owners to clear their particular section of the street in order to avoid the stench and infections that with time the water would bring.15 Sanitary regulations posted annually focused on the flinging of water, clean or dirty, from windows and doors onto the street, and on the spillage of water by builders, food sellers, and leather workers on the street.16 Most actively prosecuted was the flow from private spaces onto the  “piazze publiche, ”  in particular the multiple kinds of makeshift draining devices that were said to bring “public harm and jeopardy because they not only render the City filthy and muddy, but also smelly to all its inhabitants.”17 

Apparently, the movement of water across the city could not be fully secured, not even while underground. Strict regulations against the opening of unlicensed conduits anywhere along the aqueducts’ underground passages were constantly disregard- 

ed, and where the flow was externalized, through the numerous fountains built between 1570 and 1600, the possibility of deviation was back on the street.18 Indeed, the fountains and their surrounding spaces became a major ongoing challenge for authorities as a site that had to be ordered in the name of urban progress, yet constantly threatened to overflow. Initially, the civic government’s aim had been to distribute fountains more or less evenly across the most densely populated areas of central Rome and to reorganize everyday movement, especially in relation to commercial exchange, through the definition of clearer boundaries. Certainly the sanitary regulation that followed was relentless in targeting a number of fountains located within the most active market spaces—Piazza Guidea, Piazza Montanara, Piazza Navona, Piazza del Campidoglio—and in the direct purview of the Campidoglio.19 

\  In the fountain piazza the overflow was constant; the masters of the street persisted in restricting the fetching of water or feeding of animals from the main fountain rather than a peripheral opening, the washing and hanging of clothing, and the daily congregation of street sellers, rural laborers, gamblers, prostitutes, soldiers, and beggars. They also imposed a citywide scheme in which the cleaning of the central piazzas was organized in relation to the days of the week and the hours of the day.20 By thus attempting to control the time of the everyday, these orders asserted the similarity of these spaces and a shared interest in their constant improvement. But it is precisely within everyday movements that differences between particular piazzas emerge, even in official regulation. The chamberlain regularly censured officials in charge of aqueducts for reducing water pressure in one area to favor another.21 Moreover, these notifications increasingly reveal a conflict between maintaining the flow of water needed to keep the major fountains full and assuring people in those neighborhoods access from the street, since most of these fountains were not intended to be functional. 

Within the space of the piazza two official incentives, to contain the local and organize a citywide space, converged. But as a  bando  of March 27, 1657, indicates, this intersection raised contradictions around issues of access and movement: 

[I] n order to reform the shops with stalls, and stalls located at the center and around the Piazza of the Church of the Rotonda . . . travertine markers have been placed in front of shops and stalls for the greater ornament to the piazza and the convenience of the public .. . that sellers of drugs, spices, shoes, chickens, prepared meats, fruits, fish, and other people and artisans not dare to be in front of the church, fountain and urn, nor in another place in this piazza ... or in another manner impede or occupy this piazza, streets nor much less the view of the fountain and urn, under the penalty of 25  scudi.22 

In this attempt to impose order and stability and thus facilitate new opportunities foy movement and exchange, the main target became market exchange. Yet even a modern public space that privileged tourism’s strategic view as well as the carriage traffic of the upper ranks had to accommodate commerce, albeit contained within the clear 

boundaries of travertine. The guidebook  In Search of Rome  subscribes to just such a division. 

Of course, commercial exchange could not be so easily contained, either within urban space or in its circulation of representations of public space. Single-sheet prints for the market, which addressed tourist interests with diverse takes on the modern city, presented a challenge to official discourse on public space. Introducing new pictorial vocabularies, images of fountains orchestrate the encounter between contained local space and abstractions of citywide space. Moreover, as market objects that circulated without clear status, they could function as collectible print but also as the pictorial counterpart to cheap topical pamphlets. Michel de Certeau argues that with visual representation previously undefinable urban spaces became more distinctive and coherent, and thus more exposed to official control. If official regulation focused on these spaces, it was partly because their reorganization through representation rendered them easier to describe than the irregular fragmented areas beyond. Even so, this privileged viewing point, according to de Certeau, can only be enacted within the illusion of a comprehensive image. In Maggi’s 1625 map of Rome, for instance, the fountain piazza is reduced to the graphic signifier of a fountain, which, linked to others like it, produce the appearance of coherent parts interlocking into a readable urban whole (see Figure 4.3). But not all representations of urban space participated in such 

-igure 4.3. Giovanni Maggi,  Iconography of the City of Rome,  folio 29,1625 (detail). Gabinetto IMazionale delle stampe. 

a direct struggle between the official forces of progress and its local targets, especially because not all of these spaces were the same or held the same potential within concepts of the modern city. In fact, what is interesting about prints of fountains is how they register or conceal these differences and, deploying the powerful metaphor of water’s overflow, argue for progress and social order but also confront dynamic movement, seepage, and unpredictability within urban space. In effect, prints for the market are most revealing when encounters between official discourses on the city, private interests, everyday life, the tourist industry, the technology of print and print audiences ^unsettle readability. 

Forging the Space of the Fountain Piazza 

Most fountains built in early modern Rome could be discussed in terms of the collusive interrelations between private wealth, civic claims, and papal authority that mediated access to water. Perhaps the best-known instance is that of the Mattei fountain, which after complicated negotiations between the Mattei family and civic officials was relocated from Piazza Giudea to the nearby space in front of this family’s three palaces.23 The Mattei, agreeing to pave and keep clean the space around the fountain, acquired control of the neighborhood’s access to water. Moreover, the family gained the right to police the area and agreed to provide the guards posted each night on Piazza Giudea at the gate of the ghetto.24 

While sanitary regulation worked ceaselessly to mask these conflicting interests, they were given visibility through forms of printing intended for the market. Initially, the most persistent location for the fountain was within printed papal portraits, usually as part of a sequence of building types that served to frame the portrait.25 In one such print of Gregory XIII, the Mattei fountain as well as others built during Gregory’s pontificate are extricated from the urban context and grouped together to inscribe a symbolic topography of urban progress in relation to papal authority.26 Guidebooks, meanwhile, tend to link the fountain to private palaces, regardless of whether it was communally or privately funded. In the 1643  Description of Ancient and Modern Rome,  for instance, the image of the Mattei fountain serves to define a modern city of institutional and private boundaries (see Figure 4.4).27 This image of the fountain, tightly compressed within its frame and circumscribed within the three family palaces, denies the continuity of space beyond the piazza or even within it. 

blot surprisingly, the conflicting interests of powerful urban groups inflected the ways the space of the fountain came to be imagined in print. After all, the printing industry was itself bound to the aristocracy through a system of debt and obligation. Moreover, attempts by authorities and prominent families to control urban space through the elaboration of fountain decoration served print publishers by presenting them with a much-needed opportunity to expand their stock of images of Rome. Toward this end, publishers also became dependent on the work of foreign print-makers. The speed with which images of fountains entered the marketplace can be attributed to the initiative of these printmakers who sought to generate employment. 

Figure 4.4.  Description of Ancient and Modem Rome,  Mattei Fountain, pp. 722-23,1643. British Library. 

This dependency on foreign and—to a large degree—transient printmakers led to the introduction of diverse visual vocabularies and thus to the reorganization of the topographical print. 

Initially, fountains served to expand the established repertoire of topographical prints. They were depicted with the same precise visual vocabulary and claimed to offer an unmediated view of urban structures even as these were transformed through the linear possibilities of print technology. Within early-seventeenth-century sets of prints, the fountain was another recurrent building type, much as ancient columns, obelisks, and amphitheaters.28 But the ongoing relocation of the fountain in regulatory and market print suggested other options, precisely because this site, unlike the city’s antiquities, was charged with the hopes and fears of urban change. 

The new tourist guidebook is a useful place to start to consider how competing discourses of urban modernity were embedded in representations of fountains.  Grandeurs of the City of Rome,  published in 1625, is typical in reclassifying the urban landscape in terms of distinctions between the ancient and the modern.29 Fountains are classified as “modern,” the only such site that is not religious or private and that opens up urban space to broader interests. The fountain at San Pietro is a case in point (see Figure 4.5). The text underscores the technical feats that brought water to the Borgo. Control over natural forces is implied in every achievement: the difficulties of joining the full expanse of the aqueduct, the multiplicity of conduits used, the restoration of the ruined foundations of the aqueduct, and the social improvement over a large area of Rome. Function and progress are also linked to aesthetic pleasures. 

Figure 4.5.  Grandeurs of the City of Rome.  Fountain of San Pietro, 1625. British Library. 

Accordingly, the fountains built within the Borgo (“all are not only useful and necessary, but beautiful”) are described at length, especially through their diverse shapes and forms, quality of materials, and decorative movement of water.30 These interests are extended in the image, which works to elaborate the decorative patterns of water and fountain. The design displays printing’s ability to sustain an illusion of three-dimensional veracity while attenuating the pleasures of repetitive interlocking shapes. Indeed, while visual observation pursues aesthetic pleasure, it also demonstrates that such extensions of vision are only possible through the technology of print and its ability to constitute visual cognition in new ways. In other words, while the divide between past and present is heightened asserting a different future, change is visualized within technological rather than social progress. 

For  Portrait of Modern Rome,  this distinction is fundamental. Given that the guide represents the modern city as a coherent whole formed from many parts, it is not surprising that the fountain, already visualized within a sequence of repetition and difference, would prove useful. Even the district of Sant’Angelo, described solely in terms of social problems and charitable institutions of enclosure, could be conjoined to the rest of the city through the visual interests offered by the Mattei fountain. Of course, this notion of the “modern,” with its link between cohesion and physical improvement, is applied to the fountain and not its surrounding space. The text may emphasize the piazza in its multiple social paths and unpredictable relations, but the image included in the 1689 edition frames the view just at the point at which visual observation of the fountain itself becomes optimal. 

By the time sets of fountain prints entered the market, the fountain could represent urban progress and be entirely detached from urban specificity. Lists of print sellers’ stock and surviving sets of fountain prints point to a remarkable flexibility in the formation of groupings. But evidence also indicates that while many bought such prints one by one, publishers were keen to promote bound sets. In 1618 there were at least two distinctive types on the market.  Diverse Fountains That Can Be Seen in the Holy City of Rome and in Other Parts of Italy,  composed mostly of etchings by Giovanni Maggi and published twice in 1618 by Giuseppe de Rossi, is the earliest grouping sold with title page (see Figure 4.6).31 A set of etchings produced by the Spaniard Francisco Corduba and sold in groups of six, four, or as loose single sheets was probably on sale a bit earlier.32 During the next twenty years both sets were reprinted with new additions and updatings, while a third group, compiled by Giovanni Battista de Rossi, was published in 1637 under the title  Collection of the Principal Fountains in the Illustrious City of Rome,  and dedicated to Carlo Antonio del Pozzo.33 Already the latter was a composite of at least two types of images engraved by Domenico Parasacchi and Pietro Miotte, and was supplemented and reprinted up to 1773.34 

The images in  Diverse Fountains  keep a strict focus on the physical structure of the fountain itself, elaborated and extended through visual absorption. Even when two of Corduba’s images were incorporated to add fountains not in the original set, these were radically edited to eliminate all that appears beyond the fountain itself.35 Maggi’s 

Figure 4.6. Giovanni Maggi,  Diverse Fountains That Can Be Seen in the Holy City of Rome and Other Parts of Italy,  title page, 1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delie Stampe. 

Mattei fountain is framed to disallow the scattering of visual concentration (see Figure 4.7).36 Vision is kept from moving beyond the edges of the fountain and its very intensity serves to hold at bay all possible sources of distortion, be these bodies, smells, or noises. In effect, this visual attentiveness serves to extricate the fountain from the 

Figure 4.7. Giovanni Maggi,  Fountain in Rome in the Piazza of Lord Mathei, Diverse Fountains,  1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

particularities of urban space, displacing these onto the challenges of visual cognition and aesthetic judgment. For the viewer of the print, such overt strategies to erase the lived time of the street become a challenge to produce another kind of time. 

The grouping of these prints encourages movement across images rather than out 

toward urban space. Viewers are confronted with the accumulation of detail, line, and pattern, even as the prints claim the authenticity and specificity of each view. This is not the same deployment of fountain imagery as in guidebooks, which use the visual distinctiveness of each example to impose urban coherence and order. The groupings of single-sheet prints organized an ensemble of possibilities, but viewers actualized these by producing distinctive groupings and giving them particular nuances. The two 1618 editions of  Diverse Fountains,  for example, offer quite different selections. One divides the fountains by location (Rome/outside Rome) and by specificity (real/ imaginary).37 The other includes more or less the same images, yet mixes Roman fountains with those from elsewhere, and existing fountains with fanciful ones. Each of the images, observed in relation to others, gained specificity while opening up unexpected imaginary orientations. With their elaboration, repetition, and differentiations of decorative forms these prints prompted users to try out different combinations, activating displacements and differences as they sought to order a disorderly world. 

Additions to this set of prints, both as new fountains were built and as new images became available, attest to the success of representations in which visual objectification and the pursuit of an internal subjective order collude with technological notions of progressive urban space. The introduction of an image of the Barberini fountain, built in the 1630s, shows how visual attention could be extended by conflating the artistry of the viewpoint with the artistry of the object (see Figure 4-8).38 In this instance, the image presses on the visual skill of reading pictorial devices to accommodate to the hand of both the maker of the print and the maker of the fountain. Bernini’s participation is a significant new addition to the interests of fountain imagery, bringing to it modes of assessment that intermix scientific and artistic invention. Consequently, viewing possibilities are multiplied, starting with the adoption of a strategic side viewpoint. This perspective locates readability in the inventive form of the fountain itself as well as in its intricate movement of water. The dynamic outpouring of water speaks to progress through individual creativity and technology, but this water flow reinstates order by being contained within an aesthetic frame. Its purity, implied in the detached character of its knowledge and viewpoint, works hard to control the unpredictability of all other sensations and all other bodies.  Only  the print permits such an internalized space of subjectivity, offering the opportunity to purify urban space through the cognitive skills of the observer and hold in tension a desire for certain kind of change and the fear of its unpredictability. 

A comparison with Parasacchi’s image of the same fountain in the 1637  Collection of the Principal Fountains of the Illustrious City of Rome  proves revealing (see Figure 4.9).39 Instead of a modernity of artistic order and technological progress, the viewer is now offered one of social movement and exchange. The point of view, from above, may not produce the most effective display of the fountain’s innovative form and movement of water, but it opens up the surrounding space. Thus it is the piazza, rather than the fountain, that now frames visual attention. Dynamic outpouring can 

Figure 4.8.  Fountain in Rome in the Piazza of Cardinal Antonio Barberini, Diverse Fountains,  1630s. Biblioteca Angelica. 

be found in the multiple figures that stroll, walk, and run across the extended space rather than in the patterns of the water. These figures traverse the representational surface of the print in seemingly haphazard but potentially converging paths, activating interest in urban life, especially its diversity, social anonymity, and even unpredictabil- 

Figure 4.9. Domenico Parasacchi,  Fountain in the Piazza of the Barberini. Collection of the Principal Fountains,  1638. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

ity. They move, then, not only across the space of the fountain but also across public space. As with all images included in this set, the space of the fountain is configured by the very mixture of its bodies: servants, aristocrats, sellers, beggars, clerics, dogs that defecate, carriages that speed away, and horses that suddenly break into a gallop, 

all are equally prominent and equally undifferentiated. The diminution of scale as figures move away from the fountain suggests the possibility of a public space without boundaries or cohesion. Yet the figures are ordered within the representational surface along invisible pathways, an arrangement that keeps the parts from entirely fragmenting the whole. 

In the 1637 set of prints this diversified public is also contained through established visual vocabularies for different social types. Aristocratic leisure activities, especially ball games, are rendered in a descriptive mode, while unsavory characters or chaotic encounters are turned into humorous caricature, a range of vocabularies also found in current genre painting. Moreover, the spaces of congregation are interchangeable, since the same mixtures of peoples appear in virtually every fountain piazza. Even so, the choice of fountains is worth noting. Market piazzas are avoided in favor of spaces within the purview of private or institutional patrons. The papal Piazza del Quirinale, the  Popolo Romanos  Piazza del Campidoglio, and the Dominican Piazza of Sant’Agostino are included, as are those controlled by the Farnese and Barberini families. Thus the notion of public space is not as open as it may first seem, for whatever mixtures of people and unpredictable situations are present, these are ultimately secured through institutional and private domination of urban space. 

Interest in the unpredictable, chaotic, and enticing movements of the space of the fountain resurface within various attempts to market prints, and invariably there are strategies for negotiating the boundaries of anxiety and pleasure. An interesting instance is presented by Francesco Villamena’s 1623 print of Giovanni Alto, a print discussed in chapter 2 (see Figure 2.9). While Alto as guide to Rome offers to disclose the true modern city through the conjunction of visual and intellectual skills, it is only by revealing the diversity and chaos of urban space that this assertion becomes persuasive. The fountain provides the focus for the unpredictable movements of people: laborers lean against murals, beggars restlessly loiter, recently arrived pilgrims drink and wash their feet, soldiers prepare for an unexpected arrival, and dogs fight and are chased away with stones. This overflow of bodies, converging, intersecting, and clashing, is apparently brought into control through the enticements of visual evaluation, yet the image itself counts on rather different visual pleasures by activating the titillating possibilities of such fluid encounters. 

The set of etchings of Roman fountains by Francesco Corduba also negotiates the fears and desires located in urban space, but introduces a more overt challenge to contemporary discourses on urban progress. Cordubas images divide the focus of visual attention between the structure of the fountain and the ways it organizes pathways beyond itself and especially within everyday movements. Initially these fountains, so precise in their topographical description, may appear as interchangeable designs. Yet because they are combined with scenes of urban life that open the space to local specificities, no such exchange is possible. Indeed, it would be difficult to ignore the return to actual urban space. The street sellers and beggars around the piazza of Ponte Sisto, 

the second-hand market in Piazza Giudea, the gamblers around the Orsini palace on Monte Giordano, the persistence of locals drawing water in the piazza of Monte Scossa Cavalli (see Figures 4.10-4.13), all point to particularities of urban space already defined through official struggles with the everyday.40 One could even argue that the criteria for the very choice of fountains was the opportunity to display conflictual and haphazard encounter. While not all of its viewers may have been aware of local specificities, these prints target informed observers and challenge them as much as the artistic conundrums of Maggi’s prints. If the latter count on the viewer’s intense efforts to forget the specificities of urban space , Co rdub a’s pr ints bank on the viewer’s willingness to risk confrontation with local conflicts and controversies. 

What might be the relation between this attempt to market everyday life in Rome’s fountain piazzas and the ongoing official regulation of these spaces? Corduba’s Piazza of San Sisto41 offers some clues. Urban specificity is inscribed not only through the meticulous rendering of the newly built fountain at the side of the Hospital of San Sisto, but also through the provocative narrative enacted along the foreground. A group of street sellers suddenly interrupts urban space with a startling collision. The horse has fallen, dishes and pots are strewn in every direction, and the sellers’ futile attempts to rectify the situation only lead to more disarray. Within the purview of San Sisto, the representation of itinerant sellers caught in a moment of confusion speaks of a highly contested space of circulation and of competing activities of street survival. The image exploits the controversies around the institution of San Sisto’s monopoly on officially sanctioned mendicancy and its recurrent attempts to remove unlicensed beggars and other transients from the strategic space in front of the hospital. 

But the image also addresses urban transience through the deployment of the well-established print genre of Roman street sellers.42 In this type of print, single figures representing street trades and services are shown in continuous schematized rows, apparently on the move but without any specificity of location. The sellers of dishes and pots in Cordubas image belong to one of its distinctive figure types, but instead of remaining within a timeless dislocated procession they are inserted into a distinctive moment. What are the implications of transforming the processional image of street sellers into a dramatic incident and of relocating it within specific urban space, one moreover that was the focus of official struggles to regularize urban mendicancy? Evidently, the print offers the pleasures of the theatrical enactment of recognizable street types but does not leave untouched the readability of the urban topography. In fact, it complicates urban visibility by bringing the stereotypical characters of genre print into play with the particularities of urban space. In effect, this is a representation of itinerancy that pertains as much to the movements of a self-conscious eye as to the performance of urban bodily struggles by traders and disabled mendicants.43 

The decisive factor is that this set of prints juxtaposes pictorial vocabularies from both genre and topographical representations, and brings into dialogue visual vocabularies that challenge each other’s assumptions. Undoubtedly this is in keeping with the 

Figure 4.10. Francisco Corduba,  Fountain of the Ponte Sisto in Rome,  1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

Figure 4.11. Francisco Corduba,  Fountain in Rome in Piazza Giudea,  1618. Gabinetto Nazionaie del le Stampe. 

Figure 4.12. Francisco Corduba,  Fountain in Rome in Monte Giordano at the Palazzo of Lord Orsini,  1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

Figure 4.13. Francisco Corduba,  Fountain in Rome in the Piazza of San Giacomo Scorcia Cavalli,  1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

efforts of foreign printmakers to expand the Roman print market by introducing genre imagery and interlinking it with the established topographical views. Corduba, a Spaniard, drew on visual vocabularies situated within the print production of Haarlem during the first two decades of the seventeenth century. Exchanges with the prints of Jan van de Velde in the mid-i6ios are explicit, perhaps prompted by Van de 

Veldes own brief visit to Rome in 1617.44 Various of the figures and figure groups from a Van de Velde series of prints representing country markets are found relocated in Corduba’s Roman piazzas.45 The pilgrim who approaches a fashionable couple at the country market now approaches equally fashionable gentlemen at the entrance of Palazzo Orsini; the children enmeshed in a brawl in front of the fruit and vegetable stalls now conduct their brawl in front of the fountain at San Giacomo at Scossa Cavalli; the women and men who labor to transport fruits and vegetables now are burdened with the containers of water drawn from this same fountain. What is striking about these relocations is the close attention to social specificity, with only the pilgrim’s costume regarded as interchangeable. Differences between Dutch nobility and Roman aristocracy or between rural worker and urban poor are registered with a slight readjustment of a collar or the dropping of a sleeve. Moreover, as already noted, activities are organized in relation to specificity of place. Thus while the country market prints register social differences along an urban-rural divide, those of the Roman fountains display multiple social differences configured through a differentiated urban terrain. 

It might seem that by drawing on these two visual vocabularies Corduba’s images specify urban space in the two contradictory ways used in official discourses, both unifying it in terms of physical and technological progress (through the representation of the fountain) and rendering it specific in terms of the localizable everyday (through the representation of the problematic and illicit). Yet these images bring the two into play within the same visual field while introducing other gaps. The Van de Velde genre prints register social difference through the representation of a wide spectrum of people in relation to distinctive forms of work and play.46 Official Roman discourse on cleanliness, however, focuses on certain spaces and situates within these certain communities. Corduba’s prints, operating somewhere between the two, open the site of the fountain to a cross-section of activities that define specific locations and intermix forms of identity that official discourse seeks to keep separate. It is, then, the interplay between the specificities of space and people’s movements in and out of these spaces that sets Corduba’s images apart, not only from other prints of fountains but also from official strategies to impose urban control. They thus offer a different take on public space, one that depends on a more self-conscious approach to the visual representation of urban disruption and disorder, but one that nonetheless harbors within it some of official discourse’s anxieties around the transgression of boundaries. 

Overflow, Seepage, and Piazza Giudea 

In what city of the world will you find The flow of things for sale that you know, 

Starting at the piazza of the Jews, 

And then you will see these at Campo de’ Fiori . . . But this is a shadow of that which each day 

one sees pass by one’s house each morning, and one hears shouted through every street.47 

Corduba’s representation of Piazza Giudea is entirely exceptional and, more than any other fountain image, unsettles the readability of the overview and disturbs the autonomy of the local. The tension between the coherent city and the specificities of the local was nowhere as acute as when they met at Piazza Giudea. This site, perhaps more than others, shows that attempts to transform urban space through printed representation into a readable text increasingly introduced contradictions. It is just those locations that official discourse sought to penetrate through the regulation of everyday life that proved most difficult to incorporate within the visual vocabularies defining the city as modern and progressive. In the case of Piazza Giudea, this reached fetishistic proportions. More printed text was directed at this particular space than just about any other in the city, yet it is almost absent from visual representation during the first half of the seventeenth century.48 But not entirely. 

In defining the specificity of Piazza Giudea, Corduba’s combination of visual vocabularies introduces an initial contradiction: the fountain links it with other city spaces, while the market of second-hand goods that surrounds the fountain distinguishes it from the same spaces. The market, with vendors displaying their many offerings both to a potential buyer and to a potential spectator, is of course a type of genre image with wide currency, produced at this time in the exchange of visual vocabularies between Spain, the Netherlands, and Italy.49 The expectation of this kind of image lay precisely in the richness of the display, in the diversity and arrangement of abundance, and increasingly in the painterly skill with which the illusion of presence could be conveyed. Not surprisingly, it was developed in close relation to the potentiality of the medium of oil painting to conflate hypervisual sensations and possessability.50 

What initially distinguishes Corduba’s image is its reversal of the expectations of the market as it was framed by oil painting. An array of humble objects is dispersed throughout the open space of the piazza (see Figure 4.14). While the sellers are located in the midst of potential transactions, the objects themselves seem to occupy a space in between the narrative and the abstracted surface of representation. The items on offer are reduced, not only through the resonance of the empty space that separates them, but through the printed line, which in its very starkness wears down each item no less effectively than the oil medium builds up the richness of a bountiful and exotic market. No viewer attuned to scenes of markets could fail to be intrigued by this reversal of what is usually on offer, namely the opposite of excess, that which is pared down, reduced, in effect, lacking. Inscribed within the representation of each object—the resewn shirt, the crooked stool, the chipped bowl—is their very state of being used up. What is intriguing, then, is the visual dichotomy of objectification through the clarity of each item in space, and of reduction through the restraint of the etched line. The image fashions Piazza Giudea as a kind of antimarket, localized and enacted in 

:igure 4.14. Francisco Corduba,  Fountain in Rome in Piazza Giudea,  1618 (detail). Gabinetto IMazionale delle Stampe. 

reversal of the established notions of the excess and sensuality. It seeks to match visual form to a sign of difference. 

Among the many restrictions imposed on Jewish merchants by the end of the sixteenth century, the selling of food was most strictly enforced.51 The image becomes a reversal of the food market and of what a market represents to community bonds and exchange. Yet many of the objects on offer are nonetheless related to food, and even to intimate aspects of the body. So what is the efficacy or pleasure of imagery reduced to what is lacking, but insinuating the presence of bodies presumed to be elsewhere? 

It is significant that official regulation of Piazza Giudea took up the selling of second-hand goods indirectly, only as it impinged on money-lending by Jewish bankers through the pawning of private property.52 In policing economic exchanges within this space, printed notifications conflate the two practices to which Jewish communities were restricted, namely selling pawns and second-hand goods, and suggest that they were carried out jointly by Jewish bankers and  “Regatieri ”or rag-pickers. It was in this piazza that people pawned objects, usually modest belongings, for an amount that would have to be repaid with interest within the year. If unpaid the pawn would be auctioned off from an office located at one side of the new fountain. This 

practice was closely monitored by papal authorities, who during the early years of the seventeenth century regularly accused Jewish bankers of conspiring with other bankers as well as with second-hand sellers to keep the bidding low in order to make a profit by selling the objects through the market. This type of regulation focused on liquid wealth rather than tangible products and represented the space of the piazza as one of legal and economic transaction. The exchange, defined in terms of commitments contracted between lenders or creditors and borrowers or debtors, was one that transcended a fixed location. Official discourse thus implies an invisible exchange that masks the interdependence of communities. It certainly hides the long-established financial relationship between the papacy and Jewish bankers while enabling authorities to define themselves as protectors of the owners of the pawns. 

By contrast, Corduba’s image represents a process of exchange as a set of secondhand objects dispersed within actual space. In other words, it gives urban relationships physical specificity. This is not to say that official notices did not address this space in terms of its occupants, for they certainly did. But these orders sought to differentiate between the occupants of the piazza and peoples elsewhere, and to negate the possibilities of communications between the two. Two groups were excluded from this piazza through official edicts: the catechumens, converts to Christianity still in the process of instruction, and the neophytes, newly baptized converts still considered to be in a state of transition.53 Notices posted at the gate of the ghetto prohibit any kind of exchange between these two categories of people and Jewish Romans, be it mere conversation or the sharing of food. According to these notices catechumens were strictly prohibited from entering Piazza Giudea because they might then be tempted to enter the ghetto, and there purchase special meat or receive gifts of food and drink. In turn, family members of catechumens were not allowed to be in the space, presumably in case the excluded relatives were indeed present. Evidently the possibilities of this space to serve as an in-between, and blur a clear division between Jew and Christian, was regarded as most threatening to the process of conversion. In Fanucci’s treatise on urban charity the recent failures to impose conversion is attributed to particularity of location, and writing on the institution established for catechumens he states: 

Even though Jews have converted to the Catholic faith at all times without fail, there was no proper or particular place where they could be received and instructed; now they were kept in one place and now in another . . . and for this reason I assume it is good that from the year 1540 in the month of February ... a company was instituted under the title of San Giuseppe de Cathecumeni, in the church of San Giovanni of the market under the Campidoglio.54 

It is not coincidental that the House of Catechumens, established by the Jesuits but funded in part through obligation by Jews, was situated at one of the entrances to the ghetto, but the one furthest from the gate on Piazza Giudea.55 

Official regulation constantly demarcated the boundaries around the space of 

Piazza Giudea through the imposition of religious and racial categories, and most of this concern focused on the auction house. Located at one corner of the piazza, this key building included a fence built on the outside and protruding onto the otherwise open space. During auctions participants were ordered to keep to the outer side of the fence and to make their offers without causing injury, threatening, bullying, raising fists, making rude gestures, or casting bad looks at officials or other bidders, as ways to block other bids.56 The harshest punishment was reserved for cursing and insulting by naming in any number of ways God, Christ, the Virgin, or any saint. Such minute detailing of transgression both through the body and through language suggests a high level of anxiety in the attempts to control this space, particularly in relation to religious difference. The restriction of the exchange of words in the course of auctioning pawns cannot be disassociated from other attempts to curtail the movement of words in and out of this space, for instance, as Gigli attests, through the execution in this piazza of those who participated in the circulation of illicit writings.57 

Indeed, in the guidebook  In Search of Rome  Piazza Giudea is mentioned as one of the city piazzas with certain goods and services, and what is noted is the auctioning of pawns and the public executions.58 The conjunction of the two is not as odd as it may first seem. Piazza Giudea was one of many market piazzas that had within it the  corda,  the apparatus for the corporal punishment of those involved in trade and commerce. The support for the  corda,  moreover, seems to have been conjoined with the gallows. Thus here is an instance in which the space of market exchange, including its most overt threat of corporal punishment, overlapped with the space of capital punishment. What is striking about the executions carried out in this piazza is the ways they constantly invoke the market exchanges between Christian and Jewish communities. When merchants were executed for profiting from a grain shortage, colluding Christians and Jews were hung side by side.59 Most people executed in Piazza Giudea were accused of crimes of heresy, and not only of converting to Judaism but also to Protestantism. The space constantly revealed, through the law’s most oppressive force, the fluidity of social exchange, and potential contamination. 

Ultimately, official regulation reveals the failure to impose clear boundaries over this “in-between” space. Papal restrictions on banking activities targeted catechumens and neophytes who were said to provide the crucial link between Christians and Jews in terms of secret plots to lower prices at auctions.60 These new converts, while excluded from this space through the regulation of religious conversion, were presumed to be present in the regulation of pawnbrokers, which insisted on the collusive plots that move from Jews to neophytes and from neophytes to Christians. With this in view, the aggressive attempts to regulate language during the height of business transaction also point to the in-between, within the fragile identity of the convert as well as within the space’s everyday movements. 

Most of this anxiety was located at the ultimate frontier of the piazza, namely, the main gate to the ghetto, which stood at one end of this piazza and was the site for af- 

fixing notices that pertained exclusively to Jewish communities. The appearance of notices on this gate rendered them legal, and through this practice the formation of this space was closely tied to the shifting situation of Jewish legal status.61 A  bando  of July 1654 prohibiting Jews from moving around the city in carriages, for instance, states, as do all others: “And we wish that once this is made public inside the enclosure of the Jews and affixed in its gates it will have the same force as if to each it was personally intimated.”62 If the printed notices display a great deal of ambiguity in their attempts to deal with the piazza itself, they are entirely unequivocal about the boundary that separates the ghetto and the rest of the city. These notices affirm a division of Jews and Christians in terms of physical spaces and physical bodies, excluding Jews from the city and Christians from the ghetto, especially from its synagogue.63 

But even this boundary remained unstable, primarily because of the ambiguous definitions of the space in front, Piazza Giudea, which depending on circumstances could shift from being part of the ghetto to being part of the “city.” During times of plague the boundary is reasserted at the gate of the ghetto. Indeed, although the fountain was built to service the people living within the ghetto,64 during the plague of 1656 when the enclosure was entirely sealed, Jews were obliged to pay twenty Christians to carry buckets of water from the fountain to the gate of the ghetto.65 Moreover, in images of the city at the time of the plague, the gate is shown shut, sealed, and reinforced with the papal coats of arms, while Piazza Giudea disappears entirely. At another recurrent time of crisis, the  Sede Vacante,  during which the entire city was thrown into unpredictable forms of conflict, the boundary was redrawn between the piazza and the rest of the city. The civic notices posted during one such occasion prohibited Christians from entering the piazza and the ghetto and disturbing the work of Jewish bankers and traders. 

If other images in Cordubas set offer the pleasures of the volatile and random in the city, this one turns to the consistency of market exchange and its multiple routes across the city. The unflagging movement of goods through the city’s piazzas, evoked so powerfully in contemporary poems as the flow and exchange on the street of bodies, sounds, and smells, rarely found visual expression. This image of Piazza Giudea is an exception, revealing the traces of a multiplicity of exchanges, and even of the possibility to move between boundaries and work within an “in-between” space. The image fashions the everyday as a site of pleasure and titillation through its very strangeness and instability. The dispersed objects, all marked by traces of their former use, localize yet also fill up the imaginary space around a pristine fountain. In their implied incompleteness and dispersal as unrelated pieces of the past, they confront the viewer with the challenge of making them mean again. Where is the meaning to be located if not in the different paths between viewer and objects on offer, and in the surprises, gaps, and enticements found in those paths? Of course the objects are not entirely discrete or unrelated entities; they are in fact all remnants of the everydayness of life. Their dispersal, however, raises the specter of their former place within people’s 

lives. They even project those now absent bodies, both in the shirt that keeps the shape of the one who once wore it, and in the arrangement of the hat, shirt, and clogs. This evocative display insinuates itself on the viewer, perhaps through a particular item, which unexpectedly pieces together indistinct bits of the past and relocates that past within a new situation. This calling up of memory is for the most part unpredictable, but there are ways in which the image, through its relation to conflicts and struggles situated within the piazza, charts out potential paths of memory. 

The very attempt to localize the space in terms of a second-hand market points to the relation between the piazza and urban space at large. The trade in second-hand goods necessarily moves one from this space into the ghetto as well as into other parts of city, first through its association with pawns, which in the form of handwritten notes found their way through all parts of the city. These identified the banker in question through two surnames, one Jewish, the other Italian, and were dated in an equally hybrid manner, with the year from the Jewish calendar, and the day and month from the Christian one. The objects, accumulated in part from the auctioning of unpaid pawns, circulated through the city, on the main streets inside the ghetto as well as in the rest of Rome, where they were taken by street sellers who also bought and traded items as they moved about.66 A wide range of people were thus involved in both the selling and buying, even as different forms of authorities attempted to define the practice exclusively in terms of a Jewish identity and to contain it within Piazza Giudea. Yet while people throughout the city participated in the exchange of secondhand goods, a large portion of the Jewish population was dependent on the continuous process of recycling, whether through sale, or through the relentless tasks of fixing, mending, patching, and making ordinary everyday objects, particularly clothing, usable again. Thus the representation of the objects in the print, their very paring down and signs of building up, points to the interconnections of this piazza to all parts of the city in an uninterrupted process of exchange, use, and reuse that involved diverse communities and had no readable trajectories. 

While the image pulls social relations beyond the local space, it also points to the very conflicts of those relations and does not mask or reconcile these. For instance, the definition of the piazza strictly in terms of a second-hand market was pertinent to an ongoing dispute within Jewish communities. The reorganization of the piazza when the fountain was built disrupted for many sellers, and others as well, the established paths of their everyday life. Lives that once were shaped within irregular small openings, passageways, and streets now had to be reorganized around a more centralized open space focused on the fountain. In his discussion of the relation between memory and space, Maurice Halbwachs argues that such disruptions brought a more intense awareness of one’s past and present and of the social bonds, which, depending on the specificities of place, gained greater clarity at the very moment of being challenged.67 The reorganization of the piazza affected the relation of this space to the nearby enclosure, since the piazza became most desirable and bankers and owners of permanent shops challenged the presence of second-hand sellers. In the ghetto, the lack of space 

led to an increasingly hierarchical organization, with some of the wealthier merchants and bankers, who had earlier been forced to move there from elsewhere in the city, buying the rights-of-way over house entrances and corridors.68 Of course the image can give us no direct view into these relations, although the display of objects of the everyday, dispersed as if quite unable to fill the given space, seems to speak of an emptiness rather than of the scarcity of space. The image, then, inverts the hierarchical reorganization of the piazza and its class conflicts. But does the physicality of the used object conceal new forms of liquid commerce or does it evoke a sense of lack and thus prompt the viewer to look elsewhere? 

Corduba’s image of the piazza presses the viewer to move from this space to other parts of Rome, and to take the route of financial exchange and debt. The print represents a transaction in progress. A well-to-do man stands with his back to the viewer and, distinguished by his attire from the others, serves as intermediary between viewer and market. If this figure provides an entry point, it is defined in terms of the participation of those with means to take up the opportunities offered by Piazza Giudea. In the midst of a leisurely stroll through the market to observe its changing items, he has come to a stop. Might it be because he is suddenly confronted with a familiar item? Certainly what is on display are the humble objects of everyday life. Yet as he turns away from the item offered by the seller, could he be considering his own possessions pawned at a moment of need? Within this ambiguous transaction, the image perhaps points to the position of debt and dependence that was experienced by many who used this piazza, and which reversed the unusual relationship between Christians and Jews. Whether as an individual or as a member of a family or group, whether in the past or the present, or whether imaginary or real, the accumulation of debt and its anxieties are within the image’s possible readings. For some, even the visualization of this particular space of transaction, could, as could their proximity to the actual piazza in the city, invert the positions of superiority and subordination operating beyond its vicinity.69 And within this displacement of guilt and shame, sustained by concurrent notions of water’s overflow, might the exchange in progress not be reinterpreted as extending the paths, both physical and moral, of contamination? 

This image of Piazza Giudea turns out to be reduced, yet full of potential. It reveals difference within social relations, and does so within a compelling mixture of pleasures and anxieties. As far as it brings into view the multiple and conflictual relationships through which Piazza Giudea operated, it shows that these involved everyone in the city and not just those forced to live within the ghetto. As far as it conjures up resentments within urban relationships, it may have fed into oppressive strategies of enclosure. At the very least, it made the contradictory character of the piazza’s imposed boundaries more overt and thus more recognizable. And it reminded the viewer of the piazza’s function as an “in-between” space, one defined by alliances and relationships operating through the everyday but denied by official discourse. All this the image does by complicating, through a juxtaposition of different visual vocabularies, concurrent forms of imaging the modern city. 

When Piazza Giudea reappears in later-seventeenth-century cycles of fountains, it does so entirely transformed by visual strategies that increasingly serve to bring coherence to the city. In a print of 1689 the boundaries of the piazza are not only rigidly clarified but also serve to reassert the separation of ghetto from the rest of the city (see Figure 4.15). The gate to the ghetto is well secured, its hefty stones covered with papal and civic symbols. Such clarity of boundaries undermines the “in-between” aspects of the piazza, which now becomes almost indistinguishable from other piazzas centered on a lavish fountain. It is the decorative richness of the overflowing water that anchors the view and defines the possibilities of its pleasures. What this overflow anchors, of course, is social exchange. The fountain dominates the space, literally fills it up, diminishing the presence of the few scattered figures of street sellers. This is not permitted by Corduba’s image, in which the objects for sale are out of scale with the fountain, extending the space outward, and insisting on both the piazzas specificity and its relations to other places. And thus the image, like the account of the piazza in the  Portrait of Modern Rome,  registers nagging worries about people’s increasing disregard of all attempts to enforce separation. 

Figure 4.15. Matteo Gregorio Rossi,  Fountain in Piazza Giudea,  1689. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

Rumor’s Trajectories 

The  Sede Vacante  and 

the Dispersal of Urban Conflict 

The city of Rome, finding itself much tormented by successive wars, and overwhelmed by the rumors that usually spread during the  Sede Vacante,  lived with much melancholy; the people being tired of so much turbulence, and the Holy Church being tossed in the tempestuous sea of discord. Now what astonishment there is at the appearance of the dove wielding a branch of olive (sign of the future calm) and there should be unconstrained rejoicing.1 

I f the election of a new pope brought to an end the overt urban conflict of the  Sede Vacante,  it did not suspend its disruptive rumors or haunting memories. The peculiar time frame between the death of one pope and the election of the next was, of course, recurrent. It was bound to take place within the limits of a human life, and was framed by established rituals marking its beginning and end.2 Yet the  Sede Vacante  was highly unpredictable. Its time could not be fixed, neither the time of its recurrence nor of its duration. In 1605 one papal election followed another within less than a month, while in 1655 the election extended over eighty days. Speculation about the timing of the next  Sede Vacante,  or the length of a current one, fed fears of random violence and planned retribution. These rumors had their consequences, as in 1623, when predictions of a lengthy period of papal election due to the animosity between two papal nephews led to an extremely volatile urban situation.3 And always within rumor and speculation lingered powerful memories of past  Sedes Vacantes.  For Gigli the overwhelming eruption of physical violence during the 1623  Sede Vacante  could only be conceived insofar as it superseded other instances in living memory: 

[N]o one alive could remember ever having seen a similar time. No day would go by without many conflicts, homicides, treacheries, many men and women found murdered in diverse locations, and many were found headless; and others similarly without a head were found thrown in the Tiber in this state; many houses were broken into at night and wretchedly robbed; doors were broken, women forced, others killed, others raped, and thus many maidens insulted, raped and 

161 

taken away. . . . The Caporione of Trastevere was stabbed while he was inspecting his district, and other Caporioni were many times in danger for their lives.4 

Obviously such outbreaks of violence cannot be understood in terms of a clearly directed target. In its pervasive and unpredictable level of conflict, involving not only bonds of patronage, employment, and service, but also neighborhood, religious community, friendship, and family, the  Sede Vacante  defies any obvious or unequivocal explanation. With the death of the pope many social and economic relations suddenly terminated, and city tribunals and papal courts came to a halt.5 Such extreme levels of uncertainty about the distribution of authority produced, conceptually at least, a void at all points where authority usually exerted its pressures. This moment brought both opportunity and threat and raised what at other times remained hidden, namely personal resentments, political rivalries, and even repressed desires. 

Yet the flow of rumor, while unpredictable in route and effect, also targeted existing conflicts. When, upon the 1644 election of Innocent X, Angelo Macerate was removed from his job as fiscal officer of the Campidoglio, apparently for his past mistreatment of the new papal nephew, the incident was reattributed to his practice of demanding payment from those who sought civic offices.6 Stories of revenge were ubiquitous, for example, Gigli’s account of Monsignor Cesarini who, upon learning of Urban VIII’s death, ran to the Campidoglio calling for vengeance against the Barberini and their supporters, and who managed, before being arrested, to insult, threaten, and drive out of the city Governor Spada.7 Accounts of the crowd that rushed up to the Campidoglio to destroy the statue of the most recent pope attest to people’s awareness of the collusive relations between papal and civic governments.8 It so happens that the death of Urban VIII coincided with controversial papal wars and recurrent shortages of grain. During the election that followed, all potential candidates were criticized for how they might deal with these conflicts once elected.9 According to Gigli rumors of the new pope’s intentions to increase the official size of a loaf of bread by two ounces and cut the milling tax prompted bakers to increase it by half an ounce in order to forestall this order.10 Rather than a state of chaos in which anything became possible—a world turned upside down—the  Sede Vacante  revealed specific conflicts but frequently through displaced actions. 

Once the new pope was elected, the fears and opportunities of this volatile time did not simply vanish. On the contrary, the anticipation of a future  Sede Vacante,  one that might come as unexpectedly as the last one ended, kept these possibilities on reserve. Indeed, the  Sede Vacante  operated as a symbolic time frame not only during its duration but also at other times. Forms of verbal exchange carried this potentiality, particularly through threats of future revenge. With this constant deferral of resolution, memories became crucial, activating both the fears of retribution and the pleasures of attainment. Any incident, plot, or  Sede Vacante  could resurface at any time and in unexpected and dangerous ways. 

During the first half of the seventeenth century the  Sede Vacante  changed decisively, especially through the escalation of urban violence. A new and more politicized form of papal election was introduced in 1605 under Leo XI, including secret voting and veto power held by three major Catholic powers, namely France, Spain, and the Roman empire.11 Scholars agree that these institutional changes prompted lengthier elections, impinging on urban relations and escalating tensions between the city and the College of Cardinals. At this moment the unpredictable movement of rumor and memories within urban space was crucial because it fed both fears and possibilities. While one can only rely on instances in which rumors were written down, by the diarist Gigli among others, it is evident that these produced not only the constant ruptures and unexpected conflicts but also moments of consolidation. 

In these ways, rumor resembled printing. Of course, printing was the means through which civic authorities conveyed orders and expanded their jurisdiction. And in the circulation of illicit opinions, print was rarely used since it was much more vulnerable to exposure.12 Print for the market also served papal authority by representing papal ritual and endowing it with the appearance of continuity and stability. Indeed, in Gerardi’s 1644  Triumphal Possesso of Our Lord Innocent X,  this is the purpose attached to the restaging of the coronation procession in print: 

We who by the particular grace of God have seen and have followed in this walk our Pontiff Innocent X from the Vatican to the Lateran with the aim of taking the usual possession, we can well boast of being able to narrate it to others, and I was granted permission to have it printed in order to commit it to eternal memory, that which with pleasure I have observed.13 

It has even been suggested that printing served to codify and regularize papal rituals while diminishing the importance of the actual performance.14 

Yet printing presented other opportunities, and these proved decisive in the changing relations of the  Sede Vacante.  In 1655, a few days after the College of Cardinals entered the conclave that followed the death of Innocent X, a pamphlet went on sale entitled  Complete Account of All That Occurred in the City of Rome during the Present Sede Vacante. 13 What sets this pamphlet apart from others describing  Sede Vacante  rituals is that its aim was to address a time of conflict in the city and to explain how such a crisis could be managed. One might well surmise that its very existence was directly connected to the particularly volatile experiences of the previous  Sede Vacante.  As a marketable commodity, this pamphlet both outlines the rituals sustaining political power and disrupts the presumed normality of these rituals by calling up memories of 1644. 

The account of the  Sede Vacante  starts with a description of a set of rituals that mask the interruption of the usual flow of power relations. For the reader these rites open a route through the city, a route along a political hierarchy and paved with visual pleasures: at the exact time that the Roman Senate rings the bell of the Campidoglio to announce the death of the pope, a guard of well-armed men is seen departing from 

this same piazza to the palaces of the cardinals, princes, and important nobles. Simultaneously, the papal Swiss guards, under the custody of Cardinal Antonio Barberini, ceremoniously close the gates to the city and to the papal palace of Monte Cavallo, while officers of the  Popolo Romano  open the gates of the prisons of the Campidoglio, Tor di Nona, and the Borgo, freeing all prisoners. Ritual is extended throughout the city when the  caporioni,  the civic officials elected to oversee Rome’s fourteen  rioni,  enter their district preceded by the playing of drums and the display of insignia. Finally, civic authority is reasserted within the individual household, with the affixing of notices throughout the city ordering that a light be set at a window each night, and that a man be sent out to survey around each house, “in order that the unrestrained also live during the  Sede Vacante  with the restrain of justice.”16 

While rituals of authority in the city are on display, those marking the end of the pope’s life—the procession at two-thirty in the morning from Monte Cavallo to San Pietro, and the ceremonies in the Cappella Paolina—are shrouded in mystery. The reader of the pamphlet is offered some account of these secretive rituals, but then is quickly returned to the efficacy of public ritual within the city: 

The eminent gentleman Cardinal Chamberlain and great almoner Antonio Barberini . . . organized the procedures and gave the orders so well, that never in the remembrance of men, nor in the memory of paper, has a  Sede Vacante  been seen to proceed so sweetly, peacefully, and quietly as this one; ... A tranquil commune has been produced out of a tempered liberty granted within the limits of what is just, with the posting of proper and erudite edicts that with great vigilance forestall accidental occurrences . . . Thus the games of vagabonds that usurped the place of the good in the piazzas were rightly driven away; and these were warned by extremely rigorous  bandi  so that they understand that within a few hours they must leave such a well governed city at a time so regardful and jealous.17 

Interestingly enough, ritual is linked to the reader’s pleasure in viewing—seeing the gates close or open, the ceremonial entrance of the  caporioni,  the burning candle at each window—while printed paper is linked to a secure city. But all rational measures are based on the memory of past incidents, which must be recalled in order to forestall potential conflict. Memories of the 1644  Sede Vacante  haunt the text and in these the reader must find the justification for the measures imposed during the present one. Urban disturbances of the past are located in that most open of urban spaces, the piazza, and with that most unstable of urban figures, the vagabond. But all reassurances that these measures will balance the need for order with the desire for liberty cannot assuage the implication that the “unrestrained” are still within, since by raising the anxiety in such memories the account cannot help but suggest their potentiality. After all, while the pamphlet seeks to constrain memory for the sake of social progress, its very ability to attract readers depends on the propitious and unexpected in urban space. This pamphlet, then, vacillates between the pleasures of orderly ritual and of dis- 

rupting rumor. It is important to recognize that the pamphlet is not situated within either of these spheres, for it is neither the voice of official discourse nor the voice of the street. As a marketable form, it carries to its reader something of the relationship between the two. My argument starts from the premise that printed materials contributed significantly to shifting conceptions of the  Sede Vacante,  precisely because of their marketing priorities. Pamphlets and images of election rituals, compendium on conclaves, and treatises on election procedures were sold at the time of the  Sede Vacante  itself, thus circulating ideas, rumors, and stories about the possibilities of the moment.18 I will consider three kinds of printed representations of the  Sede Vacante  that reveal new strategies to reach readers as well as a shift of orientation from local to international audiences. The 1605 print of Leo XI’s  possesso  offers a point of departure (see Figure 5.1). It is an image of triumph that brings closure to social uncertainty and simultaneously activates a process of negotiation within urban politics. It so happens that 1605 also proved decisive for the marketing of prints on the papal election itself. Thus the conclave prints that followed the sudden death of Leo XI provide my third example, for these give new resonance to urban disruption, by defining it within innovative visual vocabularies and by bringing it into tension with papal authority (see 

Figure 5.1. Antonio de Paulis,  The Solemn Cavalcade Undertaken In Rome for Pope Leo XTs Possesso of S. Giovam Laterano,  Rome, 1605. Gabinetto Comunale delle Stampe. 

Figures 5.2-5.4). In between is the extraordinary production of celebratory pamphlets that followed the 1644 election of Innocent X. If these produce an excess of royal presence within the city, they also contain within them, at times quite explicitly, vestiges of urban conflict and uncertainty. But these pamphlets do not simply reveal the increasingly volatile relations between the papacy and the city, they also relocate these concerns within touristic interests. 

Leo XI’s  Possesso  and the Negotiation of Social Order 

The transition from a time of uncertainty to a time of order was inscribed by the pope’s  possesso,   both as it was enacted on the street and restaged in pamphlets and single-sheet prints.19 The procession itself was curiously detached from actual social shifts in the city, since it always took place a few months or, on occasion, even a year after the election of the pope.20 Even so, this performance of transition was itself an actual moment of political negotiation, enabling the opportunity to forge new relations between city and pope. The rituals of the  possesso   certainly reasserted the pope’s place at the center of a much larger empire, transforming the cityscape itself into the 

Figure 5.2. Giovanni Maggi,  Plan of the Conclave,  Giovanni Orlandi, Rome, 1605. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

Figure 5.3. Antonio de Paulis,  Plan of the Conclave,  Rome, 1605. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

geopolitical world of Latin Christendom.21 Yet of all papal coronation rituals, the por- sesso,  literally the “taking of possession,” acknowledged the pope’s role as the city’s own bishop and dealt most directly with the obligations that bound one to the other. In his analysis of the royal entry, Louis Marin has noted that it was “both a means of maintaining the monarchical aura and of ritually opening a political and institutional dialogue between sovereign and city’s inhabitants.”22 The papal  possesso  activated such a dialogue, and its effectiveness depended on city participation as well as on how it was represented for wider circulation. The route of the procession, starting at San Pietro and ending at the bishop’s throne in San Giovanni Laterano, was marked with lavish temporary decoration that served as points of encounter. The mutual recognition enacted between the pope and sectors of the city was enforced as well as avidly pursued. In fact, the eager participation of prominent people frequently impinged on the route, which was established through tradition but was always open to contingency. 

The 1605  possesso  of Leo XI introduced more than the usual share of unforeseen circumstances, starting with the participation of the city’s Florentine community at the election of a Medici pope.23 The  Popolo Romano,  which usually spent more funds 

Figure 5.4. Nicolas van Aelst,  Plan of the Conclave,  Rome, 1605. Gabinetto Comunale del le Stampe. 

on this performance than on any other single item, negotiated a particularly elaborate exchange of honors with the new pope.24 In Alveri’s 1664  Rome in Every State,  the account of Leo XI’s pontificate is entirely concerned with the coronation ceremonies, particularly with the pope’s strategic arrangements: 

[H]e donated to his family 25,000  scudi,  so that they would make honors at that function, wishing his court to be as splendid as possible in accordance with what he had promised to do with the  Popolo Romano,  which made for him no ordinary honors; but as if perhaps the people of Rome in particular were not worthy of so much good, it pleased the Lord that quickly he died; because having gone to take the  possesso  according to custom on the second day of Easter to the universal pleasure of all people, it transpired that due to fatigue from that function and having sweated, he got a fever that continuing to advance took his life, after having reigned only 25 days the year 1605 without having created any cardinals.25 

Ironically, all efforts to construct a new political network were undone by the performance itself, which led to the pope’s death. Yet the opportunities opened up by the  possesso  did not end with the procession itself or even with the death of Leo XI. For 

An analysis of Antonio de Paulis’s print of Leo XI’s  possesso  will show how the attempt to define a collective only accentuated its particular inclinations and exclusions.31 In this image, the unified body of the procession unfolds as it crosses and curves around the printed page. It is held together by points of departure and arrival and by markers along the way, but these are not permitted to disrupt the shape formed through processional movement. All individuals, while identified through order and inscription, become intermeshed and generate meaning collectively.32 In the print, unlike the street, the overall shape of the procession becomes totally clear. The position offered to viewers is much more controlling; it calls up the performance and all of its parts simultaneously and for as long as desired. This viewpoint allows social distinctions to emerge as forcefully as during the performance. In fact, the identity of the participants is inscribed in texts that not only elucidate precedence in the procession, but also divide and order the processional flow. 

The minute differences of processional order were also embedded in the format of  possesso  printed pamphlets. Even more than single-sheet prints, these focus on local relations, devoting many pages to listing the participants in the order in which they appeared in the procession. This is certainly the orientation of Bartolomeo Bonfadino’s pamphlet,  Order Kept in Accompanying Our Lord Pope Leo XI for the Possesso of San Giovanni Laterano , which has three of its eight pages taken up by such a list.33 While useful in deciphering the street performance itself, this component was primarily of 

interest to those involved in the performance’s intricate politics. Both pamphlets on Leo XI’s  possesso  raise the question of order among the Roman nobility as a problem that necessitated unusual strategies. In Bonfadino’s publication, for instance, the apparent disorder of this part of the procession is attributed to the unpredictable interpretation of order: “And because these Lord Barons, to eradicate the opportunity of rumors about the precedence of place moved confusedly, I have listed them without order in the cavalcade.”34 Within the topical pamphlet, or even the single-sheet print, the particularities of the event were foregrounded, complying with the expectations of immediacy and disclosure, but also of accuracy by insiders who were prepared to insert corrections by hand. 

If the question of order became something of an obsession in these processions, it was because the event carried within it the anxieties of the  Sede Vacante  itself. The pamphlets served not only to correct inaccuracies or ambiguities in relation to the event itself, but also to fix the ephemeral performance within a specific social order. Actual urban space enters into representation to demarcate this new order. The route of the  possesso  was not determined simply by practical considerations or by tradition. Rather it was highly attentive to associations already inscribed within urban space. It so happens that the general route favored in the early seventeenth century started at the piazza of San Pietro, traversed the Borgho Nuovo to the Castel Sant’Angelo, and, after crossing the river, kept to Via Papale. On this street, it crossed the Banchi and the Piazza of Pasquino, eventually reaching the piazza of the church of II Gesu. At this point, the procession moved out of the urbanized center and onto the open fields of the Roman fora, so that once it passed the Campidoglio, it encountered the various triumphal arches embellished for the occasion. These were strategically allocated. The Arch of Titus, which represented the ancient capture of Jerusalem and the removal to Rome of the Temple’s treasures, was assigned to the Jewish communities. For Leo XI’s procession, however, the  Popolo Romano  petitioned and was granted the privilege of decorating this arch. 

In the pamphlets, the decorations along the route are described in remarkable detail and apart from other aspects of the procession. These descriptions extricate the elaborate temporary arches and structures from their ephemeral status within the performance. While Gigli frequently notes that many of the decorations were unfinished at the time of the  possesso,^  in topical pamphlets they are represented as complete and permanent. This is not to say that all are treated equally. Pamphlets focus on some street decorations at the expense of others, bringing further nuances to the new social order. Not surprisingly both pamphlets on Leo XI’s  possesso  start with and give most prominence to the arch set up by the Florentine community at the entrance of their neighborhood, the Banchi. In each instance, a detailed description of the figures on the arch, their exact locations, and accompanying Latin inscriptions is followed by a politically charged account of how these elements were situated within urban space. For instance, the personifications of Magnanimity and Religion are said to have faced 

the Florentine side of the Banchi, while Liberty and Justice faced the papal side of the Ponte Sant’Angelo. Another nearby decoration, the front of the pharmacy of Marc’ Antonio Ciappi, is discussed at length. Both texts also attend to the triumphal arch erected at the exit of the Campidoglio “painted of gold by the hand of Cavalliero Giuseppe d’Arpino,” and the adulatory inscription posted by the Popolo Romano on the Arch of Titus. Only Facciotto’s discusses the decoration of Pasquino, next to which Lillus Gioiosa installed an elaborate structure representing the golden age with a portrait of the king of France “that was much admired.” And only Bonfadino’s mentions the decoration of the Arch of Septimius Severus by Jewish Romans, which included verses in Hebrew with Latin equivalents.36 

Thus the restaging of the performance readjusted its urban terrain both in pamphlets that claimed to be comprehensive and in single-sheet prints that offered the visualization of absolute political power through citywide collectivity. Indeed, one of the interesting aspects of the print of Leo XI’s  possesso  is the way this collectivity is framed by urban space. While in pamphlets urban space is fragmented, especially by the autonomy of the descriptions of temporary decorations, processional images insist on the coherence of the route. In this print the processional body emerges within a very particular sequence of decorations. The procession starts not at San Pietro but at the monumental arch of the Florentines in the Banchi. Moreover, two locations appropriated by private citizens are foregrounded. These, Ciappi’s pharmacy and the space around Pasquino, are included to bring greater presence to the initial, Florentine-oriented part of the route. Thus in this encounter betwee n the royal and  t he civic body,  it is a Florentine monarchy that seeks the subjection of the city of Rome. And as if this new collective body was not enough to secure the new Medici pope, a family papal genealogical tree surmounts the whole procession. In a curious conflation of family and papal dynastic lineage, the four Medici popes, in chronological order from left to right, frame the centralized Medici papal arms. Given the constant disruption of papal authority, and of Medici intervention within Roman politics, it is a  bold if n ot somewhat desperate declaration of continuity. 

In Leo XI’s image of  possesso,  supporters are present by implication, through the street decorations. Pamphlets, on the other hand, tend to include proof of the success of the event by inserting an account of the enthusiastic participation of a wide range of spectators. Unlike the description of street decorations, this part of the text required some attempt to capture the transience of the event. Bonfadino’s pamphlet describes spectators on the street, but as the excess of courtly procession, emphasizing the display of precious materials and carriages that followed the procession all the way to San Giovanni.37 Facciotto’s, however, takes a different approach, underscoring a citywide community that emerges from the street: 

And the noise from the incredible number of people that were on the street from 

San Pietro to San Giovanni Laterano was so great, and between shouting Viva 

Leone XI, and the salvos fired by the soldiers of the  Popolo Romano  from Castel 

Sant’Angelo, from the Campidoglio, and other private places through which it passed that one could hardly be heard when speaking to another, and this continued to increase from the sound of bells that rang from all the churches, and the trumpets and drums that also accompanied the cavalcade.38 

It is usual to gauge the success of the procession by the level of engagement of its spectators, and here the blending of sound turns individuals and groups into the “people,” and perhaps provides a counter to the disruption implied by rumors about the order of the procession. 

This section of the pamphlets tends to reveal the momentary and idiosyncratic aspects of the event. In the competitive Roman print market, claims of topicality and specificity were increasingly crucial, and in this regard the  possesso  print’s constraining format may have been out of step with changing expectations. For instance, Faccioto’s pamphlet on Paul V’s 1605  possesso  starts with an unusual account of the struggle by guards on horses to clear the street of unexpected impediments.39 Printed notices posted before these events reveal that a constant problem for the organizers was the inability of the procession to move on the street with any sense of unity. In the pamphlet such a revelation might challenge the credibility of the event, but it also validates the representation itself, since with notions of veracity and immediacy publishers targeted readers beyond those present at the performance. All sorts of unexpected details slip in between the conventionalized parts of the accounts, and it is here that the competition for readers, who are presumed to take a more self-conscious approach to this event, emerges. In fact, Faccioto’s pamphlet on Leo XI’s  possesso  insists that the preparations were rushed since the pope decided to undertake the  possesso  too quickly. Orlandi’s account of Paul V’s  possesso  reveals the urgency of bringing the  Sede Vacante  to a close, given that Leo XI’s reign had been so short.40 The question of time, be it urgent, too short, or too long, increasingly infiltrates all attempts to turn the papal  possesso  into a timeless monument. 

Topical Pamphlets and the 1644 Coronation Rituals 

With the end of the extremely volatile 1644  Sede Vacante,  the marketing of topical pamphlets took a decisive turn. First of all, instead of the usual two or three, at least fourteen separate pamphlets went on sale.41 All celebrate the coming of a new ruler, but most are unable to delimit their discussion. With increased claims to the immediacy of its view, the pamphlet offered glimpses of the troubled conditions of the  Sede Vacante  itself. A pamphlet entitled  Description of the Ceremonies Undertaken Inside and Outside the Conclave  is typical in arguing for an account unobstructed by the form through which it is presented: 

It will be made understood to you, how the present description is not described by the author to make a beautiful discourse to you, to fill up a folio, and with pretty words tell you thousands of lies; but only to make you note that which truly has occurred, and otherwise I could not tell you this if I had not been there in person.42 

Yet publishers, in their rush to exploit the highly charged moment of this  Sede Vacante,  also circulated pamphlets and prints on the  possesso  even before it had been staged. Gigli, in his account of this  Sede Vacante,  is quite explicit about the implications of this attempt to exploit a ready market: 

The cavalcade of the possession of the pope was printed in figures, and described in printed accounts by three or four people, and no one told the truth, and it was printed before it was done, and it is shameful that so many lies were allowed to be printed, and particularly in the description of the costumes of the Roman magistrate.43 

For Gigli, the inaccuracies of costume render the publications generally suspect, but his annoyance at errors of this kind is not detached from his insider’s position within the  Popolo Romano. 

Evidently, other kinds of readers were targeted through these seemingly contradictory approaches. Certainly, the marketing of images and texts on the papal  possesso  at the event itself brought into question any claims of accuracy and immediacy. Yet it also allowed readers to follow the street performance and even relate it to the city as a whole. In other words, these publications began to fulfill some of the same functions as guidebooks by contextualizing particular observations within a coherent whole. Moreover, this marketing strategy had other incentives, for publishers now sought a broader and more detached market. For instance, images of both the conclave and of the  possesso  of Paul V appear in the 1614 inventory of prints available in the shop of Andrea and Michelangelo Vaccari.44 The increasing longevity of  Sede Vacante  imagery signals a change from readers with primary interest in the event itself to readers with primary interest in the printed representation of the event. 

Yet publications on the  Sede Vacante  also shifted, however tacitly and indirectly, the interest in papal ritual from its function of solidifying the change of power to its struggle against unpredictable urban space. Without departing from the standard format that includes the order of the procession and the description of the temporary decorations, many pamphlets stress the importance of the event by evoking the recent moment of crisis. Expanding on the effects of the procession upon its disinterested spectators, Gerardi’s  Festive Rome on the Election of the New Pontiff Is more concerned with putting an end to the  Sede Vacante  than with the actual election of the new pope: 

[I]n the vacancy of the Apostolic See because of the death of Urban VIII, a time in which the ship of the church was agitated by stormy waves that threatened to submerge it. It pleased divine mercy at the end of the forty ninth day to console its people with joy at such a happy elevation of Innocent X. ... At the firing done at the Castello to give the usual sign of the election of the pontiff, all the churches immediately sounded to rejoice and the people all jubilant ran madly through the streets, shouting, Viva pope Innocent X. ... [I] t was necessary that the soldiers of the most excellent Lord Duke Savelli, Perpetual Marshall of the Holy Church for 

the security of the conclave and the peace of the city, shut the fences to keep behind the very people that impatient because of happiness ran in great numbers to the Vatican palace to see their prince.45 

An intriguing slippage emerges between the celebrating public and the unruly crowd that threatens the  Sede Vacante.  The new pope has been elected, but the specter of social disorder has not disappeared, called up through the very conventions used to demonstrate compliance with authority, but which now raise anxieties about the potential for insurrection all too recently faced. 

The pamphlets of the 1644  possesso  of Innocent X find ways of managing this anxiety, and these have more to do with changing readerships than with the political implications of the  Sede Vacante.  They not only evoke and thus accentuate the moment of urban crisis, but also secure it through festivities and the monumentalization of urban space. From Briccio’s pamphlet one might even think that the  possesso  itself, and not simply its printed representations, was now staged for an entirely new audience: “Rome was entirely filled of many foreigners who attended to look at this cavalcade, which is a rare thing to see, and for its nobility greatly regarded, and worthy of consideration. ” 46 

Indeed, several of the pamphlets alter the established format to come up with an account that is more descriptive and expansive about urban space itself. Bonelli’s  Copious and Complete Account of the Cavalcade  announces its interests on the title page in the manner of a guidebook (“With machinery, designs of arches, histories, statues, declarations, mottoes, impresses, paintings, joys, feasts, celebrations, and fireworks made in Rome punctually on this day”)47 and integrates all the usual separate parts into a narrative that unfolds within a sequence of artistic and historical sites. Instead of the temporary decorations described in accounts of the procession of Leo XI, the pamphlet focuses on celebrated sites in recent tourist itineraries. In fact, the account resembles nothing more than the guided tour of the city provided by the recently published  In Search of Rome: 

Passing Pasquino it came through the street directly towards the Massimi, and passed in front of Sant’Andrea, and then in front of the palace of the Lord Pietro della Valle, and turned towards the palace of the most Excellent Lord Duke Cesarini and from there came to the piazza of the Gesü, and started towards the steps of the Campidoglio upon which the Roman Lords had raised two stucco statues on the porfid lions; the right one was Peaceful Rome with two crowns of olive in hand and one on the head . . . the pontiff went ahead and passed the arch of Titus decorated by the Jews, and from this arch to the end of the wall towards the Coliseum, and upon tapestry cloths were posted in the Hebrew language and Latin many prophecies.48 

Gerardi’s  Triumphal Possesso  also offers a coherent urban itinerary, and the description of touristic interests is extended well beyond their pertinence to the papal  posses- 

so.  But artistic interests are also intertwined with the unpredictable in urban space, and in one instance the memory of urban violence is raised through the account of a statuette that both simulates and mocks the nearby statue of Pasquino: 

Continuing the journey, having passed the palace of the Lord Duke Cesarini... in the corner opposite his palace is the workshop of an excellent and ingenious master carver of figures and other things in wood, called Andrea di Cortona. This master makes wooden statuettes that serve as model for the connoisseurs and students of painting. Every day he displays one of his statues in the window of his shop, always varying the pose or movement, so that every day the meaning changes. As a result the curious passersby call it little Pasquino; and for the procession that His Holiness has made, this witty artisan placed his statue on a little platform upon a beautiful crimson damask, in the act of thanking heaven for the end of the war. In its hand it held a crown of olive leaves and it trampled underfoot various weapons. These were exhibited in a fine arrangement and on one side an even smaller Pasquino was breaking in two a lance or pike to signify the end of war.49 

Evidently the shift toward a different more touristically inclined reader did not do away with interest in the moment of crisis. The decorative ensemble brings forth this interest, although displaced onto artistic endeavors as well as the transgressive practices of Pasquino. 

Ultimately, however, it is the unprecedented importance of the Piazza Navona in these pamphlets that signals a change of orientation. Providing the supreme point of arrival in all celebratory pamphlets, this piazza becomes the climax of touristic and  possesso  descriptions alike. It is in Piazza Navona that papal claims become fully located in urban space and, as will be argued in the following chapter, they did so by intersecting with publishing and tourist prerogatives. 

The Relocation of the Conclave Print 

Before interest in the volatility of urban space was transformed through a touristic vrewTcoiLcIave prints had addressed it directly. The conclave print, a cartographic iniägerepresenting the organization of the enclosure within which the papal election would take place, was put on the market at the beginning of the  Sede Vacante.  In the sixteenth century it was used to define the impenetrable sphere of the conclave. But a cluster of 1605 prints shifts this focus, turning it to the charged boundary between the Vatican and the city. They are unusual, both in number and in kind, and deploy a mixture of visual vocabularies (cartographic, processional, narrative, allegorical) to rework the notion of the conclave beyond a cartographic sketch. In these images the conclave emerges as an in-between space, one that opens views into the time between the death of one pope and the election of another, the space between the Vatican and the city, and the relation between official control and urban volatility. These images participate in competing notions of the boundary and extend its possibilities, even 

turning it into a new frontier. In effect, attention shifts from what must be kept within the conclave to what must be confronted within the unrestrained city. 

The circumstances surrounding Leo XI’s election and sudden death in 1605 seem to have prompted the reconfiguration of the previously unassuming conclave print. The very effort to bring the Medici pope—and the Florentine community—-into prominence had activated a network of publishing and political alliances. As noted, at the time of Leo XI’s death, only twenty-seven days after his election, an unusually large number of prints and pamphlets pertaining to his election were still in production. Giovanni Maggi and the publisher Giovanni Orlandi had joined forces on two prints pertaining to Leo XI’s  possesso  and now came up with an unusual reworking of the standard  Plan of the Conclave,  again dedicated to Massiliano Cafarelli. Antonio de Paulis, who had published the major print of Leo XI’s  possesso,  produced concurrently another elaborated version of the conclave, probably in conjunction with the same printmaker. In addition, the well-established Flemish publisher Nicolas van Aelst brought out a third possibility (see Figures 5.2-5.4).50 While the production of these prints no longer involved Florentine patronage, the success of the Leo XI election prints and pamphlets may have led publishers to presume a ready and eager market. 

Yet this conclave imagery, which would reappear during the  Sede Vacante  of 1644 together with other representations of urban unrest, is inconceivable without a shift in attitude toward the  Sede Vacante  itself. The quick recurrence of the  Sede Vacante  brought an imminence to the memories of urban unrest and conflict that was unprecedented. News reports from ambassadors in Rome insist that the level of street violence during the election of Leo XI had been unusual.51 Now, confusion between factions within the College of Cardinals, and the necessity of confronting yet another phase of urban upheaval, led to contradictory rumors on how the pope had died and on who was favored by whom in the upcoming election.52 Thus the elaboration of the conclave print counts on an intensified sense of the possibilities and burdens of the  Sede Vacante. 

If scholars have considered conclave prints at all, it is within the category of papal election rituals.55 But the most significant aspect of the development of the conclave print is its intriguing relation to the unpredictable duration of the  Sede Vacante.  The prints produced in relation to the  Sede Vacante  appear to be strictly divided between the Vatican, the site of the conclave print, and the city of Rome, the site of the  possesso  print. Of course, both sets of rituals interlinked Rome and the Vatican, and each type of representation necessarily implies that which lies on the other side. It is by making this relation overt that the 1605 prints shifted established expectations. In effect, while the titles retain the idea of mapping and protecting an internalized election process, and while the prints permit this reading, the images consistently raise the question of the relation between the internal space and its outside. 

The boundary between city and Vatican was always at work but became forcefully demarcated during the  Sede Vacante.  This division was asserted through official regulation, which as soon as the pope died was rigidly divided between the College of Cardinals in the Borgo and the Popolo Romano in the city.56 The responsibility of controlling the border of the conclave had in fact become one of the privileges of a member of the Roman aristocracy who held the keys to the main entrance at the end of the Scala Regia, and who headed the militia guarding all exchanges between the two sides.57 In pamphlets the conclave is described entirely in terms of points of limit.58 In fact the very titles of these publications highlight the inside/outside divide. In the 1644  Description of the Ceremonies Undertaken Inside and Outside the Conclave, Before and After the Creation of the Supreme Pontiff Innocent X,  the description of the conclave’s boundary is precise: 

Firstly, where the wheels were located, very good guards were posted by the most Excellent Prince Savelli, as custodian of the conclave. . . . On the Piazza of San Pietro there were four corps of guards of conscripted soldiers posted by the most Excellent Lord Taddeo Barberini, as general of the Holy Church. . . . On the stairs of the Apostolic Palace, facing the piazza, the Swiss Guards of Our Lord made an enclosure of tables with two bodies of guards, and another inside the cortile of the first gate, and at the stairs through which one goes down to San Pietro there were at the same time two others. The conclave was enclosed with bricks and all doors sealed, each infinitesimal opening, and also the windows and little windows of the loggia were walled leaving at the top an aperture of four or five  palmi,  with its coverings made of cloth, some entirely nailed, others not.59 

Such intricate layers of screens and partitions take the reader to the ultimate point of exclusion. And here at this point, the new conclave prints begin to do their work. Giovanni Maggi’s  Plan of the Conclave  offers its pleasures by confronting the limits of access. Of the three images here under consideration, this print is most forceful in defining a clear set of boundaries and maintaining a precise division between inside and outside. It categorizes and distinguishes spatial differences rigorously, so much so 

that the ground plan of the Vatican palace retains the autonomy of a cartographic representation, while the narrative scenes and objects of display are clearly contained within their own compartments, and all are strictly divided from the text. The map is laid out to display all of the boundaries of the papal complex and includes precise indications of the points of entry, with the most external points shown to be guarded by the Swiss soldiers whose weapons are also on view. The locations of the wheels through which things were transported into the conclave are also clearly noted on the map. 

The print heightens the sense of exclusion as it simultaneously offers glimpses into the interior, glimpses that fixate on the intimate life of the extraordinary body of power, the cardinal. The compartments at the top right presents a sequence in the building of chambers for the cardinals, from the bare structural beams to the final impenetrable cell. Thus the image constructs the concealment of the inside in the mode  kJ'  of scientific knowledge and is excessive in its exclusion of the outside world through the accumulation of walls, doors, draperies, and boarded windows. The symbolic resonance of the wall, becoming the focus of rumor threatening the security of the election process, cannot be overestimated. Gigli, for instance, recounts several stories of bricklayers who both built and transgressed the protective wall.60 Even the smallest crevice could enable the leaking of illicit information and the circulation of information with unforeseen repercussions: 

And it came to be even if the name of the new pope was not yet known, a bricklayer showed himself through the crack of the conclave shouting, viva Pope Innocent, and some having misunderstood, said that Crescendo had been made Pope, and thus began a great commotion, and many people rushed to the house of Cardinal Crescentio, celebrating with great joyfulness, since in fact the people desired this to be the truth. But then hearing that the pope was a Pamphili, the people were uncertain and did not celebrate, because he was held to be a severe man and not very liberal.61 

In Maggi’s print, the building of protective layers and its penetration is further fetishized through the display of the objects to be included within each of the cardinal chambers, all laid out in the manner of a display chart, and listed one by one in the accompanying text. A similar kind of classificatory display and textual amplification is used to represent the food provided for each cardinal. Narrative scenes accompany this didactic exposition; one shows the bringing of the food and the other the congregation of cardinals at work on choosing a pope. The minute details of the everyday, rather than formal rituals and ceremonies, have primary interest, for it is here that intrigue and possibility are situated. Indeed, the heightening of the boundary had increasingly been defined in terms of bodily threat, but to those inside. Since the threat of outside influence demanded physical enclosure, with between fifty to seventy cardi- 

nals housed in a highly compressed and unventilated space, the repercussions to health, particularly during summer months, became serious indeed. In August 1623 Gigli reports that most of the cardinals got very ill, many had to leave the seclusion, and at least six died during the following weeks.62 One of these was Cardinal Gozzadino, who had once had an astrologer predict that he would die in prison, and reportedly stated on his deathbed that the conclave had indeed been a wretched prison for him and many others. In Maggi’s image it is the immediacy of the body that is dissected through text and images, focusing attention on its health, comfort, and protection. 

By comparison, the print published by Antonio de Paulis defines a more permeable relationship between the inside and outside, and this emerges in the intersections of its multiple visual vocabularies. The ground plan appears as an actual cartographic print, simulated as a sheet of paper that scrolls upward at the ends to reveal but also conceal the representational space of the narrative beneath. Initially it is this interplay between revelation and concealment that activates the boundary. Certainly the display of the process of concealment, through the inclusion of a model of the cardinal cell, is used. But this interest in hidden spaces is only there to bring emphasis to its points of entry. What the image ultimately foregrounds is the possibility of penetrating the boundary of the conclave and does so by opening up the cartographic space to the movements of the body. The map scrolls up to show, through various three-dimensional renderings of areas of the Vatican, the approach to these points of entry, and all are imaged as processional movements: cardinals enter the conclave, a confraternity crosses the Piazza of San Pietro to enter the basilica, and a group of people bring food to the cardinals. Bodies in collective movement activate the site of the boundary and none more so than the remarkably lengthy procession extended across the lower right side of the print. Here the line of bodies leads the eye to a detailed representation of the wheel and its function of overseeing the passage of things into the conclave. A typical 1644 pamphlet brings to this daily activity the level of detail accorded to any ceremonial ritual: 

There were seven wheels in diverse parts, and through these entered the food brought in this order. First came two grooms of that cardinal to whom the meal was being brought, with two maces decorated on the handles with the arms of their patrons, and next the mace bearer with the silver mace and other gentlemen, then followed the steward with a tablecloth on his shoulder followed by two grooms who carried in hand cups with different delicacies, and a silver food-warmer, two others with meat, two others with knapsacks, and two others with the bottle carrier. . . . After putting the food inside, a cursor, assisting on this occasion in a violet costume, with his silver mallet closed the wheel, and the assisting prelate turned it to make sure the wheel was well closed, and then the lock was sealed with a paper, and the same is done on the inside by the masters of ceremonies.63 

The print itself indicates the crucial location of the wheels. And indeed, it is the bringing of food that is used to fetishize the point of exchange between the outside and the internalized space of the cardinals. 

Within this complex set of entries, the most elaborated appears on the lower left. The Castel Sant’Angelo and the basilica of San Pietro are shown as a continuous space articulated in part by the movement of processional bodies. The former, the symbol of papal military might, is on display not for its overall distinctive shape but for its sequence of complicated gateways, barriers, and blockades. As the inserted text makes entirely explicit, these obstructions seal the entry into all the “borghi,” the main streets of the district. Thus here is an extension of the boundary outward from the Vatican itself, now directly in contact with the city. This contact emerges with the bodily movements of three different processions. From one side of the Castel Sant’Angelo prisoners are set free and process outward onto the city side. From the side of the basilica, the cardinals move into the conclave, and finally the lengthy processional body of the confraternity occupies the in-between space, marking out and thus linking the castle to the basilica, which in turn links the conclave to the space of the city. This ritualized bodily movement marks out not only space but also time. Some movement refers to the beginning, for instance, the entry of the cardinals into the conclave or the freeing of the prisoners. But the linking of these bodies to the Castel Sant’Angelo, shown firing cannons which, as the inscription states, is a ritual that announces the election of a new pope, also inscribes the end. Meanwhile, the processors bringing food and the confraternity visits are daily occurrences, repetitive and pointing to the time in-between. Thus the processional body fills in the divide between city and Vatican just as it fills the entire time of the  Sede Vacante,  which like procession itself conflates the beginning, middle, and end. 

It is through a heightening of the physical boundary of the conclave that this image begins to suggest the time and space of uncertainty. Even in Maggi’s print, there is some necessity to show what lies outside the enclosure, not only of the Vatican but also beyond the Borgo. The city is pictured within the space at the entrance to Ponte Sant’Angelo, not coincidentally the space around the church of San Lorenzo in Damaso, the Florentine neighborhood. And it is in terms of ritual, the obligatory processions undertaken by religious orders and confraternities throughout the time of the  Sede Vacante,  that the city is given presence. This is not the case with the de Paulis print, which draws on the processional body to suggest the permeability of the boundary, but which also pictures another site of encounter. On the upper right of the image the cartographic map curls just at the point of another entry wheel and reveals the formation of military forces on guard. These were, of course, a constant presence during the time of the  Sede Vacante,  and the print represents three hundred soldiers of Duke Savello and the horse guard, all in fighting formation, ready to protect the conclave. Like the release of the prisoners, shown on the lower left-hand corner, 

these scenes extend the boundaries of the conclave in the other direction, to the spaces of the city and its potential for violence and insurrection. 

This group of conclave prints is situated within the process of exchange, rumor, and leaked information defining this border, and their interests shift between revealing the internal spaces of the election and the unpredictable and unseen spaces of the city. By all accounts the boundary of the conclave was a focus of intense attention throughout the time of the election, with the outside edges usually occupied by people whose relation to the election was not always obvious. As a particular kind of public space, the border held people who, intentionally or not, gained fragments of information and circulated it within the city. During the chaotic conclave that followed Leo XI’s death, when political alliances were in confusion due to the recent election, fights broke out within the crowds that gathered at the entrance of the conclave, and all sorts of reports spread through the city. The move of information from one side to the other was constant, but the repercussions of this information tended to emerge in the city. In 1644 accounts that Cardinal Sacchetti was about to be elected resulted in a near riot at his family palace, while in 1623 the news of Urban VIII’s election spread through the city before the ballot was finalized, and prompted the story that the new pope had taken his particular name due to his special affection for Rome.64 

I turn now to the third image under consideration, the  Plan of the Conclave  published by Nicolas van Aelst, which more than the others shifts the focus of representation to the exchange between the Vatican and the city, and even to the space of the city itself. In this image no divisions between its different visual vocabularies are retained. Thus the cartographic space is infiltrated on all sides by multiple narrative scenes, which are not contained within compartments but come to overwhelm the schematic rendition of the Vatican palace. Once again the expected information on the location of the cardinals during the election is included, but bodily movement now appears to overwhelm the certainties conveyed through the cartographic vocabulary. I would argue that the processional mode itself breaks down and unpredictable movements begin to threaten the boundary. Certainly this is an image of the conclave entirely defined through bodily movement and its possibilities. On the left a solid processional body winds around the page and has as its counterpart a procession moving from the lower right side toward the center. The first of these processions comes to a stop at the temporary fence, which is guarded by cannons and armed guards and is surrounded by observers and carriages. Even street sellers are shown taking advantage of the opportunity for trade that such a temporary congregation might bring. In fact, it is the presence of unidentified people around the much-guarded boundaries of the conclave that is surprising. At the center of the image people congregate at crucial points of entry and exchange: a crowd stands aimlessly around the fountain, clusters of guards pass the time gambling and are distracted from their duties, and people just stand or sit around and watch without partaking of any ritual or task pertaining to the 

conclave. It is these loiterers, watchers, and strategists that in diverse ways contribute to the constant movement of rumor outward and back again, from conclave to city. Thus Gigli, in his account of the difficult 1644 conclave, recounts: 

On the thirtieth of August rumors were raised that Cardinal Barberini was doing whatever he could to make Sacchetti pope; for the people were not pleased because they feared a similar Pontificate to that of Urban VIII. On the thirty-first the announcement of Sacchetti was expected, and many in the courtyard of the palace with the cistern shouted in loud voices, Do not make Pope Sacchetti or Rome will be sacked.65 

Equally intriguing is the image’s bold move out of the vicinity of the Vatican. If the left side of the print seems well contained by the curving procession, the right side breaks down entirely with the overt display of conflict and violence. In proximity to the clusters of people that loiter around the edges of the Vatican, one finds a startling image of conflict. Cut by the edge of the image but implying its continuity beyond this frame, the large and highly armed forces of the heads of the  none  engage in sword-fights, some victims already shown collapsing on the ground. The inscription situates this scene of explicit conflict within the nightly activities of the heads of the  none  and their armed troops as they seek to curtail criminal deeds. The move then is onto the city itself, and to the particularly threatening possibilities of the night. Thus, on the edges of the print, the infiltration of unpredictable transgression call up the possibilities present elsewhere through the suggestive activating of the boundary. 

In effect, this image is all about the time of waiting, a time of plots, suppositions, and opportunities. People bide their time, waiting to participate in the circulation of rumor and the seepage of possibilities across boundaries. Within this unpredictable flow the city becomes a kind of frontier, which is to say a space conceived of as in need of conquest. As remarkable as are the images of urban violence, the attempt to bring visual form to rumor’s unpredictable trajectories is even more noteworthy. Rumor is the rupturing of the boundary that cannot be met with a well-armed force or stabilized through repetitious processions. And the blank oval space on the upper left, to be filled by a portrait of the newly elected pope, is a pointed reminder of what is at stake in the passage of time and the unpredictable circulation of rumor. 

While the symbolism of impenetrable seclusion sustained a political system in which negotiation, collusion, and manipulation worked on multiple fronts, it also was a displacement of the fear and anxiety of the city itself.66 After the &lt;vents of 1644] when publishers reactivated the format of the 1605 conclave prints, distinctive narrative moments replaced the repetition of the processional format. In the conclave prints of 1655 the tendency is to divide the image into separate narrative compartments, and in this way these become more contained and standardized. But as emerges in Louis Rouhier’s print published by Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi, these also are less likely to occupy the cartographic or topographic renderings of the Vatican and 

the Castel Sant’Angelo, and instead enact the presence of urban unrest (see Figure 5.5). At the center of this image is the aggressively armed horse guard, in attitudes of attack and facing outward, as if moving out from the boundaries of the Vatican. Extending the picture space further toward the city, compartments are accommodated that show people on foot and equally armed, facing the most threatening space and time. According the inscription, these are: “Heads of the  none  that in the  Sede Vacante  go through the city at night with many armed people.”67 Thus the boundary of the conclave now confronts another frontier, the multiple and unknown possibilities opened up by urban space during its most opaque time. It is the city that has become the most tantalizing site of concealment. 

The 1655  Possesso  Print of Alexander VII 

And what about the  possesso  print—how did this type of image respond to shifting representations of the urban space of the  Sede Vacante ? In 1655 Rome’s prominent publisher Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi put out a print of Alexander VII’s  possesso.69. 

Figure 5.5. Louis Rouhier,  Plan of the Conclave,  Rome, 1655. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

Etched by Rouhier, the large-scale image is sophisticated in execution but keeps to the conventional format with which to display a coherent processional body, its order of movement, and its excesses of bodily ornament (see Figure 5.6). Moving from the lower right side of the page, and concluding on the upper left, the procession charts the progress through the city as it criss-crosses the blank space in the usual neat rows. The order of processing is meticulously recorded through a conjunction of image and inserted inscriptions, and enables the reader to follow the different offices—both papal and civic—and the Roman nobility that interweave to make up this particular processional body of authority. It is on the edges of the image that one finds the encroachment of urban space onto the space of the procession, and it is here that shifting strategies emerged, both in relation to the changing expectations of  Sede Vacante  imagery and to the political and cultural particularities of the moment. 

In comparison to the earlier print of Leo XI’s  possesso,  the relation of the procession to urban space has been substantially transformed. All spatial markers are removed from within the procession itself and anchored at the edges of the page, where they can be perused almost as autonomous perspectival views. Moreover, the emphasis is on 

Figure 5.6. Louis Rouhier,  The Cavalcade with Its Ceremonies of the New Pontiff When He Takes  Possesso, 1655. Copyright The British Museum. 

permanent sites in the city rather than on the decorations produced for the procession to highlight particular staged encounters and political negotiations. Thus the journey, like those described in pamphlet accounts of the  possesso,  is represented as an itinerary of celebrated buildings and monuments. Instead of showing the cavalcade passing through temporary street arches, the procession now serves to reveal highly detailed and grandiose perspectival views of the city. Of course these sites are also relevant to  possesso  rituals, and the print attempts to conflate two separate journeys within the same urban landscape.     j 

San Pietro and San Giovanni Laterano frame the procession, and do so by dissolving the processional body into vast perspectival views. The procession may start from one and end in the other, but it is not allowed to intervene in the viewer’s ability to explore the monumental ensemble of basilica, palaces, and obelisks, organized to produce an orderly and magnificent vista. At the sides of the procession are three other equally impressive renderings of monumental three-dimensional space; on the lower left the Castel Sant’Angelo is shown engulfed by the billowing smoke of cannon fire, while on the upper left the Campidoglio towers over its impressive flight of steps. On the upper right, the Coliseum appears as it frequently did in tourist images, namely as both whole and dissected for visual scrutiny. 

Of course such a redefinition of the space around the procession does not leave the processional space itself untouched. It could be argued that the space represented provides a comprehensive account of the procession itself since it includes its actual points of departure and arrival. This image, unlike earlier ones, does not seem to privilege certain interest groups, for instance the national and family alliances that shape the  possesso  print of Leo XI. Thus the authority now claimed through the procession is one based on a more anonymous institutional bureaucracy, and its encounter is with an equally anonymous city. This shift in the conceptualization of the newly forged collective is projected onto other parts of the image. Instead of being surmounted by the Medici family tree with its conflation of family and institutional power, the uppermost part of this image is taken up with a sequence of narrative compartments that represent the rituals of papal power, with the portrait of the new pope inserted in between. With all particular social orientations omitted, the image becomes more flexible and easily reused for future  possesso  processions. Moreover, in this apparently neutralized form, the  possesso  print offered new marketing opportunities since it became more feasible for publishers to put it on the market at the time of the performance itself without the risk of discrediting the print due to overt discrepancies. 

Not surprisingly, these shifts in publishing strategies are interlinked with actual institutional changes and further conflictual realignments of power between the papacy and civic authorities. Various of the printed pamphlets on Alexander VTI’s  possesso  recount that the pope prohibited any excess in the staging of this procession.69 According to this pamphlet, this was not only an act of charity on the part of the pope but pleased most people since the financial burden of these celebrations affected everyone. It was by arguing for the city’s overall social welfare that the pope could 

disallow or at least curtail the Popolo Romano s participation in the procession, while still permitting private citizens to take political advantage of the event. For the Popolo Romano, which counted on the possibilities facilitated by the  possesso,  the prohibition was regarded as a curtailment of its authority. As it turned out, pamphlets describe this as a particularly lavish  possesso  in terms of the overall street decoration, but less attention is given to the decoration of particular arches and buildings. In describing the encounter between the pope and the Popolo Romano, all pamphlets opt to focus on the pope’s gesture of tossing to the people gathered at the Campidoglio a great quantity of silver medals engraved with his new papal arms.70 Ultimately the pamphlets circumvent the civic representatives and define the relation of the pope to the city of Rome primarily through accounts of the permanent rather than temporary sites of encounter. 

Thus the papal  possesso  print is one site in which papal autho rity a nd the print market seem to come effortlessly together. Yet it is worth reconsidering the fuller implications of the shift of audience for these prints. Increasing market pressures to situate city processions within urban spaces meaningful to tourists and pilgrims raised the problem of how to mesh two inherently separate functions and motivations for the  possesso  print. Undoubtedly a compromise was easier with this kind of procession than with others precisely because there was considerable overlap between papal and touristic urban itineraries. While the papal procession itself appears less bound to the exchanges on the street, the interest of buyers and. viewers has reshaped the space of the procession into one in which touristic pleasures can operate. The very need to resituate the  possesso  procession within this-intersection regularized its image of the city to a monumental touristic space. 

Ultimately, this representation of urban space accommodates exchanges situated outside the authority demanded from the city’s newly consecrated prince. Once again the disjuncture between the representation of the procession and of its physical setting is overt. And it is through this disjuncture that the spectator of the procession, a crucial aspect of its claims to success, can now be pictured. Each of the scenes that open up the image with a three-dimensional prospect is characterized not only through a strategic viewpoint but also through the representation of people that give bodily presence to this disembodied viewpoint. The urban perspective has thus become a perfect theater, with astonishing stagings and appreciative audiences. They certainly validate the papal procession by showing it to operate within a lively and diverse urban spectatorship. Yet these theaters also produce another kind of body within the print, one defined by dispersed groups, casual stances, and conversational exchanges, in other words, an audience with a more individualistic approach to urban space and its place within it. This is not a coherent collective but a mixture of disjointed bodies, gaining presence from their individual ability to forge their own urban encounters and, through these exchanges with the modern city, to alter their own social possibilities. 

The Production of Place 

Enclosures and Exchanges in Piazza Navona 

W hen in 1644 Giovanni Battista Pamphili was elected to the office of pontiff, all eyes turned to Piazza Navona. For it was here, where the Pamphili family shared space with other noble families as well as with merchants and artisans, the Spanish of SanJj  taco mo and the weekly food market, that the culminating celebrations of the papal election were staged. This was not to be yet another in the sequence of grandiose courtly spectacles that the piazza had accommodated so many times before.1 Rather, the ephemeral festivities of the night of November 23,1644, given wider and long-term currency through the production of numerous printed pamphlets, proved to be a crucial turning point.2 At this moment the standing Pamphili claim over the space gained the force of papal authority, redefining decisively the piazza’s relation to the city at large. The printed pamphlets on Innocent X’s  possesso  culminate not, as was customary, with the procession’s arrival at San Giovanni Laterano but with that evening’s celebrations held at Piazza Navona. Gerardi’s pamphlet,  Triumphal Possesso,  perhaps more than most, seeks to extricate the piazza from its diverse claims and orientations, and to transform it by enveloping it within an unmatched display of courtly excess: 

In front of the palace of Lord Panfilij toward the Piazza Navona in the fountain opposite, a great machine and artificial mountain was erected in the middle, and upon it was represented the ark of the flood with a figure of Noah, who faced the palace with open arms admiring the heavens, which appeared from one of those lofty windows that was attached to a canopy, along which a large dove with an olive branch was to descend. . . . Noah’s ark, which was full of fireworks, was lit with fire around two in the morning, and the dove, descending in a beautiful manner through the canopy, made beautiful effects and burnt the mount in good order . . . and then rising little by little could be seen rockets launched in the guise of flying comets, with explosions activated by battery; and it lasted through one long hour to discharge the various shots in an extravagant and curious manner.3 

In Piazza Navona the  possesso  rituals shifted from an exchange between monarch and city to a reassertion of courtly space, with its aristocratic relations of duty and obligation. 

187 

In the text it is the will of absolute power that transforms the piazza and stupefies spectators with its astonishing resurgence. Night turns into day and urban space into courtly spectacle as the dove of peace, the Pamphili symbol, descends from the family palace into the piazza, there to encounter an elaborate mechanism in the form of a mound surmounted by Noah’s ark.4 The parallel between the ensuing explosion and the monarch’s effect over the embattled city of Rome is overt, if not reassuring. After all, the piazza, standing in for the turbulent waters carrying Noah’s ark, was now reborn in flames. 

This moment of wonder would prove prophetic. Piazza Navona, a space claimed by diverse publics, suddenly became the focus of citywide attention. Different places had long been accommodated within it, although through the rigorous control of cyclical time. Thus the daily transient sellers, the weekly food market, the annual Easter festivities held by Spanish nationals, and the courtly festivals could coexist, even if not always with the piazza’s residents. But the pursuit of a space that would stand apart from the rest of the city, yet serve to represent it, was activated by a particular intersection of circumstances. Among these the growing commercial interests of the print market were central, and as guidebooks demonstrate these had already served to frame the space for tourist audiences in strategic ways. In the 1638 edition of  Portrait of Modern Rome,  the importance of the piazza to the city as a whole is stressed and conveyed through a mixture of utilitarian services and social exchange: 

Today this place is called Piazza Navona; ... in the middle of this piazza is a great vase of stone of much value, all in one piece and at ground level without any pipe; but spewing water from below it is always full, which is of great convenience and public benefit. Many private houses as well are irrigated with the same water. Every Wednesday there is still a most beautiful market, instituted on the orders of the most eminent Cardinal Rotomagense of the French nation, with great attendance and tremendous utility to the city. In sum, this piazza is not only frequented by continuous traffic, but embellished by the great numbers of carriages and other promenaders, and its beauty renders it pleasing to all. Here also on the morning of Easter of Resurrection a sumptuous festival was undertaken, celebrated by the Spanish nation in honor of the Resurrection of Our Lord Jesus Christ, which is attended not only by the citizens, but also by many people of foreign lands. Today it is held to be not only the most beautiful piazza in Rome, but also has the reputation for being among the most beautiful piazzas that are in Italy, and perhaps elsewhere. . . . Here in one part of the palace of the Lords Rivaldi, Monsignor Felice Contilori, Secretary of the Consulta, has built the most beautiful library of all the sciences.5 

The piazza is defined as public through its conjunction of uses: the provision of water to the neighborhood, the Wednesday market for the city at large, the Easter festivities for the religious community, the visits of foreign rulers for aristocrats, and the library 

of the sciences for intellectuals. Its status as a public space, representing not only local residents but also the city as a whole, is conveyed through movements in and out of the space. While peoples from many places continue to pour in, its reputation for beauty is increasingly spreading outward. Preceding this account of urban modernity is a description of the ancient circus that gave shape to the piazza. As a monumental architectural complex that brings clarity to social hierarchy, this evocation of the Circo Agonale works as a kind of utopic mirror; its grandeur and orderliness provide a desired model for a legible and homogeneous public space and simultaneously serve to confirm the piazza’s modernity. If the ancient circus invokes social order, the modern piazza enables social movement and circulation. 

Distinctions between ancient and modern space were ubiquitous, and the guidebook  In Search of Rome,  which was first published in 1644, the year of Innocent X’s election, represents the piazza in two entirely different ways. The first is within the itinerary of the sixth day, where the piazza prompts the visitor to unravel layers of ancient history, both pagan and Christian, and to observe the Roman nobility: 

Enter into Piazza Navona, called Circo Agonale in ancient times, either because here on the green fields on the command of Numa King of the Romans the games of Giano Agonio were celebrated; or perhaps because Emperor Alexander built here the Circus called Agonale. Observe in this piazza . . . San Giacomo degli Spagnoli with its hospital, the palaces of the Cupis family, of Cardinal Pamphili, of the Orsini, of the Torres family and the three fountains of Trevi water built by Gregory XIII.6 

In the second, found in the guide’s appendix, the piazza is associated with a particular range of goods and services: 

Navona, where the print sellers, resellers of old books, fruit sellers, ironwork sellers and charlatans are found; and here a market is held every Wednesday on the order of Cardinal Rotomagense Franzese.7 

Within this brief description of a space of commercial exchange, it is telling that dis-ti nctions e inarge .between established and transient sellers, legitimate merchants and theatrical impersonators, and the weekly market and the permanent shops. 

Images of the piazza in the guidebooks also draw distinctions between public and market space. The first of these is found in the 1622 Mascardi edition of  The Marvels of Rome  and differs from other prints inserted into the three-day tour of the ancient city in deploying a cartographic rather than topographic vocabulary (see Figure 6.x). This view is from above, revealing neat rows of palaces and houses that form a distinctive oval. With the view extended to nearby Piazza Madama, there is some context beyond the piazza’s boundaries. Yet neither this nor the demarcations of pathways and circles that stand for congregations of people disrupt the clarity of this space, empty but filled with the powerful concepts of order and coherence. 

Figure 6.1.  The Marvels of Rome,  Piazza Navona, 1637. British Library. 

In the 1638 edition of  Portrait of Modern Rome  the 1622 image is adapted with some significant readjustments. In keeping with this guide’s approach, the viewpoint moves one closer to the specificities of the piazza while also reasserting its representation of the city as a whole (see Figure 6.2). The particularities of space and time are now conveyed through the detailed account of property owners and occupants. The map view facilitates the attachment of numbers to the different buildings, which, in an accompanying key, are identified with the names, status, and profession of residents. The piazza’s diverse residents are on display and include a prince, the ambassador of the emper- \  or&gt; Cardinal Pamphili, the city’s official printer, and a lawyer. But what this westward view also facilitates is the concealment of the cluster of artisanal shops and residences 

Figure 6.2.  Portrait of Modern Rome,  Piazza Navona, 1638, pp. 232-33. British Library. 

on the opposite side. It is here, between the church of San Giacomo and the Palazzo Torres, that the makers of copper pots and wicker baskets and chairs congregated.8 This image fashions the piazza by its class boundaries, clarified through aristocratic palaces and the absence of daily trade and commerce. And this separation of the piazza from the rest of the city also results from changes to the lower part of the image, which instead of extending the space out into the city brings the city back into the space. The figures of Romulus and Remus, representing the origins of Rome, expose the piazza’s modernity, both by juxtaposing the ancient with the modern and by filling its void with the city’s mythic history. 

If this image needs to call up a mythic history of Rome to fill an empty space, it is because this emptiness is only a reminder of the market, which, after all, the guidebooks recommend to visitors and even praise for its usefulness to the city as a whole. 

In fact, the weekly market of Piazza Navona, situated here since its removal from the Campidoglio in 1477,9 was a site of mixed and uncontainable exchange increasingly at odds with attempts to define the piazzas boundaries or its relation to an orderly modern city.10 For the chamberlain of the apostolic chamber who administered the Wednesday vegetable market, the constant problem was the ways commerce spilled outside its designated time and space.11 During the first decades of the century sanitary edicts repeatedly targeted the market’s lack of boundaries, as in an example from June 15,1607: 

[W]e command the traders, sellers of pots, and other inhabitants, artisans, that they must not keep nor extend their things nor put awnings nor other impediments more than six palmi beyond the wall of their rooms and houses. . . . And to remove also the impediments introduced in recent days in Piazza Madama, and in San Appolinare, and also in the neighboring alleys that converge on Piazza Navona ... so that cars and carriages passing through are not impeded in any way.12 

Of particular concern was the presence of those that could not be fixed within the space through the usual regulation of trade and brought to the market the mocking and carnivalesque aspects of theater: 

Contortionists, acrobats, charlatans, and others, that dare to have stands, benches or tables with their oil or distilled water or compost, or other sorts of materials, which will be discarded on the ground.13 

Successive printed notification struggled with the mixture of activities within the market, in which theater and commerce were constantly entangled. An edict of March io, 1640, warning against letting donkeys and pigs loose in the piazza, suggests a close link between the congestion that impeded efficient movement and the visual attractions offered by the market.14 

? Evidently the lack of separation between market and fair was at odds with attempts to order Piazza Navona into a coherent space, and this emerges in contemporary visual representations.15 In the anonymous painting of the market in the Museo di Roma, usually dated around 1630, the primary interest is the unlimited extension of the physical space through exchange (see Figure 6.3). A multiplicity of exchanges confronts the viewer. Transient and permanent sellers, including print and book merchants, share space with temporary displays of curiosities and entertainment as well as with the mayhem raised by the volatile crowds that gather around these. Momentary encounters and haphazard congregations spill onto side streets and beyond, particularly along the furthest northern end of the piazza. The carriage traffic that so concerned official regulation is present but in no way accommodated by the possible pathways across the piazza. Even the fountains are too insignificant to order such a vast and uncharted space. As for the surrounding buildings, these do not bring shape to the space, but rather serve to frame otherwise unrestrained social activity. In this 

theatrum mundi  the market has become a fair, which removed from ordinary space and time, or from modernity’s progressive time, facilitates the unbounded intermixture of people and its social opportunities.16 

i 

Figure 6.3.  Piazza Navona,  anonymous painting, c. 1630. Museo di Roma, n. 3651. 

If in this image the market has no physical shape and thus no limits, in Israel Silvestre’s print of around 1640, it is turned into strategic viewing points (see Figure 6.4).17 While this image deploys a meticulous topographical vocabulary, it is concerned with the visual observation of the idiosyncratic detail rather than with the readability of an abstracted shape. Indeed, its very focus on the southern end of the piazza, between the church of San Giacomo and the Palazzo Torres, brings access to a part of the market dominated by artisans and transient sellers. The spaces around San Giacomo degli Spagnoli had acquired a reputation for the concentration of beggars and thieves, initially through the infamous case of the young beggar who after being arrested in this church was said to have revealed the presence of many well-organized companies of thieves and beggars working in the area.18 According to the much-circulated  Book of the Vagabonds,  this part of the piazza provided a focus for all kinds of alternative market activities, including the performances of fake beggars, quacks, healers, entertainers, 

Figure 6.4. Israel Silvestre,  Piazza Navona,  1640. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

and fire eaters who brought a measure of theatrical spectacle and ambivalence to commercial exchange.19 In Silvestre s print the practices of artisans and transient traders inform the pleasures and frustrations of viewing itself. With its temporary stalls full of hidden places, and its clutter of people and objects that obliterate the readability of the space, the image draws attention to a more mobile form of viewing. It prompts a desire for the illicit pleasures of urban space, driven by a mixture of curiosity, unpredictability, and concealment. And viewing registers diversity as it leaps back and forth from the elegant orderly architecture of the piazzas residents to the temporary, shabby, and unsteady tents of the sellers. 

Internal divisions of the piazza had long been the focus of official efforts to control market exchange. Perhaps no factor was more decisive in this ongoing struggle than the contentious issue of the piazza’s pavement.20 The pavement, first completed by 1588, served to draw different boundaries simultaneously.21 It separated the piazza from the rest of the city and brought coherence to internal differences by dividing the space into segments that could be specified and identified. As early as 1600 Chamberlain Aldobrandini justified the plan to repave the piazza on the grounds that its broken pavement brought the semblance of incoherence to the city as a whole: 

Being that the pavement in Piazza Navona has broken in many places, which causes the unsightliness of the city since this piazza is its noble member, and also due to the great concourse of the people that continually gather here, it has been established that it be paved anew, with the cost contributed by the proprietors of the places that are in it in order to sell goods on the day of the market.22 

This  bando  orders all those who hold a place in the piazza to declare it or risk losing it. Both by linking the right to sell in the market to a tax on the pavement, and by fixing each seller to a specific portion of the pavement, this strategy of urban modernization was intended to stabilize commercial exchange. At least, the office of the chamberlain used the pavement as a means to clarify ambiguities between permanent property owners and merchants, and especially between authorized and transient sellers. 

The issue of the pavement comes up again in an edict of September 26, 1616, in which the chamberlain declares the pavement to be well under way but that sellers must make payments or the outstanding debt would be auctioned off in the form of a pawn and their places lost. By February 1, 1619, another printed order reveals that many allotments have been abandoned and the pavement remains unpaid.23 This poster lists precisely what space is available, and the list is divided into two, the first defined as residual places to proper places, and the second as available parts of the pavement favored by sellers of herbs, fruits, prepared meat, and chickens. In the first list the space is identified by its previous holder and its neighbors, for example, “Iacomo bella barba, adjacent to the greengrocer and to Antonio seller of prepared meats,” and the cost estimated with minute variations. In the second list only physical demarcators indicate space: “The pavement in one piece in front of the above fountain toward the Caldari, where the stone lid was made.”24 Most of the available space pertains to food stalls, and all are identified as such except for two, which are distinguished by the fact that their former occupants were Jewish sellers. The spaces on the second list are small, awkwardly located, and, without exception, situated around the southern end, especially next to the fountain and the nearby outlet of the sewer. 

Conflict over the space not only persisted but also increased as sellers started to conduct trade outside assigned places and guild regulations, especially on the edges of the piazza and in collusion with local property owners.25 The guild for the fruit and vegetable sellers responded with arguments against restrictions faced by its members in the market but actually sought to exclude those without guild membership.26 Pressured by this guild and sellers with legitimate places, the office of the chamberlain circulated a strongly worded poster “in four places of this Piazza” on July 1,1619: 

[W]e command and prohibit to all and single patrons, owners and inhabitants of the houses and shops existing around the Piazza Navona, that they not dare nor presume to demand or make demand from whatever person that sells fruit or whatever kind of food in front of their houses and shops whether in the day of the 

market or any other day of the week, anything however minimal. . . nor disturb or impede these sellers.27 

The threatened fine of 500  scudi  is remarkable, as is the statement that those claiming to have legitimate reasons for such payments must present within three days to the apostolic chamber any “privileges, letters, patents, bulls, briefs, concessions, indulgence, grace and other writings and reasons.” While the guild maintained that legitimate sellers were obliged to provide payoffs to retain their places, it is evident that much of this concern pertained to the emergence of a new “zone of production and exchange” that was both within and outside the official definition of the market.28 

By the time the Pamphili came into power, the conflict of space within the market had only become more acute. A  bando  posted on December 20, 1646, states that on September 18 an order had appeared demanding payment from all those who continued to retain their stall in the piazza without having paid the tax on the repavement of 1641; now, after so much time without payment, the places would be offered to others. But when one turns to a  bando  of June 25, 1648, from the apostolic chamber, it is evident that the sale on September 18,1647, of “diverse places on the market of the Piazza Navona partly rejected partly derelict, and lost for not having paid the tax on the pavement of these places made in the year 1641” was not a success.29 Now officials, and especially the  Popolo Romano  magistrates who claimed to maintain market morality, expressed concern that the contractor hired for the pavement would take over the right to rent those spaces.30 

In justifying the control of commerce that moved out of their direct jurisdiction, officials turned to the morality of the market. At this particular time, when civic magistrates were increasingly in collusion with papal authority, official notifications raised the threat of increasing grain shortages. These targeted local sellers, who worked from the southeast part of the piazza and were said to purchase products from farmers in order to resell them at a higher price in the piazza. An example from November 17, 1645, attributes to these middlemen both the displacement of farmers and the exploitation of the needy and, in the process, introduces yet another internal boundary: 

[T]he artisans who are inhabitants of the city must stay in the places assigned to them, those on the path of S. Giacomo delli Spagnoli, and the foreigners on the other path of Sant’ Agnese, in such a way that the flow of the water in the middle of the piazza divides one from the other, and cannot stop by nor pass onto to the path of these foreigners, under the same punishment of 25 gold  scudi  and three strikes of the  corda?x 

The flow of water was now to provide a key division within the piazza, separating locals from foreigners. The inability of official regulation to keep market exchange from spilling over imposed boundaries, a situation that pertained to the city at large, was now articulated within its most representative space. 

Just at this moment of market expansion, the Pamphili’s presence in this space turned from the claims of a private noble family to those of the institution of the church, prompting aggressive efforts to inscribe the piazza with papal authority and define it as Rome’s center. It so happens that the Pamphili family, whose palace was located directly opposite the church of San Giacomo degli Spagnoli, also fixed its sights on the southern end of the piazza. Even in the 1644  possesso  pamphlets, there are attempts to forge a coherent courtly space by reigning in this part of the piazza, especially as it meets up with the nearby Piazza of Pasquino.32 When the issue of the reorganization of the piazza is raised again, the southern side of the piazza is the focus. An edict of August 29,1646, posted by the masters of the street, announces the sale of building materials from the recently dismantled housing, which was irregularly clustered around the church of San Giacomo.33 The rebuilding of the Pamphili palace and the dislocation of many long-term residents on the soutnwest side of the piazza was followed by the project for a new central fountain.34 Before long the private family church of Sant’ Agnese was inserted within the Pamphili palace and strategically situated to mark the center of the overall piazza space.35 

What is crucial about the Pamphili family’s aggressive campaign to dominate the piazza, and through it the city at large, is that it prompted other claims to the space, especially those of sellers and traders, to become more explicitly acknowledged. When most threatened, the long-term presence of artisanal labor and transient trade became the focus of rumor and resentment. Given the location, it is not surprising to find that most of the critique of the newly organized piazza circulated in the form of pasquinades. According to Gigli’s account, taxation to fund the building of the fountain prompted a double movement, with pieces of the ancient obelisk slowly moving toward the piazza and pasquinades attacking the enterprise quickly moving outward: 

Because of this the people seditiously murmured, and also because another tax, that was already established for the obelisk and for the Fountain in the Piazza Navona. Three smaller pieces of the obelisk were already brought upon carts pulled by a great number of buffaloes. But two large pieces were transported on the ground little by little with winches, and with implements and huge ropes on the strength of four horses, and finally arrived at Piazza Navona the last day of August; and it is said that the cost of conducting it from Capo di Bove to this piazza amounts to twelve thousand  scudi,  and the entire expenditure was eighty thousand  scudi.  While the pieces of Obelisk were conducted through the city, the people said many things, and that it was not the time to make this expense while there was the need to provide grain, and various words were attached to these stones, and one in particular said this. 

We want something other than obelisk and fountains, bread we want, bread, bread, bread. 

. . . Other reproachful words were publicized against D. Olimpia, so much so 

that it was said that many spies were ordered, people that went about dressed in silk to discover the authors of the pasquinades.36 

Thus the fragments of the ancient obelisk extend the role of the ancient statue of Pasquino in the circulation of papal critique. The result is a space permeated by seditious and uncertain presence: those circulating rumors, posting notes on the pieces of obelisk, and moving around in aristocratic attire in order to spy on the others. The mounting controversy prompted Gigli to give transient sellers as well as artisans in the area a prominent part in his account of the unveiling of the new fountain.37 It is Gigli’s diary that offers the fullest view of the days leading up to this event, including the circulation of a  bando  on June 6 in which transient sellers were ordered to evacuate the piazza once and for all:38 

And it was already ordered to all the fruit sellers, rag pickers, booksellers, and other sellers of diverse things that were constantly in this piazza, that they should go away, and to those who lived there, that they not extend the display of their things beyond that which fitted on the table, wishing that this piazza serve only for passage of the carriages, and this was put in execution the next day, which was the ninth of June, and many were those that for having contravened in some minor way were put in prison. Then on the twelfth of June the water of the fountains was turned on and everything revealed, and the piazza uncluttered in every part. There were militia placed in guard of the fountains day as well as night in respect of the statues that are there, and some people were incarcerated for foolishly accosting them, or for having thrown things in the water. . . . [T]he sellers of fruit, vegetables, notions, books, second-hand objects, and trinkets, Jews and others who continually set up shop in the piazza left it with great resentment and anger, and being displaced and not knowing where to settle, many moved to the piazza Madama, and through the street in front of the university of the Sapienza and the church of San Giacomo degli Spagnoli, but from there they were then removed, becoming dispersed here and there, and only elsewhere were they allowed to do business.39 

The image of the fountain’s waterflow washing the piazza clean is evoked but only as a means to reveal points of conflict and threat: the guards needed to protect the fountain, the imprisonment of sellers, and the displaced traders still in search of space along nearby streets. It is a conflict articulated in terms of class, with carriage traffic replacing those who move on foot, and aesthetic priorities replacing market activities. The space of the market, with its assumptions of a privileged space of exchange, was suddenly and dramatically emptied out and the void refilled with different visual pleasures, a different concept of public space, and indeed a different public. 

It was only at this moment that long-standing conflictual claims over the piazza 

were brought together within its space, there to be attended not only by those directly involved but also by citywide communities. In this process of appropriation and contestation, printing not only gave these conflicts visibility but also participated in their formation. Publishers and sellers of prints and pamphlets, themselves affected by the changes to the piazza, now became intricately involved in contradictory claims over the space. Official public space, emptied of the movements of market exchange and reordered through structures that inscribed a clear political hierarchy, was largely projected through print. Indeed, the attempt to reorder the space against a notion of the chaos and corruption of market exchange could only be sustained for any length of time in two-dimensional representation. Images sold at the time of the opening of the fountain do overlap with papal imagery of the piazza, which itself conflates institutional and private interests. But the print market had its own priorities, which by now included a clientele not necessarily framed by a direct stake in the locality, but who expected both a self-reflexive approach to the visual vocabularies of urban modernity and the topicality of print. 

Paradoxically, the topical pamphlets, published to take full commercial advantage of the height of controversy, bring shape to the image of the piazza as a timeless utopia. The relation between viewer and image, one in which the desire for bodily movement is displaced onto the desire for visual transparency (and, keeping with Foucault, the viewer sees the self where it is not), projects itself over the space of the piazza.40 Of the six pamphlets collected by Cardinal Cartari and inserted in his diary next to the entries for the volatile month of June 1651, three use this kind of virtual image as frontispiece. The example in  Description of the Obelisk or Needle of Navona  juxtaposes the verticality of the fountain with the horizontal layout of the piazza’s buildings (see Figure 6.5).41 A stark shadow cast by the obelisk across the space only accentuates its expanse, emptiness, and immutability. Any signs of time and movement are restricted to the sky in the form of clouds that frame the space simultaneously with the sun and the moon. Thus through geometric manipulation the image manufactures a representational space of comprehensive and unchanging vision. In fact, it is the intensity of visual observation that arrests the uncertainties of time and space and produces an ideal whole. In the title page of Maria Portia Vignoli’s  The Obelisk of Piazza Navona,  the piazza is transformed within a sequence of circles (see Figure 6.6).42 The fountain and its railing mirror the frame, and if this projects urban space onto an abstracted surface, then the curving of this surface suggested by the cloud formations projects urban space onto a cartographic globe. 

This move in the image of the piazza from city to globe is a recurrent theme in these pamphlets. Francesco Aschone’s  Praises and Grandeurs of the Needle and Fountain of Piazza Navona,  for instance, which dedicates its Neapolitan verses to the Naples-born Bernini,43 begins with an account of the fountain as both the nexus of world congregation and as emitting the world from within: 

Figure 6.5. Francesco Moneta,  Description of the Obelisk or Needle of Navona,  Rome, 1651, title page. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

Figure 6.6. Maria Portia Vignoli,  The Obelisk of Piazza Navona,  Rome, Francesco Moneta, 1651, title page. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

From a thousand miles away 

Let everyone run and come 

To see this wonder 

made now in the Piazza Navona 

It was unveiled with great concourse 

The fountain of the obelisk 

Anyone that moves around and around it Will see marvelous things There are four parts of the world And the greatest rivers, 

Which flow down to say Lofty things to astonish you.44 

In this context, the fountain transforms the surrounding space into a utopic circuit, extricating it not only from its multiple social relations but also from the city itself, and filling it up with new forms of vision and knowledge. The fountain itself enables lengthy discussions of the piazza as the center of the world, conflating a world geography with the transformation of the actual physical space.  The Strange Countess,  a dialogue between Bacchus and Neptune on the flora and fauna of the four continents, and Antonio Bernal’s  Copious Discourse of the Fountain and Needle Erected in Piazza Navona  draw on mythological and scholarly resources to come up with lengthy explications on the meaning of world rivers, plants, and animals.45 

This image of the fountain as a point of intersection between a specific place and an atemporal global space is also deployed in various ceremonial papal broadsides announcing the results of religious disputations held in the papal palace of the Can-celleria.46 These are accompanied by increasingly elaborate depictions of princely virtue, and in the early 1650s views of urban space associated with Innocent X were used as demonstrations of that virtue. In the  Divino Implorato Praesidio,  dated November 21,1652, the Pamphili papal arms are framed by personifications of the church and of Rome.47 Rome’s attributes are those of triumph: the armor, the lance, the laurel, and the world in the form of a large sphere held by ribbons. Rendered as both globe and mirror, the sphere reveals a utopia that happens to resemble Piazza Navona (see Figure 6.7). This vision, presenting simultaneously a particular achievement of the pope and an image of universal perfection, is configured by a symmetrical arrangement of the Four Rivers fountain viewed against the southern end of the piazza. It surely did much to conjoin the politically charged world imagery of the fountain with the political claims of the Pamphili papacy.48 Certainly its exquisite form, accentuated by a frame that links it both to precious objects and heavenly visions, serves to transform urban space into princely virtue. 

These utopic images are by no means consistent, and in another instance the strategies of viewing are expanded in relation to bodily movement. For the  Divino Implorato 

Figure 6.7.  Divino Implorato Praesidio,  Piazza Navona, 1652. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

Praesidio  of June 6,1654, Giovanni Bonacino produced an image of remarkable conceit (see Figure 6.8).49 The papal arms, carried by angels and two personifications on heavenly clouds, hover over the piazza, each reflecting the other’s perfection. Urban space is not only permeated by a heavenly glow, but the piazza is reframed through a dislocated gaze. The view, rather than implying a coherent expanse of the piazza, is strictly dependent on a body moving around a corner and catching a glimpse of the Pamphili palace and the church of Sant’Agnese. In effect, it is the implied gaze, rather than the image, that brings forth this privileged view of the piazza, with the oblique angle revealing as much about the presence of the viewer as about the piazza itself. 

Topical pamphlets also presume an increasingly self-conscious approach to urban space and its visual exchanges, and make overt the ways its representation depends on the vocabularies of particular kinds of print. Indeed, these juxtapose to great effect the picaresque concerns of cheap pamphlets with the learned concerns of scholarly publications as a way to address new interest in the complexities of modern public space.50 Three of the pamphlets draw not only on courtly dialogues and scientific information for their representation of the piazza, but also on the language and knowledge of the 

Figure 6.8. Giovanni Bonacino,  Divino Implorato Praesidio,  Piazza Navona, 1653. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

market piazza. Aschone’s  Praises and Grandeurs of the Needle and Fountain of Piazza Navona  raises the issue of movement and access within the piazza in an ironic inversion of its own claims to modernity. Starting with the metaphor of the fountain as a ship amid rough seas, it soon turns to a struggle for movement: 

The great ship of the fountain Never one more beautiful has been seen Many mouths are ready to spew water and give tribute, 

Fame you who have a hundred tongues It is up to you to distinguish them And in order that through each path the flow of passage can move through the venerable piazza, 

And so that such a cortege may be seen 

they no longer wish to stay 

with nothing to see or buy 

Each post, table and awning 

They wish to expel in every pact 

But there is great penalty for the improvement 

in the ban that has thus made 

So fair and elegant a piazza 

That should not be befouled.51 

One form of urban movement is stamped out in order to impose another. The new movement of carriages and visitors demands a reorganization of the space and locates these people within spectacle engaged in the reflexive act of viewing and being viewed. But in its reference to the  bando,  the poem evokes the cost, conflating the expense of the fountain with the loss of those who are now displaced. 

Sunday morning 

two thousand and more people 

formed a congregation 

inside Piazza Navona 

upon the expulsion 

that needed to be made 

from so fine a piazza 

a thing of tears, 

at last was resolved, 

by a very knowing old man 

to take their trinkets 

and to go wandering 

to gnaw the nails 

and to pound the heel 

With them cried 

also the apple sellers 

and the seller of chestnuts and lemons, 

that were so beloved 

they went out of the piazza 

towards the Sapienza 

to see the clock 

armed with patience 

and having less work 

the onions and garlic 

drew from their eyes 

a million tears 

but also with the others 

pound their heels 

From the other side escapes 

a wicked hunchback 

that sells matches 

and is called Diodato 

but frequently in the piazza 

he had a paltry business 

and there was his son 

who was a little lame 

with baskets of torn rags 

things to make bundles 

and he said oh you pretty Jews 

let s leave quickly 

and return to the Ghetto 

In the bad time that is now.54 

In a decidedly ironic tone, the displacement of sellers and their forced dispersal through the city is contrasted with the entrance of international visitors into the piazza. The return to the ghetto, a theme of dispersal and enclosure brought up multiple times in the poem, calls up a notion of unimpeded market transaction now" lost. New forms of movement are relocated back in the piazza, but with the overt imposition of regularity, restraint, and containment. This frame is one that isolates the quaint and local from the larger components of market exchange. It thus seems an enactment of locality that conveys how commercial activities had exceeded the conceptual boundary of the market as trade activities yielded to a larger network than the piazza could contain.55 Ultimately, however, the desire and fear of unrestricted market exchange must intersect with the strict hierarchies of social order implied by the other verses in the pamphlet. This publication addresses urban space within different and even contradictory registers of meaning, bringing diverse notions of urban movement to the same representation, there for the reader to confront. 

For a pictorial image of the piazza that eradicates neither bodily movement nor the pleasures of visual exchange, one can turn to single-sheet prints. In a pair of prints etched by Louis Rouhier and published by Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi, the space is forged as public through the specificities of time and space (see Figures 6.9 and 6.10).56 Access to the fountain is now extended over two images, and this is just one of the ways in which the prints seek to bring a new approach to visuality within public space. In each, the fountain defines the field of vision, taking in the most concentrated views of its own world geography as well as all the parts of the surrounding buildings that such viewpoints might reveal.57 These are rendered in exacting topographical vocabulary and become part of the ways the eye is not allowed to settle on an overall shape but is kept constantly on the move. This movement might start from the fountain to take in all of its details and its attentive and enthusiastic promenaders and then progress upward toward the height of the obelisk, finally reaching the surmounting Pamphili dove holding an olive branch. In other words, the earlier coherence of the space is replaced with an eye that penetrates the space activated by the visual power of the fountain. Thus instead of being conceptualized by what is lacking, the piazza is conceptualized by what fills it. In fact, the desire is to fill, and constantly refill, the space. It is filled with gushing water, rhetorical bodily gestures, the flora and fauna of the world at large, the continuous movement of people around the fountain, and even time, be it back to antiquity or forward to the future. If contemporary images of the space seem all too empty, this one seems astonishingly full. 

Visual observation is what fills the space, supplying it with a new order, new boundaries, and a new public. The fountain anchors visual observation, for the viewer of the 

Figure 6.9. Louis Rouhier,  Pamphili Obelisk, Oriental Side,  1651. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

print as well as for the occupants of the piazza. The image not only uses a topographical vocabulary but also takes it further by asserting both bodily presence and scientific claims of accuracy. Viewing is multiplied through two exactly framed views from opposite sides but slightly off center, perhaps to better convey the three-dimensional space. Thus as well as moving the viewpoint upward and downward, the image 

Figure 6.10. Louis Rouhier,  Pamphili Obelisk, Occidental Side,  1651. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

confronts the viewer with movement around the fountain’s circumference, there to encounter not only the sculptural display but also other eyes looking back. The prints are complementary, each incomplete without the other, for it is the continuity and reflex-ivity of visual observation within urban space rather than two views of the same object that is here proposed. The double image not only enables access to the entire circumference, but also conjoins the space in the circular movement around the boundaries defined by the fountain. Attentiveness to direction of viewing is indicated within the inscriptions, which designate one view as occidental and the other as oriental, a geographical orientation extended by the naming of the four world rivers. This extension of vision outward from the object of attention is also pursued in relation to the obelisk. The latter is meticulously rendered from two sides and encircled by a  “scala”  around its circumference measured in  “palmi Romani. ”  The decorative conceptualization of its height, a twisting scroll that ruptures the illusionistic space, alludes to bodily movement around the obelisk. This disruption of the illusionistic space, however, only serves to magnify the prints claims for truthful observation, since it extends vision beyond what is permitted by the physical space itself. Similarly, the fountain’s flow, so integrally tied to the politics and contestations of urban space, is now elevated to a world metaphor, one that anchors the four rivers of the world to the waters flowing into Piazza Navona, and brings global knowledge back into the bodily possibilities of the piazza. 

But this assertion of an interlinked local and global space is not detached from the particularities of the moment, for the image is most attentive to the conditions under which the new space is reorganized and given new visibility. Unlike other more atem-poral prints of fountains, these locate urban space through precise inscriptions, within the time of the unveiling of the fountain on June 2, 1651. It is at this moment that the new space emerges, primarily through the new paths of circulation formed by the fountain. Just as the viewer of the print is prompted to encircle the fountain, the space of the piazza is now reshaped as a circular path. This path is composed primarily of people engaged in the activity of observing the fountain and each other, and thus following its complicated world imagery beyond and back to the specificities of the physical space. It is worth comparing this image with the anonymous painting of Innocent X’s procession around the fountain during its ceremonial unveiling.58 In the latter, the processional collective evacuates the challenges of the space and even situates its view toward the new Pamphili palace and the aristocratic southwest corner of the piazza. In Rouhier’s images, the pathways through space are also shaped but by the fountain rather than the processional order. Thus they signal a new form of authority, less singular perhaps, but an authority nonetheless. The promenaders appear as separate clusters of people and include a mixture of men, women, children, and animals. These are now brought together not only by the irresistible pull of the fountain, but by distinctive signifiers of prominence and wealth that the city affords: the movement and display of fancy carriages, the fashionable attires of ladies and gentlemen, and the 

servants. But workers are also included and one of these, the solitary figure of the street seller at the front of the fountain, cannot be missed even by the most cursory glance. Is this merely a token insertion that makes a claim for homogeneous public space, or is it a reminder of difference through which a coherent new public can be defined? 

Other attempts to define urban modernity in terms of a refined space of visual exchange introduce variations, in particular, a print etched by Girolamo Pedrignani and published by Giovanni Battista Rossi, whose shop was, as the print states, on the piazza itself (see Figure 6.n).59 In this instance, this single image incorporates within it Rouhier’s two views of the fountain as well as the two additional sides of the obelisk. All, including accompanying inscriptions, are organized in a symmetrical arrangement against an abstracted backdrop. Inconsistencies suggest a hasty production. The views of the fountain are shown in reverse, while the surmounting inscription, taken from one of Rouhier’s prints, identifies both only as  “Parte Orientale. ”  Yet it is telling that the interests of scientific and rational knowledge are expanded through the elaboration of the obelisk. This is interlinked with the authority over this space of Pope 

Figure 6.11. Girolamo Pedrignani,  Pamphili Obelisk,  1651. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

Innocent X, whose framed portrait now forms part of the abstracted backdrop. Even so, the interests of viewers are also presumed to lie beyond the fountain and within the space of congregation. Dispersed clusters of people move from side to side, not organized around the circular shape of the fountain, but outward and beyond. The fountain does not exert the kind of pull that keeps people at its side, although it is the center of haphazard paths and exchanges. Signs of trade and commerce are now entirely omitted, but the fountain produces the opportunities of convergence, which, unlike that pictured in Rouhier’s prints, is not necessarily held in place by its presence and visual attractions. 

In this struggle to reframe the piazza and through it the notion of public space, the pressing issue becomes the definition of urban modernity. Within contemporaneous guidebooks to Rome, the modernity of the piazza is significantly readjusted at this moment of urban disruption. The third edition of the  Portrait of Modern Rome  appeared less than a year after the unveiling of the Four Rivers fountain and introduced a new section on the fountain, inserted at the very end of the guidebook.60 This may have been prompted by considerations of production, but it is used as an opportunity to expand on the particular resonance of Piazza Navona within the city, an argument that begins with a spirited account of the rightful place of Rome at the center of world civilization. The fountain itself is associated with a form of vision that mixes the wondrous from courtly festival with the beautiful from discourses on aesthetics. And it is this ability to activate a heightened legibility that defines the fountain as modern: 

The wonder and astonishment of this cunning Fountain renders scorn on the Glioconij, the Appollonij, the Fidij, the Prassiteli, and on so many more famous artists from learned Greece; waters spurt up almost as live springs from the fissures of marbles ... a mouth that forces out under the feet of one of these rivers makes a wonderful impact. And to show that here there is nothing that is not thought marvelous, in the lower part of the middle of the water there is a leaping dolphin, that with his open mouth spews water all over Africa, and as a pendant on the other side in the middle of the water but above, there is similarly a serpent that floats towards America.61 

This is no mere descriptive account, but rather a creative interpretation of embodiment, with artistic and technological achievement literally bringing forth life and thus the opportunity of change and progress. In fact, the later editions of both new guidebooks explain the visual possibilities of the piazza in terms of aesthetic pleasure and technical progress. In the 1689 edition the discussion of the fountain is incorporated within the itinerary of the  rione  of Parione, but now a different text, shorter but much more focused on the sculptural forms of the fountain, describes each of the statues and associates them with the style of particular sculptors.62 The 1658 edition of  In Search of Rome  uses a similar strategy, but while Piazza Navona is now given much more prominence, the weight of interest falls on expanding ancient knowledge, and 

particularly on the feats of engineering demonstrated by Borromini in the new church of Sant’Agnese.63 

The presentation of the overall piazza within the 1652 edition of  Portrait of Modern Rome  has also undergone some telling readjustments, as usual achieved through additions of text and reorganization of images, rather than the reconceptualization of the account as a whole. What is most explicit within the new text is a decisive moment of change, the 1647 reframing of the space of circulation by demolishing irregular buildings.64 This notion of change is achieved in part by a more overt distinction between the ancient and modern piazza. Not only is the text now clearly divided into ancient and modern sections, but these differences are reasserted through the juxtaposition of the images of the piazza in its two guises. The established image of the contemporary space is again revised, both updating the appearance of the piazza and linking it more overtly to its ancient predecessor (see Figures 6.12 and 6.13). No longer encumbered by the need to identify the occupants of the buildings, the space of the piazza becomes much more coherent and more in line with its ancient counterpart, particularly with the addition of the new fountain topped by the obelisk. These images are now located on consecutive pages, prompting the reader to attend to their interrelation. Both offer overviews of an oval space with one straight side, rigidly organized for the eye and anchored at the center by a vertical obelisk. 

How does this guidebook retain a notion of progress while avoiding thq concern with social change of its urban itineraries? In this edition, the earlier image (see Figure 6.2) is altered with the insertion of the fountain at its center and with the diminish-ment of the specificities of the space. In the 1689 edition the 1652 image has itself been readjusted with the church of Sant’Agnese and the Pamphili palace taking their place among the ring of buildings and overwhelming their balance (see Figure 6.14). Simultaneously, the foreground of the image, previously taken up with the figures of Romulus and Remus, is altered to accommodate promenaders and strollers that seem Uto allude to a new kind of urban space. Unlike the ancient circus, which is entirely ordered and unchanging, the contemporary piazza is charted out as a sequence of substitutions and insertions that speeds up papal command over the urban environment. Change, however, appears primarily on the level of surface, through the claims of print to expand legibility and comprehension. Such clarification serves to distinguish the space from those surrounding it and, like the ancient circus, becomes set apart from, yet standing in for, the rest of the city. Within this process of clarification and substitution, the piazza is burdened with a notion of urban progress that can only be secured through print technology and serve touristic interests. 

This definition of modern space, prioritizing aesthetic and technological considerations, was dependent on the containment of a specific location. It was obvious what produced it and what threatened it. And it was easier to define on paper but much more difficult to put into practice, at least for any length of time. The construction of this space within collusive relations between papal, family, publishing, and touristic 

Figure 6.12.  Portrait of Modern Rome,  Piazza Navona, 1652, p. 233. British Library. 

Figure 6.13.  Portrait of Modern Rome,  Circo Agonale, 1652, p. 231. British Library. 

Di Piazza Nauona. 

Figure 6.14.  Portrait of Modern Rome,  Piazza Navona, 1689, p. 234. British Library. 

interests may have secured it more forcefully, but not forcefully enough to displace counterclaims to the space, claims that could not be physically located and were continuously shifting. While the merchants with shops on the piazza continued to bear much of the burden of taxation, other more transient sellers were soon back at work.65 According to Gigli only four days after the death of Innocent X the sellers of fruits, garlic, onions, and herbs were permitted to return, although notices were posted reiterating the same orders as those given just before the unveiling of the fountain. Alexander VII initially reintroduced prohibitions, but food sellers continued to trade in the piazza, even during the crisis brought on by a bubonic epidemic during 1656-57. Only in 1692 were they once again removed from the piazza, and then only for a short time.66 

Interestingly enough, a flurry of printed street notifications dated within the months just before the 1656 epidemic reveals yet another challenge to official attempts to keep commercial exchange within the physical boundaries of the piazza. On April 22, 1656, the apostolic chamber posted the usual sanitary  bando  in which the concern with the clear definition of boundaries is almost identical to the order of 1607.67 By May 22 Cardinal Chamberlain Rapaccioli issued another order; this one addresses foreigners that come into Piazza Navona to sell fruit and seeks to contain the spillage of this trade within strategically located barriers.68 But by the second of July, at the height of the epidemic, the question of movement and exchange was refocused onto the circulation of everyday secondhand objects: 

[T]he present edict prohibits all Jews, sellers of old clothes, shoes, boots, rag pickers and any other person to bring to sell in the day of the market, nor in another time in Navona ... nor in these buy clothing and things to wear, or bedding, or for another use, nor new nor old, copper, tin nor copper or tin ware, nor other movables, nor of these make a display, nor piazzas in these places.69 

The restriction was on objects deemed dangerous due to their transportability and mutability. But what also emerges is the transportability of the piazza itself, with the possibility of being reconfigured here and there. The governor may have focused on transient sellers and movable trades, but in doing so he only gave a recognizable face to an increasingly unpredictable market exchange. It is the specter of the ex pand ing market that resurfaces, and with it the piazza’s relation to other urban spaces in the city rather than the piazza as substitution for and abstraction of the city. 

The Uncertainties of Time 

Managing and Marketing the Plague of 1656-57 

The illusion of transparency goes hand in hand with a view of space as innocent, as free of traps or secret places. Anything hidden or dissimulated—and hence dangerous—is antagonistic to transparency, under whose reign everything can be taken in by a single glance from that mental eye which illuminates whatever it contemplates. Comprehension is thus supposed, without meeting any insurmountable obstacles, to conduct what is perceived, i.e. its object, from the shadows into the light; it is supposed to effect this displacement of the object either by piercing it with a ray or by converting it, after certain precautions have been taken, from a murky to a luminous state. 

Henri Lefebvre 1 

I n February 1657, with Rome on the tenth month of a severe bubonic epidemic, the prominent publisher Giovanni Giacomo de Rossi put on the market a set of three large-scale prints etched by Louis Rouhier.2 Given the enforced closure of the city, the incarceration of people, and the restrictions of businesses and trades, this set of prints is remarkable for more than its highly innovative approach to picturing the modern city. It is within a flourishing market for images of contemporary urban space that these images speak, but they do so at an unusual moment. The city that unfolds in an unprecedented sequence of compartments is in the grips of social crisis. At this moment urban movement is not only possible, it is actually imperative to survival. It is also imperative for the viewer’s ability to infiltrate urban space, organize it, and make it comprehensible. Yet the space of transparency, in which a cognitive eye illuminates whatever it contemplates and turns it into knowledge, must be, according to Lefebvre, unfettered by the anxiety and titillation of what is indecipherable.3 But this city is virtually made up of such unfathomable encounters: the enclosed hospitals of the contaminated, the sealed gates of the Jewish Ghetto, and the unimaginable sufferings of the body. 

Paradoxically, while the images prove compelling because they disrupt the expected clarification of urban space, their offer of a penetrating viewing point is only heightened. The first print of the cycle (see Figure 7.1), even more than the others, confronts 

219 

Figure 7.1. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (1), 1657. Copyright The British Museum. 

the viewer with the possibilities of visuality extricated from the usual perspectival view, and produced instead through the movements of time and space. The initial image of Trastevere presents a sequence of dislocated viewing points, with landmarks such as San Pietro and Castel Sant’Angelo glimpsed only as fragments over a raked landscape and a curiously bulging river. With the frame cutting the vista exactly at the river that separates Trastevere from the rest of Rome, the eye moves upward along with the bodies of disease. And while this uppermost tier of the print projects a dizzying outward movement, its counterpart at the bottom arrests all possibilities of viewing. One is compelled to face toward the city from the outside of two main gates, only to have the view obstructed and tantalizingly denied. In between, an entire tier is devoted to an unprecedented night sequence in which different forms of lighting pierce the dark to reveal not only the still bodies of the dead but also the..active bodies of transgressors. This is a bold declaration of technical virtuosity, and entirely in keeping 

with the most recent technological claims of printing to perforate and illuminate hidden and suppressed urban space. 

The crisis of the plague is often interpreted as cyclical, a time of inevitable human suffering that regularly interrupts historical time. Scholarship has also used a persistent pattern to explain the many recurrences of the plague in European cities for well over three hundred years. Even very recently, this kind of predestined cycle of retribution has become a way to frame early modern projects of surveillance and confinement of the sick, the poor, and the transient.4 In seeking to preclude the particular and contingent, this kind of narrative remains no less invested with the properties of a timeless myth than the strategy of interpreting the plague as a punishment from God demanding collective expiation and penance. While the powerful notion of time’s recurrence cannot be denied, it is also imperative to consider it in relation to the particular set of historical circumstances through which it is activated. Rouhier’s images, I would argue, offer such an opportunity. Drawing on powerful memories of the plague, and on a mixture of rational and irrational fears, the images represent the authority of health officials as they work to separate the contaminated from the clean. While these imply that the forms of social organization mobilized to counter threat of disease are as inevitable and natural as the course of the epidemic itself, they also link official efforts to other incentives, especially to the new demand for both urban order and scientific progress. The struggle between authority and disease is now shown through their common target, the pursuit of everyday life. It is by picturing the efforts to contain the paths of disease that the images find a way to bring visual form to current conflicts around street movement, and thus to the contradictions that shaped new desires for urban mobility. In other words, Rouhier’s images challenge the timeless utopic visions of the modern city precisely by bringing visibility to and exploiting fgars around urban circulation. 

Just how does this set of prints draw on an opportune moment to rework the visual vocabularies of the modern city? Turning to what is probably the second image of the set (see Figure 7.2), I want to consider how the conjoining of two established visual forms produced something different and unexpected. The city is imaged within a coherent narrative that follows a conception of the course of the plague itself, starting with the closing of city gates at the top left, and ending with the final burial of the infected outside the walls on the lowest tier. In between are the extreme measures taken to separate the clean from the contaminated: the closure and fumigation of houses, the burning of possessions, and the perpetual movement of bodies through the city from one institution of containment to the next. This sequential arrangement, marking different stages from beginning to end, is made explicit by accompanying captions numbered from 1 to 49. But it is the continuous movement of bodies across compartments, even ones representing different spaces, which links the narrative scenes together. In effect, this movement organizes narrative action into the familiar form of a procession. With certain readjustments for the sake of variety and internal action, Rouhier’s print 

Figure 7.2. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (2); 1657. Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo e la Documentazione, Rome. 

presents the viewer with a continuous cavalcade that zigzags across the page, and in the process evokes the formation of a collective. Implied in this sequence is not a particular journey in time, but rather its constant reenactment. 

It is not surprising to find the use of the processional format to represent the plague. After all, as the dedication states, this is a representation of “those who all together form a portrait,”5 and how better to visualize a citywide collective engaged in a joint struggle to defeat disease? Processional images, through a synchronicity of repetitious action, forge a single body denying fragmentation and the unexpected. Moreover, their directional arrangement produces not only a coherent social body but also its distinctive parts. In Rouhier’s print a remarkably wide range of social experience is revealed as it takes on, or succumbs to, the threat of contamination. Social difference is registered most powerfully in people’s physical relation to disease itself, and this has two interlinked orientations: differences in social responsibility within this 

crisis, and differences in actual proximity to disease. In keeping with processional prints, individual identity is reserved for the uppermost ranks. Within this collectivity only two people are identified by name, Mario Chigi, the pope’s brother who begins the cycle by inspecting the city gate, and Girolamo Gastaldi, the commissioner of epidemic hospitals. The latter is shown accompanying convalescents from a hospital of contamination to one of quarantine, and thus moving the flow of contagion through the contained form of the procession. Ironically, Gastaldi was himself largely responsible for imposing a policy of segregation that included outlawing all processional performance, much to the frustration of local churches and confraternities. Of course, by locating official action in terms of particular individuals who put themselves at risk for the benefit of others, this image follows the model of citywide charity organized around the patronage of the wealthy nobility. 

Next in the collective’s hierarchy are the officers of the Congregation of Health, identified by jobs that are themselves categorized in relation to physical proximity to contamination. For instance, doctors and fumigators are distinguished between those entering contaminated houses and those entering clean houses. Acts that contravene rhe congregation’s regulations are found in this section of the hierarchy, starting with officers fearful of doing their jobs. Merchants and property owners hold the same contradictory relation to the movements of contamination; they challenge official closure of their work premises, yet also consult official street posters; they attempt to flee the city yet also steal contaminated property. The most concentrated point of disease is reserved for the bottom of the social hierarchy. Here, in the corpses piled up high on boats or thrown into a pit outside the city, one encounters total compliance as well as complete anonymity. 

The collectivity produced through processional representation depends on the evacuation of all specificity of space and time and, with it, anything unpredictable, contingent, or conflictual that might bring about fragmentation. In this image, however, urban space provides a setting for the procession and even structures its movements and possibilities. In contrast to the processional print, which imposes its own route between points of departure and arrival, this image presents a procession forged within a meticulously observed urban setting. This is not only particular space but it is delimited in terms of conflictual social exchange: sealed gates, blocked bridges, bolted doors, obstructed passageways, and instruments of torture. The opening of space to visual scrutiny is crucial here, but it also serves to constantly deny access, raising the specter of that which cannot be turned into rational knowledge. Shops are viewed through window screens, the city through reinforced blockades, and the ghetto through sturdy bolted gates. 

The boundary, so crucial to both a readable space and policies of containment, is certainly heightened, initially through the very legibility of urban space. Starting on the top left, the city gate, the Porta del Popolo, is pictured in its most recent reorganization surmounted by the papal Chigi arms. Although one of the most recognizable 

spaces in the city through its recurrent perspectival renditions in tourist guidebooks and prints, it is now shown from the outside. The next compartment shifts to the island of San Bartolomeo, at this moment confiscated by the congregation to serve as one of its emergency hospitals, and here represented in its characteristic wide vista framed by two bridges. Thus the familiar within the vocabulary of topographical prints is rendered unfamiliar, both by offering unusual viewpoints and by replacing the perspectival singular view with the perception of relational spaces. For when one turns to the next two tiers, one finds spaces that are continuous with those in the first. The second tier has a prospect of the island from one of its two bridges and extends it to the streets that lie just beyond to take in one of the sealed entrances of the ghetto. The third tier returns to the Porta del Popolo, but now seen from the inside and across the radial streets that open up from the gate. On the fourth tier the movement of people is situated once again in the area north of the island. It is here that by omitting and shrinking certain streets, two key institutions requisitioned by the Congregation of Health, the Hospital of Santa Maria della Consolazione and the newly built jail on the Via Giulia, are shown framing the sealed main gate of the Jewish Ghetto. 

Thus Rouhier’s image manages to draw on touristic expectations for spatial readability, and even to extend these by complicating the visual cognition of urban space. But it also orders the space in very particular ways. In fact, the processional narrative activates just those parts of the city where the notion of exchange is most fraught: the boundaries of the city, the enclosures of the sick, and the gates of the ghetto. It is at these points of conflict that the greatest contradictions emerge between the desire for transparency through visual knowledge and the necessity for opaqueness within irrational notions of contamination. According to Michel de Certeau, the boundary is activated by an inner contradiction between the frontier and the bridge, which is to say between the limits of a space and its outside.6 Indeed, the ubiquitous boundaries in Rouhier’s set of prints do not simply conceal what should not be seen, they also serve to feed the imagination about what lies on the other side, and thus transform interiority into a heightened desire to move beyond its limits. These images set up boundaries to prevent what is on the other side from seeping in, yet turns them into thresholds with the promise of shocking disclosure. In this respect, the boundary that separates the city from its outside, found at the beginning and end of each of the three images, is the resonant point from which to access urban crisis. When one first encounters this city, it is from the outside with the closing of the Porta del Popolo. Fences reinforce the gate and afford only a peek of the obelisk and the spaces that lie beyond. In the final scene we are once again outside city walls, now in the fields around the Basilica of San Paolo, where contamination and death are finally extinguished. Hence during this journey, the inside/outside divide has become inverted, with the internal contamination that initially drew us inside now relegated outside city boundaries. 

But this is not the function of internal boundaries, which, like de Certeau’s bridge, raise contradictions between inside and outside. Paradoxically, the inscription of the 

Street with official texts initially suggests the threat to the security of internal enclosures. Closed doors may be nailed shut with the word “Sanitä” and thus indicate the curtailment of daily life, but people stare from behind closed windows, shopkeepers hover at the entrance of their premises, and owners attempt to retrieve confiscated possessions. The cluster of people around the  bando  fixes limitations upon urban space, particularly everyday movement, but nearby scenes of theft and flight recall its transgression. At the entrance of the lazaretto, the hospital of the contaminated, one encounters a lengthy list of the dead posted on the outer fence. This boundary may be guarded by an elaborate sequence of physical obstructions, but it is also activated by fear. 

Evidently, inner urban boundaries are not all the same, and they cannot be equally transgressed. For the viewer, the ability to access the other side is directly related to the possibilities of physical movement for those on the street. In relation to the city, the viewer is compelled to enter by the very strategies used to delimit bodily access. In other words, visuality is driven by the desire to see what city gates and fences conceal, namely the most feared sites of contamination. There are no such opportunities to breach the boundaries of the ghetto, which are presented as unchallenged and are brought into view only as a reminder of what cannot be revealed. In between is the lazaretto, framed yet concealed by perfect vision. It is this space in particular that is activated through the intersection of two distinctive forms of visual representation. While the processional narrative challenges the boundaries of urban space, the particularity of urban space threatens to disrupt processional cohesion. According to Lefebvre, urban space makes possible the intersection of diverse forms of power, precisely because political, economic, and cultural priorities become concentrated in certain spaces.7 Within these spaces diverse interests come together or spark contradictions. In Rouhier’s set of prints, the enclosure of the contaminated is such a point of concentration, bringing into play issues of vision not only within the print market, but also within regulatory print. It is to these issues that I now turn. 

Printing and the Boundaries of Urban Crisis 

The contagion is unleashed, and to extinguish it, it is not enough to cure the infected, but requires preserving the healthy, and impeding that by communication they are not infected; this is the most crucial point, for precisely if one wanted to dry a lake, it is not enough to drive the water out, if you do not prevent other water from gathering.8 

At a time when all forms of circulation were regarded as a threat to urban security, the movements of printed paper in the city presented particular complicatipns. Vast amounts of notifications were posted on the street daily, which meant that some printers, and especially the official printer, actually thrived during these months. Others illicitly took up the opportunity presented by this unprecedented demand for 

printed orders, instructions, permissions and passports. In March 1657 a  bando  from the curia threatened in the strongest terms those who printed, distributed, or sold materials for which the official printer held a privilege and which would necessarily result in the transgression of health orders. Print for the market was also restricted, due only in part to the closure of most forms of production in the city. As a crucial voice in the formation of discourse on urban space and the modern city, prints and topical pamphlets presented the possibility of countering official policies on the management of disease in the city. 

So how did Rouhier’s set of three large-scale prints negotiate a position within such constraining and conflictual relations of power? After all, the dedication bears witness to the relationship between'thepäpaf öffice and de Rossi, whose print shop, located in Via della Pace, was one of the most successful enterprises of its kind and came to hold a virtual monopoly over the print market for images of the city.9 This publisher’s alliance with the upper echelons of dynastic power in the city went well beyond seeking protection for individual publications. As Francesca Consagra has shown, in 1664 Alexander VII granted de Rossi the kind of privilege given only to the official printer, namely copyright protection over his entire stock for ten years.10 As it turned out, the copyright came none too soon, since by the time the epidemic ended in late 1657 two other printers in the city had put out variations on Rouhier’s set of prints. 

According to the title, which appears on the first print, the set of prints ostensibly represents the orders and actions taken by the pope and Congregation of Health to secure the city from contagion (see Figure 7.1).11 A lengthy dedication to the pope’s brother Mario Chigi invokes the prints’ function as exempla for urban progress and change: 

The city of Rome, preserved from the harm of the contagion, is rendered an example to the world. ... publishing in prints the images of the places, ministries devoted to health, and the orders and modes of providing to the living, and of burying the dead, I come to dedicate to your eminence, like those who all come together to form a portrait of your most pious fervor, worthy of passing on with eternal memory for the marvels and imitation of posterity, and here I profoundly bow to your eminence. Rome, February 21,1657.12 

The images, then, are framed in terms of a future model for the management of urban crisis. Victory is declared over the forces of disease, and the urban collective becomes a portrait image of the cardinal himself. 

graved in three royal folios.”14 Defined more by what it is not  (Roma Antica)  than what it is, the classification of modern Rome remained contradictory and incoherent. It included the images of the newly refurbished Piazza Navona that Rouhier himself had etched for de Rossi, but also his recent 1655 processional print of Alexander VU’s  possesso.  Thus scientific rationalized urban views (cartography, perspectival views, cycles of fountains, palaces, villas) that presume an independent knowledgeable subject commingle with spectacles of authority (papal processions and ceremonies) that presume the subjection of the viewer to the body of authority. Rouhier’s new set of prints works precisely at this contradiction in the category of  Roma Moderna.  In doing so, it draws distinctions and relationships with other types of print. While offering the urgency of topical pamphlets, the prints transform this mode of representation into a sophisticated visual vocabulary that seeks to project objective and rational knowledge. While claiming a direct unmediated relationship to the street and its entanglements with official regulation, the prints also claim a self-conscious approach to visual evidence and its relation to concepts of the modern city. Thus the time of the street and the time of print (and its visual vocabularies) intersect, as do the strategies of authority and the desires of users. What emerges is printing’s claim to endow the image of urban modernity with the uniqueness, stability, and distinction of a collectible object, but within a moment when printing had already challenged the notion of permanence by introducing the potential of reproduction, circulation, and contamination. 

When the newly formed Congregation of Health set out to organize urban space to address a sudden state of social and political crisis, it too turned to print. In attempting to transform the uncertainties of urban space into clear and unbreachable boundaries, the congregation continued the official deployment of the  bandog  With this established exchange, it sought to contain, in now entirely explicit ways, categories of people and their relation to urban space. Yet the sudden change of authority in the city, and the overall intensification of conflict within urban space, altered the usual terms of this exchange. Carlo Cipolla, whose work addresses occurrences of the bubonic plague in Tuscany, observes that traditionally the time span of an epidemic became a site for urban conflict between the church and public health officials who progressively expanded the sphere of their control from one recurrence of the plague to the next.16 In Rome, where authority was fragmented and contested, the institution of one official body to deal with emergency actions brought an unusual degree of centralization to government offices. Established through the apostolic chamber, the new congregation represented a mixture of interests in the city, and included eleven cardinals, the treasurer and governor of Rome, eight prelates, the pope’s brother Mario Chigi, and from the  Popolo Romano  the three conservators and the fiscal officer. In May of 1656, following reports of the plague from Naples, the congregation began to meet almost daily at the papal palazzo in Monte Cavallo, and by October 25 it had usurped all executive and judicial authority in the city.17 

The Congregation of Health was by no means homogeneous, and its policies were 

not particularly coherent. Alexander VII complained in his diary that the committee’s protracted discussions and few resolutions were not desirable at such a moment of crisis.18 But this fragmentation enabled particular members of the committee to become more autonomous in the pursuit of their duties. While initially authority was distributed evenly over four sections of the city headed by four deputy prelates, the congregation also focused on so-called problem areas and assigned particular individuals to take charge of urban spaces designated as excessive in levels of contamination and conflict. Parts of the large district ofTrastevere, where rumors of illness led to the institution of emergency action in the city, were enclosed with a high fence and put under the control of Cardinal Barberini. No evidence of illness was necessary for the immediate order to seal the gates of the Jewish Ghetto, which was consigned to Mario Chigi.19 Prelate Girolamo Gastaldi agreed to organize confiscated buildings to be used for enclosure and quarantine. While its proximity to contagion made this post undesirable, Gastaldi managed to turn it into an opportunity for self-advancement, becoming general commissioner of health and eventually being raised to cardinal. 

The congregation, at its very first meeting of May 21, ordered the closure of eight city gates and assigned four soldiers to those still in use.20 But this symbolic assertion of citywide control had complications. The gates of the city were partly under the control of the  Popolo Romano,  which claimed this boundary as its prerogative. Its deputies, mostly members of the Roman nobility, supervised the entry of people and objects, rotating this duty and serving once every eighteen days for a day or night shift.21 Entrance depended on one’s place of origin and route of travel, except for categories of people (vagabond, Gypsy, Jew, mendicant) that were entirely excluded. Even so, any clear division between inside and outside was challenged by those who moved back and forth in their daily lives.22 

Internal boundaries became even more closely scrutinized, in a struggle to establish secure enclosures from within. An instance of this kind of regulation appeared on June 28, addressing people’s movements in and out of the enclosures of Trastevere: 

[N]or by doors, windows or stairs, or in whatever other means, can anyone trespass the bars, walls and partitions, and introduce oneself inside the enclosure of the  Rione  ofTrastevere, nor the inhabitants shut up in that enclosure depart outside of it, or attempt and procure to introduce oneself and pass inside, or outside under corporal punishment even that of life. . . . And under the same penalty the receiving of letters or things from whatever person inside is prohibited, and the sending from the outside to the inside, and introducing it without license in writing of Monsignor Governor of that district. And those that have a necessity to deal with that which is restricted, will be permitted to do so ten steps away, with the assistance of the guard, without drawing nearer than these ten steps under the same penalty, to which even the same soldiers at guard are subjected.23 

Such elaborate regulations for maintaining this boundary not only heightened the divide between clean and unclean but also introduced contradictions, even implicating 

those in charge of securing the enclosure. This was no secondary concern. After all, many of those working to police Trastevere did so under duress, as is evident from an August 2i edict denouncing the escape of Sisto di Belardino Cardello, who was released from jail in order to serve as a guard.24 

Indeed, complications at the boundary went further. Physical movement, of people and merchandise alike, was negotiated through an elaborate system of printed permits. The  Bolletino della Sanitä  served as a passport, permitting the bearer to enter or depart from the city. It was regulated through printed notifications that defined format, authenticity, and circulation, forbidding their unsanctioned distribution and warning printers against selling any not ordered by health officials.25 The burden of overseeing the  bolletini  ultimately rested with recruited guards who, as a  bando  of October 6,1656, explains, were bound by the same harsh regulations.26 In fact, the congregation’s own workers constantly undermined these boundaries.27 The congregation’s diary kept in the Biblioteca Corsini includes the joint trial of Haminio Pariani, a quarantine official, and Girolamo Rota, a doctor, both of whom were accused of conspiring to release someone from quarantine before the required forty days.28 

Official regulation vacillated between local containment and citywide abstractions and thus embraced diverse notions of social control and urban progress. Perhaps the most evocative representation of local stakes emerges in an unusual painting, now in the Museo di Roma in which Cardinal Barberini is represented as the savior of Trastevere (see Figure 7.3).29 In an interesting inversion of Rouhier’s image of Trastevere, this painting offers a bird’s-eye-view of one section of the district, bounded from behind by the river and from the front by the charitable distribution of bread. Extricated from Rome and even from the rest of the district, this enclosure becomes a particular site of penitential charity. The link of the plague to divine retribution and penitentiary acts is made explicit through the heavenly court that surmounts the spectacle of human suffering. There are advocates—the Virgin, Peter, and Paul—in this court, and their efficacy may be gauged by the horn of plenty, which appears among the papal symbols, and showers coins down on Trastevere. The flow of mercy also moves with the exchange of paper between Cardinal Barberini and other religious and aristocratic participants, including a member of the Knights of Malta. The cardinal’s charity activates a citywide bureaucracy that ultimately produces the large baskets of bread distributed inside the enclosure. In this urban space of penance and authority, angels and three Barberini bees can move in and out but people must put up with enforced incarceration. 

A very different concept of social progress is advanced by Gastaldi’s large lavishly illustrated volume,  Political and Legal Treatise on the Avoidance and Conquest of the Plague,  published in 1684.30 Gastaldi, parlaying his experience as administrator of epidemic hospitals into the position of expert on the administration of urban crisis, argues for the successful management of the 1656-57 epidemic in Rome, which he represents as a military campaign to regain territory under siege. The treatise is in Latin and is accompanied by elaborate prints in which urban space becomes a sequence of 

Figure 7.3.  The Enclosure of Trastevere,  anonymous painting, c. 1657. IVluseo di Palazzo Venezia, n. 5131, in deposit at the Museo di Roma. 

threatened boundaries secured through scientific knowledge, geometric designs, and the evacuation of human bodies. In effect, it offers a blueprint for other cities and other crises. Starting with a summary of the measures imposed to secure the city, Gastaldi’s text moves spatially from public to private boundaries, seeking to sustain 

the former and reveal the latter. Within this account, the epidemic acts as a social indicator, making people’s social position explicit and urban space transparent. Gastaldi divides people spatially between the transient and the stable, the contaminated and the clean, and locates them in an abstracted urban organization that has no room for contingency or opportunity. In sum, this treatise privileges space over time, representing the city, both in images and text, as a series of boundaries that reduce all conflict through division and segregation.31 

In the organization of the city offered by Gastaldi, printing is as crucial to the imposition of comprehensive social control as physical intervention. Printing is the means to the regularization of an ensemble of physical spaces, both through images that facilitate urban legibility and through the reproduction and circulation of official orders. The treatise is, in fact, entirely fixated on the regulatory functions of the  bando,  and about half of it is taken up with full-scale reproductions of those posted by the Congregation of Health.32 All the printed orders included pertain to the control of space, with the restrictions on transients and on city markets being the most prominent. Omitted, however, are the many notifications through which congregation officials responded to specificity of space, its persistence of daily life, and the unexpected contradictions introduced by their own system of surveillance. 

Instability at the Site of Viewership:The Island and the City 

In Rouhier’s set of images urban space is forged between movements of the body and of the eye. Its urban modernity seems to emerge at the points of tension between the performative and the representational. One can consider the strategy of displaying the hospitals of the infected and the houses of quarantine in a sequence of prospects (see Figure 7.4). This is indeed a touristic frame, highlighting monumental buildings pleasingly ordered and strategically viewed. Each scene offers not only the distinctive features of more or less celebrated buildings and structures, but also a particular angle of viewing within which urban space can be carefully measured and assessed. The viewer of these prints is endowed with a privileged mobile eye that can easily bypass bodily limitations and scan across converging streets, take in a wide panorama from above, and focus on a perspective strategically framed within arches from its very center. Rouhier’s images offer access not only to precisely ordered urban space, which whenever possible overlaps with touristic sites (Antonini ruins, San Giovanni Laterano), but also to the rural landscapes that now become part of the city. If there is tension in these images, it is between the demands of unobstructed viewing and the necessity to inscribe boundaries and enclosures around these buildings. Gates, fences, and even instruments of torture simultaneously contribute to the visual ordering of space and challenge the assumption of the unobstructed penetrating view. 

So what exactly is revealed through the repetition of these perspectival views? In foregrounding institutions of disease and quarantine, the prints call up the practice of confiscating religious buildings, prisons, and charitable facilities in order to forge a 

Figure 7.4. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (3), 1657. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

citywide network of control, much in the way that institutions for the poor and ill had been conjoined into a coherent system of welfare. Initially, the congregation requisitioned religious buildings just outside the city to be used as emergency hospitals, in many cases against much opposition from the clergy. The first was the church and convent of San Pancrazio just outside the gate of San Pancrazio on the western side of Trastevere, followed by the Casaletto of Pius V.33 The continuous expansion onto other sites was necessitated by the increasing number of people sent to the hospital, but also by the practice of moving survivors of the hospital into quarantine. In Rouhier’s prints these dispersed sites are rewoven into a new whole, the charitable and socially progressive city. It is a concept of modernity familiar from the guidebook  Portrait of Modern Rome,  although now the dispersed urban locales are interconnected by the movements of disease as well as by the visual interests of the touristic view. At the same time, the insertion of the instruments of bodily punishment within the perspectival 

organization of urban space recalls the modern city of  In Search of Rome,  in which these joined forces to give further resolution to the boundaries of public space. 

Evidently, picturing the city through its health institutions met with success; at least other printmakers opted to appropriate just this aspect of Rouhier’s images. But, these related prints revert to more established forms of containment, especially by imposing a clear separation between scenes of urban space and scenes of social action. One, etched by Johann Friederich Greuter, printed by Jacopo Molinari, and on sale from a shop behind the church of  11  Gesü, banks on the pleasures of the extended vista (see Figure 7.5). The other, designed by Giovanni Lambruzzi, etched by Michel’Angelo Marinari, and sold from the nearby shop of Horazio Marinari by San Andrea della Valle, opts for the illicit pleasures of anecdotal narrative (see Figure 7.6).34 Greuter adopts a highly elaborated topographical vocabulary, with each scene opening up a vast viewing field beyond the urban terrain. Within these spectacular vistas, the main pleasure is the constant extension of the viewing process. Ironically, what is actually difficult to see is the presence of disease, which although discernible through small details is 

Figure 7.5. J. F. Greuter,  Design of the Island and Other Places in Rome Which Served on the Occasion of the Plague of 1656, 1657. Gabinetto Comunale delle Stampe. 

Figure 7.6. Giovanni Lambrizzi and Michel'Angelo Marinari,  Design for the Island of San Bartolomeo in Trastevere of Rome Destined for a Lazaretto on Occasion of the Plague of 1656, 1657. Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

never allowed to detract from the grandiose landscapes. Lambruzzi reverses this perspective. In his print Rome is defined through distinctive and recognizable buildings, but it becomes strangely unfamiliar through the curious and surprising activities prompted by the current crisis. Thus the print confronts the viewer with unusual close-up views: cats and dogs being thrown into the river from the bridge, or the shocking spectacle of anonymous naked corpses being laid out on trenches around the basilica of San Paolo. In a voyeuristic mixture of shock, horror, and fascination, the print picks up on current interest in the interruption of ordinary life through urban disaster. 

While a sequence of emergency institutions could stand in for a sequence of touristic sites, this strategy raises the question of urban coherence and hierarchy. This is especially true of Rouhier’s set of prints, in which urban space is not evacuated of 6 the performance of social action. Among the institutions containing contamination, the island of San Bartolomeo is foregrounded in all the prints, initially through its key location on the upper-right corner. Rouhier further isolated this site by locating it within the cycle of the plague (see Figure 7.2) and transforming it into the primary focus of visual observation. The island was, as it still is, at the center of the most 

densely populated areas of the city. It also happened to be located directly between the two urban districts designated by the Congregation of Health as most problematic, the  none  of Trastevere and the Jewish Ghetto. There would seem to be every reason to use it as a lazaretto. After all, it was already set up for medical care and, through the natural boundary of the river, could be isolated from the city while being located at its very center. However, the Congregation of Health only confiscated the buildings in the island once the epidemic was well under way and it became inconvenient to move people from the highly populated central districts to hospitals on the outer areas.35 This reticence was due, no doubt, to the very centrality of the island. Official struggles to separate people through the boundary of the river never ceased, and printed instructions for guards target those who try to enter as much as those who try to leave.36 On July 17 the governor posted a  bando  addressing the problem of people gathering at the entrance of the lazaretto: 

Seeing the excessive curiosity of idle people that congregate when suspected or infected people are conducted into the lazaretto, whence it is not possible to avoid the danger of infection due to their lack of attention, and thus people such as ministers and officials are destined to transmit it.37 

Increasingly the threat to this boundary was met with harsher retribution. On July 13 officials declared that anyone who entered the hospital, due either to illness or to work, and tried to leave without the license from the congregation or Monsignor Gastaldi would receive the death penalty. The same punishment was imposed on anyone who attempted to send in or take out letters or other objects, even if not suspected of contamination. And then there are the street posters that denounce workers and patients who escaped from the enclosure.38 

Rouhier’s image intensifies this point of tension but does so by drawing on the visual expectations of topographical prints already in circulation (see Figure 7.7). A prominent feature of touristic itineraries, the small island of San Bartolomeo offered 

Figure 7.7. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (2), 1657 (detail). Istituto Centrale per il Catalogo e la Documentazione, Rome. 

Figure 7.8.  Buildings and Ruins of Rome,  Tiber Island, 1618. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

both a resonant prospect within the city and suggestive histories of ancient and modern Rome. In Rouhier’s image the island is framed between the full length of the two ancient bridges and from the southern end. While topographical prints use a variety of viewing points, the northern perspective was favored, perhaps because it permitted a frontal view of the church and a more coherent arrangement of the island itself. In a print from the 1618  Buildings and Ruins of Rome,  a set of topographical prints of Rome published by Nicolas Van Aelst, the prospect is at a slight angle, enabling the eye to peruse the entire island and move beyond to the modest houses on the eastern river bank (see Figure 7-8).39 Another rendition of about the same date, this time viewed from the south, is even more directed toward inserting the island within the context of the city and pursues the pleasures of scrutinizing the densely built surroundings as they emerge above the bridges or are glimpsed through the supporting arches (see Figure 7.9). In fact, the intersecting points between the island and the rest of the city had become the focus of prints that explore the urban center through the complexities and discontinuities of space. Giovanni Mitelli’s 1638 print refuses the usual distinctive shape of the island and opts instead to present a disorderly and multilayered cityscape punctuated by links and intersections (see Figure 7.10).40 By contrast, Rouhier’s combination of devices—a panoramic view that is set fairly low to the ground, and the close cropping of the image at the outer end of the bridges—extricates the island from the rest of the city. Drawing on the established topographical vocabulary, Rouhier refocuses the view of the island, which now emerges as a concentrated site of contamination that stands as a heightened fragment of the city of Rome as a whole. 

And indeed this strategy is in keeping with the established metaphor of the island as Utopie city, which, appearing in accounts of ancient Rome, evokes the origins of social order and justice. In the 1625 edition of Marcucci’s  Grandeurs of the City of Rome  the origins of the island and its distinctive shape are linked to public insurrection against tyranny: 

In the middle of the Tiber is the island Tiberina, founded with the grain of the arrogant Tarquinio who due to his insolence and tyranny, after being thrown out of Rome by its citizens, who did not even wish to eat the wheat left by him, and had it thrown in the Tiber partly milled and partly in sheaf, and because there was little water it stopped, and made a mass helped by other waste, in such a way that this island was formed, and soon after extremely beautiful temples were constructed.. . . [Tjhen helped by the Romans, it was shaped into the form of a ship fashioned from very beautiful travertine, with most noble edifices inside.41 

Such a metaphor of the utopic city is sustained through the conceptualization of the island as a ship. It is what defines its boundaries and structures its internal space. In the accompanying image, the contemporary island-ship carries the city onward through somewhat turbulent waters (see Figure 7.11). This image of the island simultaneously encompasses the entire city within it, but also links it to its other parts. 

I 

;igure 7.9.Tiber Island, 1600. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

The account of the island’s ancient origins in  Portrait of Modern Rome  also evokes a utopic space and links the shape of the ship to medicine and healing as much as to just government: 

This island has the shape of a ship because it was consecrated as Esculapius, the simulacrum and serpent of which was brought here by Epidaurus in a ship; the memory of this was kept by the Romans by turning this mound on the river into the form of a ship ... and Esculapius who being regarded God of Medicine was the reason that in this same place a Nosocomio, that is a hospital for the ill, was built.42 

This guidebook includes the image of the island in the form of a ship, but now further systematized through the organization of ancient buildings. The ancient ship-city, at once minituarized and aggrandized, is a recurrent abstraction of the island, and appears as a pendant (see Figure 7.12) to the modern view (see Figure 7.8) in the 1618 Van Aelst edition of  Buildings and Ruins of Rome .43 In this version the urban topography is replaced by a hierarchical spatial layout of ancient temples and basilica within a ship. The center of this orderly city is marked by an obelisk, which, taking the place of the ship’s mast, guides and orients the surrounding public buildings. Interestingly enough, this kind of image also differs from contemporary views by being shown from the side, thus permitting the eye to traverse the bridge and reach the island, ultimately the very center of public space. The bridge provides the means to enter this nonplace and serves to anchor the ship, which happens to float upon per- 

Figure 7.10. Giovanni Mitelli,  On the Antiquities of Rome,  view of river, 1642. Gabinetto Nazionale delle Stampe. 

fectly calm waters. In contrast to its pendant print, in which the dynamic flow of water and scattered swimmers threatens the island’s autonomy, this utopian city is defined by its internal clarity and secure boundaries. 

Yet evidence suggests that contemporary views of the island carried within them, to more or less degree, a much more disturbing but also exhilarating concept of the city. A city struggling within turbulent waters emerges in prints and pamphlets devoted to the flooding of the river. Bonini’s treatise,  The Tiber Enchained,  includes a section on the problems posed by the island, and uses it as a metaphor for the predicament of the city itself constantly faced with the river’s unpredictable force: 

An unmovable impediment is the Island Licaonia, called San Bartolomeo, which has its front on the most beautiful fall of the river, which divides itself into two arms. But because by chance it has this location, stabilized by the water and assured by art, one could say that it is a necessary evil, but not without utility, being 

igure 7.11. Giacomo da Marcucci,  Grandeurs of the City of Rome, Tiber  Island, 1625. British Library. 

full of people and the antiquity of its temples and religious monastery. To remove it is impossible, to regulate it and moderate it is easy, if it is resolved to carve around it, and take away all the terraces (obstructions of earth) and the ruins that have fallen into the river, and extract whatever is outside its antique form, for not without great sense did the Romans reduce it to the semblance of a ship.44 

The ambivalence about the island, which nonetheless has claims of physical location and ancient history, is resolved by the desire to return it to its ideal antique form. In the accompanying cartographic image, a floating city is framed both by the flowing current of the river and by the edges of the riverbanks (see Figure 7.13). While the central part of the island is ordered around a central rectangular open piazza, it is the multiple obstructions and projections between the island and the rivers outer banks 

Figure 7.12.  Buildings and Ruins of Rome,  Tiber Island, 1618. Gabinetto Nazionale del le Stampe. 

that are deemed intrusive and in need of removal. Even the housing at the very edges of the river, which used the water not as a boundary but as a passageway or for recreation, becomes highly problematic to the definition of a clear boundary. 

In Rouhier’s print the river is the primary means of contextualizing the island, providing a sense of what lies outside of its boundaries and thus giving it internal coherence. Yet the river is not simply outside the island since it continues the sphere of contamination. Indeed, it is the presence of death on the water that provides the main obstacle to the viewer’s attempts to reach the island. In comparison with Bonini s overview, Rouhier’s image functions as a panorama. Louis Marin argues that the panorama prompts a desire to penetrate the city and see behind the obstructions of walls and gates.45 But here the viewer must first cross the river. Pairs of boats, the most prominent piled up with corpses, encircle the island as they move southward toward the city limits, thus transforming the river from a boundary to a path through which contamination flows. The choice of southern view is significant, for it establishes the movement of diseased bodies toward the foreground of the image. Thus the river shifts the usual inward exploratory orientation of the topographical view and instead 

:igure 7.13. Filippo Bonini,  The Tiber Enchained,  Tiber Island, 1663. British Library. 

thrusts the flow back onto the viewer. In the process, the island is held at a distance, reconfirming its status as a censored site. In sum, the river, like the walls of the city, complicates the boundary between inside and outside. And the space of the river emerges as highly ambivalent, reassuring in its ability to extricate disease and threatening in its potential to move and spread contamination. 

For authorities the river was the constant focus of anxiety. Disturbing sightings of partly nude corpses on the river were reported to the Congregation of Health on a daily basis. And the congregation struggled against people who persisted in using the river in daily life. Printed regulation prohibited boats from approaching the island, particularly at times when the dead were transported, not only from the island itself but also from the nearby ghetto. Evidently traffic on the river threatened the isolation of disease and the health procedures for moving contaminated bodies. In Rouhier’s image the practice of transporting the dead is conveyed with remarkable detail. Pairs of boats, one labeled “clean” leading the way for one labeled “contaminated,” maneuver their way under the bridge and downriver toward the city’s boundaries. In keeping with the imposed division between the dead from the island and the dead from the ghetto, the image includes a pair of boats further up the river loading corpses from the ghetto side.46 

If this representation argues for a sense of order within chaos, it also manages to heighten anxiety by forging a disturbing relation between river and island. The central boat of the dead dominates the image, confronting any gaze with the spectacle of ignominious demise. The dead instantly project the boundaries of the island onto that most intimate and fragile of boundaries, those around the individual body. One of the congregation’s strictest regulations pertained to burial practices, prohibiting these to take place in churches, although people continued to apply for special permission.47 The dead had to be buried without clothing and their clothing burned. This curtailment of the usual rituals that sustained relations between the living and the dead became particularly explosive.48 The orders printed on September 6, 1656, articulate an unsettling process: 

That those who move stretchers, boats and carts, when they go to inter the dead, must not take other than the nude corpses, and a blanket to cover with the ordering of the boat, buckets to carry water to put on top of the lime, and a stretcher to take the corpses from the boat and carry them to the cemetery, and complete the work with diligence, covering well the corpses with lime, and water and earth, in such a way that they not emit infection.49 

A metaphor for the island itself, the boat of the dead fashioned San Bartolomeo as the ultimate repository of agonizing suffering and humiliating death. Certainly the island was increasingly defined as the most concentrated point of contamination. In addition to receiving the ill from the most densely populated areas of the city, including from the sealed parts of Trastevere, San Bartolomeo was soon the destination for people in other institutions who approached death. In Rouhier’s print the one-way traffic moving toward the island on the bridges includes, as the caption makes clear, not only the ill but also the dead. And of course, Jewish victims, excluded even from this lazaretto, are nonetheless incorporated in the representation since the location of the ghetto permits the image to relocate these boats within the procession of the dead that encircles the island.50 

I return to the island-ship of antiquity, to see its rejation to Rouhier’s boat of the dead, and in turn to the island itself. If one is utopian,; the other is its inversion, a dystopian nightmare in which distorted bodies spill out with limbs disturbingly entan- /  I  gled and jutting out in all directions. Drawing on representations of the damned being taken into hell, those forced to accompany the dead register their extreme fear and discomfort, and their gestures force the viewer to contemplate the unimaginable smell and fear of decomposing flesh. But ultimately is this unfathomable horror not the promiscuous mixture of bodies? In contrast to the vision of the utopian city, this boat is characterized by the illegibility of hierarchy, boundaries, and social order. Of course dystopia, as with utopia, is an abstraction, and refers to actual social space but seeks to conceal particular conflict by presenting utter chaos (or, in the case of utopia, complete harmony). The dystopic image of the boat of the dead is one such concealment of 

power, keeping viewers from considering the underlying relations of inequality because it arrests meaning and displaces it onto shared fears around the body’s demise. And what is crucial is that it does so within a visuality constructed as rational and objective. Here scientific readings of space and irrational notions of contamination have become entirely and inextricably intertwined. 

Yet  pte slip page between topography and metaphor is also worth considering. While the boat is a mass of undifferentiated bodies, the island itself is shown as ordered, organized, and segregated. The image carefully locates and differentiates between the men’s and women’s quarters, and these from the nobility who are situated in a building at the opposite side of the island. Thus the key differentiation is between class, while for those outside the nobility gender becomes the primary division. It is also about ethnicity; after all, Jewish Romans are entirely excluded. Evidently the anxiety within the boundaries of the hospital was not simply about disease. It was also about particular social differences. Printed notifications regulating the internal workings of the hospital declared that an increase in the numbers and types of people entering the enclosure demand qew regulations.51 Most of these rules deal with overt divisions of class and gender, and are preoccupied with internal boundaries as much as with those around the hospital: 

[Tjhat no person dare to commit rape, adultery and fornication in the lazarettos, nor even come to attempt it, or any act similar to these crimes on the penalty of death, even if it is not violent; but concurs with reciprocal consent.52 

These regulations and official orders seek to address the fear of illicit sexuality, and in this they resemble the conflicts in the contemporaneous citywide organization of charities. Within the institution of the lazaretto disease and sexuality are conflated, certainly as these pertain to the artisan and trade communities. Within the river, it is this promiscuity of bodies that is the ultimate fear. 

The specter of social disorder in the image of ignominious death returns us to the crucial relationship between the island and the city. This threatening collective body must be contained and expelled, but it must also be brought to the center of attention, just as the island brought the lazaretto to the center of the city. Indeed, the island emerges as the most concentrated point of contamination, fashioned through an interplay with a wide range of touristic representations that themselves suggest a concentrated point of power. These images organize the island in diverse ways, but invariably in a resonant interrelation between touristic, economic, and political interests. Whether picturing intersecting parts of the city or an autonomous microcosm, they provide the necessary frames to a reading of this space as transparent due to its assertion of limits. Paradoxically it is the utopic “nonplace” ancient city that dislodges the certainty of this viewing position, precisely by prompting a more unsettling relation to the suffering body of disease, and by resituating this fear of social disorder back onto the city itself. If the boat of the dead is a metaphor for the island, it also serves to connect the is- 

land back to the city. This relation is, of course, made overt through the meticulous rendering of spatial relations, by the way the island is conjoined with the rest of the city in the second tier of the print. But it is most strongly evoked through the pair of boats on the foreground, linked together by a rope, which in Lambruzzi’s image rests limply on the water, but which in Rouhier’s print is kept tense, suturing the contaminated to the clean in a constant push and pull of continuity and distance. Indeed, the very cropping of the image of the island at the borders of the bridges brings this tension into view. 

Instability at the Site of Viewership:The Punished Body and Public Space 

With this image of the island, the deviant body seems to be back on the street. In Rouhier’s prints deviancy emerges within bodies that, in spite of official orders and the threat of punishment, persevere in their pursuit of daily life. These are bodies that challenge but are crucial to the forging of the ultimate collectivity. Every boundary between clean and contaminated is marked by such potentially transgressive bodies: closed homes by those who steal infected objects, and the sealed city by farmers and sellers from the country who attempt to bring in products for commercial exchange. Some of these bodies are caught by the viewer in the moment, but others will soon be there or have already passed by. This much is implied by the instruments of bodily punishment that punctuate this cityscape. The all-too-familiar  corda  imbues the institutions of contamination with physical control without obstructing the eye’s full per-spectival penetration, and even become crucial to the aesthetic organization of the space. On the bottom tier, a scaffold with a hanging body demarcates the boundary of the city at the Porta Portese. The same apparatus of punishment is on display in the next compartment, in which the move out of the city is represented as a broad cartographic prospect of the river. 

While the images hold in tension the movements of the body and the eye, conflicts around everyday mobility press this tension to the limit. The everyday was the primary focus of the Congregation of Health, which instituted a highly elaborate system of observation and reporting within neighborhoods and coerced locals in order to gain access to these spaces. For each district prominent citizens, usually doctors and those with substantial property, were assigned to record the physical state of each inhabitant and submit it to Cardinal Rivaldi. Gastaldi urged the congregation to institute an even more strict system of surveillance, stressing the need to stop the movements of contaminated objects. Official orders were constantly posted prohibiting the removal of things from condemned houses and targeting the transportation of infected property, which was to be either burnt or fumigated. The orders, however, frequently focus on the poorer areas, especially Trastevere, where the reader is told that the taking of “bedding, writings, moneys, gold, silver, jewels, and every other mobile thing” is recurrent. And they exploit local relations, encouraging informers and thus generating doubt and suspicion within neighborhoods and even in intimate relations.53 

While these strategies affected virtually all forms of trade and commerce, they were particularly attentive to the circulation of second-hand objects. Official policies on the movement of household items, especially sheets, clothes, paper, and so forth, brought scrutiny to an already marginalized form of livelihood and became a convenient way to attribute the spread of disease to particular communities, namely transient traders and especially Jewish second-hand sellers. On June 28 a  bando  was posted that pointed to unstable forms of exchange and, after linking the acquisition of pawns to the movement of disease, states: 

It is also prohibited that no Jew, or other person go around Rome selling clothing or used things, nor collect or buy torn rags from the inhabitants of Rome and its district. . . . [A]  11  who buy and sell used fabric, things to wear or of another sort, must within the next eight days have given notice . . . [of] the time and place and person from whom they have it and bought it. And those that fill mattresses and beds, or dismantle used fabrics to convert them into another form, are held and obliged to the inviolable observation of the same orders as are those who buy and sell rags, adapting proportionally all the above posted orders to their profession.54 

The aim was to trace the trajectories of mobile changeable objects. The items targeted were second-hand objects that had been through many hands and could be recycled into other items of everyday use. Of particular concern were objects from the ghetto, in which “there is the minimal portion of wool, linen, silk, thread, fur, or other things capable of catching infection.”55 Banking business and other forms of trade affecting the wealthier sectors of Rome, including the papacy itself, were permitted on the grounds that these did not threaten public health. 

The fear of the untraceable movements of unknown bodies interlocks with fears for one’s own body. The demand for the denunciation of the ill and dead raises this predicament, generating powerful and unpredictable mixtures of anxiety, submission, repulsion, and desire. Typical is a  bando  posted on September 7, which states that the discovery of signs of illness or of death be immediately reported to the congregation and dismisses all excuses presented by people that they could not recognize the symptoms of the disease.56 As well as intervening in personal bonds, with all their implications of loyalty and guilt, these regulations exploited fear of one’s own bodily demise and even of its afterlife: 

[D]ue to the failure or tardiness of the denouncements from which is born the progress of the illness with the death of many, since those wishing to conceal it forget this public harm of health, no less of the soul, that results in the death of the body of many others, who not knowing that they must protect themselves meet with these without regard. . . . [T]hese crimes will be pursued even after death and even against the corpse, and with harm to the memory of the dead.57 

But it is the resistance to such strategies that becomes most visible, revealed not only by countless official printed orders but even by the health officers themselves. The census ordered by the congregation of each district fulfilled not only the brief of the committee but also afforded a different perspective into the crisis. Indeed, a deputy’s report on the Campo Marzio,58 conducted between August 1656 and June 1657, declares that most of the suffering in the city could be attributed not to the plague but to the closure policies of the congregation that kept people from work and reduced many, even the relatively well-off, to destitution. This deputy, moreover, provides a remarkable insight into people’s tactics to deal with the increasing surveillance of everyday life:59 

[T]he fear that has entered everyone of being taken into the lazaretto, and of having one’s house closed has sinister effects, of which one is that the ill try as much as possible to conceal themselves, nor take care to be seen or given medicine by doctors or surgeons, nor call the confessor, fearing the account that will be given of their illness to the notary deputies. Nor can this be remedied by the diligence of the deputies and heads of the street who continually make visits and call each person, because each time the ill get out of their bed (if they are not too overwhelmed by the illness) and allow themselves to be seen by the deputy if they are persuaded that he is not able to determine illness, they allow themselves to be viewed at the window and behind some shutters, and once this occasion passes they return to bed with the same resolution, and other times close the house pretending to be out, without anyone being able to learn from neighbors the truth of the situation. Thus many are reduced to being near death without calling any doctor or surgeon. 

On the other side the doctors and surgeons that are not deputized agree to visit the ill only with great reticence, due to their own reasons, and even refuse absolutely to do it, and those that are deputized cannot attend to all the ill that each day emerge, and with time will increase.60 

T r --- 

Fear, frequently employed as a strategy by health officials, emerges here in its most insidious contradictions, constraining the diseased body through powerful notions of empathy, repulsion, and intrigue. But what also emerges is the performative extended and constrained by the very forms introduced to control the everyday. 

With these glimpses into the struggles around everyday life in the city, I return to Rouhier’s image of the body, which now seems much more decentered, both threatened and threatening, in conflict with the collective but also sacrificed to it. This range of possibilities is suggested throughout the sequence of narrative scenes, but they have become concentrated within one particular image of bodily suffering and demise. This scene (see Figures 7.3 and 7.14) accosts the viewer with the spectacle of official retribution through the infliction of bodily punishment that rivals even the suffering produced by the plague itself. In part, it is the dislocation of the scene that renders it excessive. Why amid open orderly landscape vistas do we find such an 

rigure 7.14. Louis Rouhier,  Diligent Orders and Measures Undertaken in the City of Rome during the Plague  (3), L657 (detail). Archivio di Stato di Roma. 

explosion of bodies, pressed against and intertwined around the shocking sights of torture and death? Moreover, while the image displays the unrestrained presence of authority, it is also curiously at odds with official policies on the isolation and segregation of potentially contaminated bodies. Executions continued to be carried out, and increased significantly, but their public performance was reduced. After all, even more than at other times, these events raised collective hostility against official prerogatives over the body.61 This image proves perplexing precisely because it breaks from the expectations both of accuracy in the congregation’s policies and of visual coherence in the conception of space. In this one image, I will argue, political power is no longer hidden behind notions of the cyclical and inevitable movements of the plague. Rather, the illusory clarity of the patterns of contamination is revealed to be the very place where the struggle for public space could finally be pictured. 

The congregation’s supreme authority is here at its most explicit, for it is the punishment of the transgressive body that provides the most concentrated vision of power. On display are not only punishments of the body but also crimes of the body. As Foucault argues, the torture of the body in public produces for all to see the truth of the crime.62 

This spectacle of brutal retribution speaks of the transgression of spatial boundaries, and in particular, as the accompanying text explains, transgression of orders conveyed in the  bando.  An official  banditore,  a singular figure that now stands in for both cursors and trumpeters, is transposed to the public space of bodily punishment. And in spite of the diminishment of the public aspects of execution at this time, the image extends these, not only by the concentration of people around the executions but also by bringing together multiple forms of punishment within a single space and time, and drawing on the accumulative effects of performance and repetition. 

The unprecedented strategy of displaying multiple forms of bodily punishment registers the particularity of the crime within the body and even within particular bodies. It also links these bodies to the scene of the crime and to specific city spaces. In early modern Europe, corporal punishment was deployed in relation to the political and social implications of the crime as well as the social status of perpetrators and victims.63 In the process it marked urban space in crucial ways, and in Rome the official imposition of bodily suffering projected claims over particular spaces and areas of jurisdiction. Thus the  corda,  which in these prints punctuates the institutions confiscated by the Congregation of Health, was found in market piazzas, where civic officers maintained the right to punish infractions of trade and commerce. Hanging was carried out in a number of venues in the city, depending on which authority claimed jurisdiction or even whether the crime pertained to a particular neighborhood. For crimes that threatened internal security, people were usually hung outside the gates.64 Indeed, during the months of the epidemic when most transgressions pertained to the crossing of internal and external city boundaries, all executions were conducted outside the city. Decapitation, which in the image is given center stage, was used for acts of treason, but because it was conceived as a more dignified and even less painful form of death it was reserved for members of the upper ranks and frequently executed inside a prison. In Rome decapitation was also strongly associated with crimes against papal authority, especially those that targeted visitors to the city, and usually led to the display of severed heads on the piazza in front of the Ponte Sant’Angelo.65 

Rouhier’s image of bodily punishment conflates, through diverse forms of punishment and urban spaces, a space of concentration that stands for public space as a whole. It argues for a public space of punishment imbued with state authority and imposing retribution equally to all. And if this compression of space evokes the city’s fragmented authority, then the body is made to fill in the cracks. The transgressive body is expanded, punished over and over again in a sequence that is inscribed with the same numbers but advances from corporal punishment of the whip to total bodily dismemberment. Giving greater visual authority to the harshest forms of punishment, the cycle foregrounds the scene of decapitation, enacted upon an unusually high, stagelike scaffold located within a broad, symmetrically organized piazza. This early form of the guillotine, used consistently in Rome and known as a  mannaia,  required the condemned person to lie on his or her stomach and for the blade to be 

driven down with the blow of a mallet.66 In the image, however, the executioner appears to have severed the head with a sword and is shown raising the sword while lifting the head toward the crowd in a gesture of authority’s triumph over the body. Another way in which this performance of public punishment intensifies the exchange between authority and public is through the participation of the Confraternity of San Giovanni Decollate.67 Members of this confraternity are represented as both participants and observers. They are distinguished through their robes and hoods as well as through their practices of accompanying, comforting, and praying for the prisoner on the way to the scaffold. The friars’ activities served to exacerbate the conflictual relation between the condemned and the executioner, which was frequently enacted as a struggle for redemption in the face of evil or even Satan.68 Given that at this time the role of the executioner became directly associated with the Congregation of Health, it is not surprising that the confraternity’s activities were the first component of public execution to be excluded. 

In consolidating singular authority, the scene represents the moment of crisis but also splits time in two. In fact, it seems to link authority’s punishment to that faced by the Christian after death. State retribution, the apparent desire to take control of an uncontrollable situation, is here imbued with Christian notions of sacrifice and salvation. In an overt parallel, the confraternity’s crucifixion arch echoes the arch formed by the guillotine. A similar conflation of state authority and Christian sacrifice seems to be at work in the unusual scene of death by firing squad, in which the victim’s pose could easily be read as Christ’s flagellation. This particular form of punishment, linked to acts against the state, is identified in the text separately due to its novelty. It is no coincidence that death through decapitation and firing squad are contained within the ambivalent relation between Christian sacrifice and state authority. These are, after all, exceptional occasions, and ones that situate punishment of the body in the rarefied circles of elite crime and in the more singular and coherent authority of the modern state. So in this instance physical punishment can be regarded as penance to be accrued for the afterlife much as an indulgence, and in this way serves as a sacrifice for the community as a whole. 

The same cannot be said of the forms of punishment relegated to the back of the representational space: th c frusta  or whip, and the  corda,  which is demonstrated with unusual veracity. While these more common forms of punishment are distanced from the viewer’s scrutiny, they are shown to come to the attention of those who happen to congregate at one of the arteries of the piazza, affording a rare glimpse into the day-to-day force of the law. The  corda,  entailing the person’s hands and feet to be tied together at the back and be pulled and twisted while hanging upside down, is of course present throughout this urban space of crisis. The apparatus that marks boundaries, especially those of the lazaretto, makes this entirely explicit. Yet during this crisis the transgression of boundaries usually led to death rather than to the torture of the  corda.  Political power may claim control over an uncontrollable crisis and even use this crisis 