Hal Foster 

- Preface - 

J unkspace  first appeared in  The Harvard Design School Guide to Shopping  (2001), a vast compendium of texts, images, and data concerning the consumerist transformation of city and suburb from the first department store to the latest mega-mall. This was the second installment of an extended project on contemporary urbanism undertaken by graduate students in architecture at Harvard overseen by Rem Koolhaas and the research team in his Office for Metropolitan Architecture (OMA).  Junkspace  was reprinted in the hundredth issue of  October  magazine, a special volume on obsolescence, where a first version of  Running Room  was also published. This essay appears here too, but in revised form so that it might serve as a partial response to  Junkspace  as well. 

What genre of writing is  Junkspace ? In his first major publication,  Delirious New York  (1978), Koolhaas demonstrated his mastery of the manifesto form; in fact, he invented his own variety—‘retroactive manifesto’ — as this celebration of the sheer density of Manhattan allowed by its famous grid was subtitled. Intermittently, over the next twenty years, Koolhaas continued in this polemical vein;  S,M,L,XL  (1995), a huge survey of OMA buildings and projects, included key interventions in ongoing debates about architecture and urbanism from the recessionary period of the 1970s to the boom years of the 1990s. Now the manifesto is essentially a modernist mode, one that looks to the future; often it aims to bend all posterity to its visionary will.  Junkspace  makes no such claim: ‘Architecture disappeared in the twentieth century,’ Koolhaas states matter-of-factly. In a sense,  Junkspace  does a harder thing: it ‘foretells’ the present, which is to say that it calls on us to recognize what is already everywhere around us. With engrained optimism, which is often fueled by technological enthusiasm, the Left 

has always bet heavily on posterity. In a recent text in  New Left Review  titled ‘For a Left with No Future’, T. J. Clark has urged us to give up on this  fata morgana.  Implicitly, Koolhaas sounds a similar note of desperate critique in  Junkspace. 

Yet it is this desperation that lends such energy to the text, which, generically, is more jeremiad than manifesto—a lamentation that veers into denunciation and back again almost sentence by sentence. As a jeremiad, the force of  Junkspace  is more ethical than political, which might be seen as a limitation if it were not that this posture makes for such biting insights, especially since Koolhaas does not presume to stand apart from ‘the kindergarten grotesque’ he surveys. In fact he takes it right into his prose; his language picks over capitalist cliches of all sorts — advertising jingles and commercial lingos, corporate logos and brand names—and retools this jumble of verbal junk for its own purposes. It is a brilliant performance that calls to mind other critical mimicries of corrupted tongues of the marketplace from James Joyce, through William Gaddis and Don DeLillo, to David Foster Wallace. 

As  Running Room  suggests, Koolhaas and OMA were among the architectural beneficiaries of the post-Wall boom after 1989. That moment appeared to usher in not only a New Europe but an entire New World Order, one that would require innovative building and infrastructure. In this order China quickly emerged as a dominant player, and its Market-Leninism soon made it the largest client of architects the world has ever seen.  S,M,L,XL  documents many of the possibilities and the pitfalls of this period (it begins with small projects but jumps to large and extra-large sizes), so why does the tone change so radically in  Junkspace  only twelve years on from 1989 (and just six years after  S,M,L,XL )? In some measure, this shift has to do with the specific context of its first publication, an analysis of the effects of shopping on city, suburb, and institutions of various sorts (e.g., museums, airports), whereby the parasite of the store somehow becomes the host that supports other forms of life (which are somewhat zombified as a result). In great part, however, this change reflects a souring on the triumphalism of 1989: far from the end of all ideology, as neoconservatives imagined at the time, 1989 marked the era of neoliberalism regnant, a form of capitalism that operates by deregulation at all levels, a deregulation that 

produces, as its primary effect in the built environment, not  grands projets  so much as Junkspace. In one way Koolhaas does subscribe to the neocon thesis of the end of history in the post-Communist world, only in his view, ‘like a crab on LSD, culture staggers endlessly sideways’. 

Junkspace  appeared twelve years after 1989, and now it is another twelve years later. What has this time brought with it? What transformations might alter our reading of this text? As presented by Koolhaas, Junkspace knows no limits, no outside, yet very quickly the events of 9/11 occurred, and new walls — and not just brick and barbed-wire ones—immediately appeared. In 2001 there were still borders of various sorts, many more arrived after 9/11, and today there might well be more walls than there were in 1989.  Plus ga change  on that score. So, too, some of us thought the attacks of 9/11 would put in question, if not in crisis, the media-ready type of spectacular architecture known as ‘starchitecture’ or ‘JunkSignature™’ (as Koolhaas calls it here), but it did not: global capital still wants its global marquees.  Plus ga change  again. Another thing that did not change (or, if it did, only for the worse) was the dominance of neoliberalism. Indeed, the balloon of the false boom continued to inflate, and it was only in fall 2007, slowly, and then in fall 2008, suddenly, that it collapsed. Has the Great Recession turned back the spread of Junkspace? It is not clear that it has, given that, if the economy is to recover, consumption and speculation must return in force —the former can only be strong, we are told by our economist masters, only if the latter are stoked. If manmade cataclysms like the crash of 2008 and the slow implosion of Europe over the last few years cannot do the trick, might man-aided disasters like Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy in 2005 and 2012, the super typhoon in Indonesia in 2009, and the earthquake-tsunami-meltdown in Fukushima in 2011 somehow stem the tide? If there is a limit put to Junkspace, it is likely to be one that is ecological before it is political. One slogan of May 1968 was  Sous les paves, la plage.  There is no beach under Junkspace, but perhaps a twenty-first-century version of the commons can begin to be staked out there. 

REM KOOLHAAS  - Junkspace - 

Logan Airport: A 'World-Class Upgrade for the Twenty-First Century  —late-twentieth-century billboard 

R abbit is the new beef ... Because we abhor the utilitarian, we have condemned ourselves to a lifelong immersion in the arbitrary ... LAX: welcoming— possibly flesh-eating-orchids—at the check-in counter ... ‘Identity’ is the new junk food for the dispossessed, globalization’s fodder for the disenfranchised ... If space-junk is the human debris that litters the universe, Junk-Space is the residue mankind leaves on the planet. The built (more about that later) product of modernization is not modern architecture but Junkspace. Junkspace is what remains after modernization has run its course, or, more precisely, what coagulates while modernization is in progress, its fallout. Modernization had a rational program: to share the blessings of science, universally. Junkspace is its apotheosis, or meltdown . Although its individual parts are the outcome of brilliant inventions, lucidly planned by human intelligence, boosted by infinite computation, their sum spells the end of Enlightenment, its resurrection as farce, a low-grade purgatory ... Junkspace is the sum total of our current achievement; we have built more than did all previous generations put together, but somehow we do not register on the same scales. We do not leave pyramids. According to a new gospel of ugliness, there is already more Junkspace under construction in the twenty-first century than has survived from the twentieth . It was a mistake to invent modern architecture for the twentieth century. Architecture disappeared in the twentieth century; we have been reading a footnote under a microscope hoping it would turn into a novel; our concern for the masses has blinded us to People’s Architecture. Junkspace seems an aberration, but it is the essence, the main thing . the product of an encounter between escalator and airconditioning, conceived in an incubator of Sheetrock (all three missing from the history books). Continuity is the essence of Junkspace; it exploits any invention that enables expansion, deploys the infrastructure of seamlessness: escalator, air-conditioning, sprinkler, fire shutter, hot-air 

curtain ... It is always interior, so extensive that you rarely perceive limits; it promotes disorientation by any means (mirror, polish, echo) ... Junkspace is sealed, held together not by structure but by skin, like a bubble. Gravity has remained constant, resisted by the same arsenal since the beginning of time; but air-conditioning-invisible medium, therefore unnoticed—has truly revolutionized architecture. Air-conditioning has launched the endless building. If architecture separates buildings, airconditioning unites them. Air-conditioning has dictated mutant regimes of organization and coexistence that leave architecture behind. A single shopping center is now the work of generations of space planners, repairmen, and fixers, like in the Middle Ages; air-conditioning sustains our cathedrals. (All architects may unwittingly be working on the same building, so far separate, but with hidden receptors that will eventually make it cohere.) Because it costs money, is no longer free, conditioned space inevitably becomes conditional space; sooner or later all conditional space turns into Junkspace ... When we think about space, we have only looked at its containers. As if space itself is invisible, all theory for the production of space is based on an obsessive preoccupation with its opposite: substance and objects, i.e., architecture. Architects could never explain space; Junkspace is our punishment for their mystifications. O.K., let’s talk about space then. The beauty of airports, especially after each upgrade. The luster of renovations. The subtlety of the shopping center. Let’s explore public space, discover casinos, spend time in theme parks . Junkspace is the body double of space, a territory of impaired vision, limited expectation, reduced earnestness. Junkspace is a Bermuda Triangle of concepts, an abandoned petri dish: it cancels distinctions, undermines resolve, confuses intention with realization. It replaces hierarchy with accumulation, composition with addition. More and more, more is more. Junkspace is overripe and undernourishing at the same time, a colossal security blanket that covers the earth in a stranglehold of seduction . Junkspace is like being condemned to a perpetual Jacuzzi with millions of your best friends . A fuzzy empire of blur, it fuses high and low, public and private, straight and bent, bloated and starved to offer a seamless patchwork of the permanently disjointed. Seemingly an apotheosis, spatially grandiose, the effect of its richness is a terminal hollowness, a vicious parody of ambition that systematically 

erodes the credibility of building, possibly forever ... Space was created by piling matter on top of matter, cemented to form a solid new whole. Junkspace is additive, layered, and lightweight, not articulated in different parts but subdivided, quartered the way a carcass is torn apart— individual chunks severed from a universal condition. There are no walls, only partitions, shimmering membranes frequently covered in mirror or gold. Structure groans invisibly underneath decoration, or worse, has become ornamental; small, shiny, space frames support nominal loads, or huge beams deliver cyclopic burdens to unsuspecting destinations ... The arch, once the workhorse of structures, has become the depleted emblem of ‘community’, welcoming an infinity of virtual populations to nonexistent theres. Where it is absent, it is simply applied— mostly in stucco—as ornamental afterthought on hurriedly erected superblocks. Junkspace’s iconography is 13 percent Roman, 8 percent Bauhaus and 7 percent Disney (neck and neck), 3 percent Art Nouveau, followed closely by Mayan ... Like a substance that could have condensed in any other form, Junkspace is a domain of feigned, simulated order, a kingdom of morphing. Its specific configuration is as fortuitous as the geometry of a snowflake. Patterns imply repetition or ultimately decipherable rules; Junkspace is beyond measure, beyond code . Because it cannot be grasped, Junkspace cannot be remembered. It is flamboyant yet unmemorable, like a screen saver; its refusal to freeze ensures instant amnesia. Junkspace does not pretend to create perfection, only interest. Its geometries are unimaginable, only makeable. Although strictly nonarchitectural, it tends to the vaulted, to the Dome. Some sections seem to be devoted to utter inertness, others in perpetual rhetorical turmoil: the deadest resides next to the most hysterical. Themes cast a pall of arrested development over interiors as big as the Pantheon, spawning stillbirths in every corner. The aesthetic is Byzantine, gorgeous, and dark, splintered into thousands of shards, all visible at the same time: a quasi-panoptical universe in which all contents rearrange themselves in split seconds around the dizzy eye of the beholder. Murals used to show idols; Junkspace’s modules are dimensioned to carry brands; myths can be shared, brands husband aura at the mercy of focus groups. Brands in Junkspace perform the same role as black holes in the universe: they are essences through which meaning disappears . The shiniest surfaces in 

the history of mankind reflect humanity at its most casual. The more we inhabit the palatial, the more we seem to dress down. A stringent dress code-last spasm of etiquette?—governs access to Junkspace: shorts, sneakers, sandals, shell suit, fleece, jeans, parka, backpack. As if the People suddenly accessed the private quarters of a dictator, Junkspace is best enjoyed in a state of postrevolutionary gawking. Polarities have merged—there is nothing left between desolation and frenzy. Neon signifies both the old and the new; interiors refer to the Stone and Space Age at the same time. Like the deactivated virus in an inoculation, Modern architecture remains essential, but only in its most sterile manifestation, High Tech (it seemed so dead only a decade ago!). It exposes what previous generations kept under wraps: structures emerge like springs from a mattress; exit stairs dangle in a didactic trapeze; probes thrust into space to deliver laboriously what is in fact omnipresent, free air; acres of glass hang from spidery cables, tautly stretched skins enclose flaccid nonevents. Transparency only reveals everything in which you cannot partake. At the stroke of midnight it all may revert to Taiwanese Gothic; in three years it may segue into Nigerian Sixties, Norwegian Chalet, or default Christian. Earthlings now live in a kindergarten grotesque ... Junkspace thrives on design, but design dies in Junkspace. There is no form, only proliferation ... Regurgitation is the new creativity; instead of creation, we honor, cherish, and embrace manipulation . Superstrings of graphics, transplanted emblems of franchise and sparkling infrastructures of light, LEDs, and video describe an authorless world beyond anyone’s claim, always unique, utterly unpredictable, yet intensely familiar. Junkspace is hot (or suddenly arctic); fluorescent walls, folded like melting stained glass, generate additional heat to raise the temperature of Junkspace to levels at which you could cultivate orchids. Pretending histories left and right, its contents are dynamic yet stagnant, recycled or multiplied as in cloning: forms search for function like hermit crabs looking for a vacant shell . Junkspace sheds architectures like a reptile sheds skins, is reborn every Monday morning. In previous building, materiality was based on a final state that could only be modified at the expense of partial destruction. At the exact moment that our culture has abandoned repetition and regularity as repressive, building materials have become more and more 

modular, unitary, and standardized; substance now comes predigitized ... As the module becomes smaller and smaller, its status become that of a crypto-pixel. With enormous difficulty-budget, argument, negotiation, deformation-irregularity and uniqueness are constructed from identical elements. Instead of trying to wrest order from chaos, the picturesque is now wrested from the homogenized, the singular liberated from the standardized ... Architects thought of Junkspace first and named it Megastructure, the final solution to transcend their huge impasse. Like multiple Babels, huge superstructures would last through eternity, teeming with impermanent subsystems that would mutate over time, beyond their control. In Junkspace, the tables are turned: it is subsystem only, without superstructure, orphaned particles in search of a framework or pattern. All materialization is provisional: cutting, bending, tearing, coating: construction has acquired a new softness, like tailoring ... The joint is no longer a problem, an intellectual issue: transitional moments are defined by stapling and taping, wrinkly brown bands barely maintain the illusion of an unbroken surface; verbs unknown and unthinkable in architectural history-clamp, stick, fold, dump, glue, shoot, double, fuse-have become indispensable. Each element performs its task in negotiated isolation. Where as detailing once suggested the coming together, possibly forever, of disparate materials, it is now a transient coupling, waiting to be undone, unscrewed, a temporary embrace with a high probability of separation; no longer the orchestrated encounter of difference, but the abrupt end of a system, a stalemate. Only the blind, reading its fault lines with their fingertips, will ever understand Junkspace’s histories ... While whole millennia worked in favor of permanence, axialities, relationships, and proportion, the program of Junkspace is escalation. Instead of development, it offers entropy. Because it is endless, it always leaks somewhere in Junkspace; in the worst case, monumental ashtrays catch intermittent drops in a gray broth . When did time stop moving forward, begin to spool in every direction, like a tape spinning out of control? Since the introduction of RealTime™? Change has been divorced from the idea of improvement. There is no progress; like a crab on LSD, culture staggers endlessly sideways . The average contemporary lunch box is a microcosm of Junkspace: a fervent semantics of health-slabs of eggplant, topped by 

thick layers of goat cheese-canceled by a colossal cookie at the bottom ... Junkspace is draining and is drained in return. Everywhere in Junkspace there are seating arrangements, ranges of modular chairs, even couches, as if the experience Junkspace offers its consumers is significantly more exhausting than any previous spatial sensation; in its most abandoned stretches, you find buffets: utilitarian tables draped in white or black sheets, perfunctory assemblies of caffeine and calories — cottage cheese, muffins, unripe grapes-notional representations of plenty, without horn and without plenty. Each Junkspace is connected, sooner or later, to bodily functions: wedged between stainless-steel partitions sit rows of groaning Romans, denim togas bunched around their huge sneakers ... Because it is so intensely consumed, Junkspace is fanatically maintained, the night shift undoing the damage of the day shift in an endless Sisyphean replay. As you recover from Junkspace, Junkspace recovers from you: between 2 and 5 a.m., yet another population, this one heartlessly casual and appreciably darker, is mopping, hovering, sweeping, toweling, resupplying . Junkspace does not inspire loyalty in its cleaners ... Dedicated to instant gratification, Junkspace accommodates seeds of future perfection; a language of apology is woven through its texture of canned euphoria; ‘pardon our appearance’ signs or miniature yellow ‘sorry’ billboards mark ongoing patches of wetness, announce momentary discomfort in return for imminent shine, the allure of improvement. Somewhere, workers sink on their knees to repair faded sections, as if in a prayer, or half-disappear in ceiling voids to negotiate elusive malfunctions, as if in confession. All surfaces are archaeological, superpositions of different ‘periods’ (what do you call the moment a particular type of wall-to-wall carpet was current?) — as you note when they’re torn ... Traditionally, typology implies demarcation, the definition of a singular model that excludes other arrangements. Junkspace represents a reverse typology of cumulative, approximative identity, less about kind than about quantity. But formlessness is still form, the formless also a typology . Take the dump, where successive trucks discharge their loads to form a heap, whole in spite of the randomness of its contents and its fundamental shapelessness, or that of the tent-envelope that assumes different shapes to accommodate variable interior volumes. Or the vague crotches of the 

new generation. Junkspace can either be absolutely chaotic or frighteningly aseptic-like a best-seller—overdetermined and indeterminate at the same time. There is something strange about ballrooms, for instance: huge wastelands kept column-free for ultimate flexibility. Because you’ve never been invited to that kind of event, you have never seen them in use; you’ve only seen them being prepared with chilling precision: a relentless grid of circular tables, extending toward a distant horizon, their diameters preempting communication; a dais big enough for the politburo of a totalitarian state, wings announcing as yet unimagined surprises-acres of organization to support future drunkenness, disarray, and disorder. Or car shows ... Junkspace is often described as a space of flows, but that is a misnomer; flows depend on disciplined movement, bodies that cohere. Junkspace is a web without a spider; although it is an architecture of the masses, each trajectory is strictly unique. Its anarchy is one of the last tangible ways in which we experience freedom. It is a space of collision, a container of atoms, busy, not dense . There is a special way of moving in Junkspace, at the same time aimless and purposeful. It is an acquired culture. Junkspace features the tyranny of the oblivious: sometimes an entire Junkspace comes unstuck through the nonconformity of one of its members; a single citizen of an another culture—a refugee, a mother-can destabilize an entire Junkspace, hold it to a rustic’s ransom, leaving an invisible swath of obstruction in his/her wake, a deregulation eventually communicated to its furthest extremities. Where movement becomes synchronized, it curdles: on escalators, near exits, parking machines, automated tellers. Sometimes, under duress, individuals are channeled in a flow, pushed through a single door or forced to negotiate the gap between two temporary obstacles (an invalid’s bleeping chariot and a Christmas tree): the manifest ill will such narrowing provokes mocks the notion of flows. Flows in Junkspace lead to disaster: department stores at the beginning of sales; the stampedes triggered by warring compartments of soccer fans; dead bodies piling up in front of the locked emergency doors of a disco— evidence of the awkward fit between the portals of Junkspace and the narrow calibrations of the old world. The young instinctively avoid the Dante-esque manipulations/containers to which Junkspace has condemned their elders in perpetuity. Within the meta-playground of 

Junkspace exist smaller playgrounds, Junkspace for children (usually in the least desirable square footage): sections of sudden miniaturization— often underneath staircases, always near dead ends — and assemblies of underdimensioned plastic structures — slides, seesaws, swings — shunned by their intended audience are turned into a Junkniche for the old, the lost, the forgotten, the insane ... the last hiccup of humanism ... Traffic is Junkspace, from airspace to the subway; the entire highway system is Junkspace, a vast potential utopia clogged by its users, as you notice when they’ve finally disappeared on vacation ... Like radioactive waste, Junkspace has an insidious half-life. Aging in Junkspace is nonexistent or catastrophic; sometimes an entire Junkspace—a department store, a nightclub, a bachelor pad—turns into a slum overnight without warning: wattage diminishes imperceptibly, letters drop out of signs, airconditioning units start dripping, cracks appear as if from otherwise unregistered earthquakes; sections rot, are no longer viable, but remain joined to the flesh of the main body via gangrenous passages. Judging the built presumed a static condition; now each architecture embodies opposite conditions simultaneously: old and new, permanent and temporary, flourishing and at risk ... Sections undergo an Alzheimer’s-like deterioration as others are upgraded. Because Junkspace is endless, it is never closed ... Renovation and restoration were procedures that took place in your absence; now you’re a witness, a reluctant participant ... Seeing Junkspace in conversion is like inspecting an unmade bed, someone else’s. Say an airport needs more space. In the past, new terminals were added, each more or less characteristic of its own age, leaving the old ones as a readable record, evidence of progress. Since passengers have definitively demonstrated their infinite malleability, the idea of rebuilding on the spot has gained currency. Travelators are thrown into reverse, signs taped, potted palms (or very large corpses) covered in body bags. Screens of taped Sheetrock segregate two populations: one wet, one dry, one hard, one flabby, one cold, one overheated. Half the population produces new space; the more affluent half consumes old space. To accommodate a nether world of manual labor, the concourse suddenly turns into Casbah: improvised locker rooms, coffee breaks, smoking, even real campfires . The ceiling is a crumpled plate like the Alps; grids of unstable tiles alternate with monogrammed sheets of black 

plastic, improbably punctured by grids of crystal chandeliers ... Metal ducts are replaced by breathing textiles. Gaping joints reveal vast ceiling voids (former canyons of asbestos?), beams, ducting, rope, cable, insulation, fire-proofing, string; tangled arrangements suddenly exposed to daylight. Impure, tortured, and complex, they exist only because they were never consciously plotted. The floor is a patchwork: different textures—concrete, hairy, heavy, shiny, plastic, metallic, muddy— alternate randomly, as if dedicated to different species . The ground is no more. There are too many raw needs to be realized on only one plane. The absolute horizontal has been abandoned. Transparency has disappeared, to be replaced by a dense crust of provisional occupation: kiosks, carts, strollers, palms, fountains, bars, sofas, trolleys ... Corridors no longer simply link A to B, but have become ‘destinations’. Their tenant life tends to be short: the most stagnant windows, the most perfunctory dresses, the most implausible flowers. All perspective is gone, as in a rainforest (itself disappearing, they keep saying ...). The formerly straight is coiled into evermore complex configurations. Only a perverse modernist choreography can explain the twists and turns, the ascents and descents, the sudden reversals that comprise the typical path from check-in (misleading name) to the apron of the average contemporary airport. Because we never reconstruct or question the absurdity of these enforced derives, we meekly submit to grotesque journeys past perfume, asylum-seekers, building site, underwear, oysters, pornography, cell phone—incredible adventures for the brain, the eye, the nose, the tongue, the womb, the testicles . There was once a polemic about the right angle and the straight line; now the ninetieth degree has become one among many. In fact, remnants of former geometries create ever new havoc, offering forlorn nodes of resistance that create unstable eddies in newly opportunistic flows ... Who would dare claim responsibility for this sequence? The idea that a profession once dictated, or at least presumed to predict, people’s movements now seems laughable, or worse: unthinkable. Instead of design, there is calculation: the more erratic the path, eccentric the loops, hidden the blueprint, efficient the exposure, the more inevitable the transaction. In this war, graphic designers are the great turncoats: Where once signage promised to deliver you to where you wanted to be, it now obfuscates and 

entangles you in a thicket of cuteness that forces you past unwanted detours, turns you back when you’re lost. Postmodernism adds a crumple-zone of viral poche that fractures and multiplies the endless frontline of display, a peristaltic shrink-wrap crucial to all commercial exchange. Trajectories are launched as ramp, turn horizontal without any warning, intersect, fold down, suddenly emerge on a vertiginous balcony above a large void. Fascism minus dictator. From the sudden dead end where you were dropped by a monumental, granite staircase, an escalator takes you to an invisible destination, facing a provisional vista made of plaster, inspired by forgettable sources. (There is no datum level; you always inhabit a sandwich. ‘Space’ is scooped out of Junkspace as from a soggy block of ice cream that has languished too long in the freezer: cylindrical, cone-shaped, more or less spherical, whatever ...) Toilet groups mutate into Disney Stores then morph to become meditation centers: Successive transformations mock the word ‘plan’. The plan is a radar screen where individual pulses survive for unpredictable periods of time in a Bacchanalian free-for-all ... In this standoff between the redundant and the inevitable, a plan would actually make matters worse, would drive you to instant despair. Only the diagram gives a bearable version. There is zero loyalty—and zero tolerance—toward configuration, no ‘original’ condition; architecture has turned into a time-lapse sequence to reveal a ‘permanent evolution’ ... The only certainty is conversion—continuous—followed, in rare cases, by ‘restoration’, the process that claims ever new sections of history as extensions of Junkspace. History corrupts, absolute history corrupts absolutely. Color and matter are eliminated from these bloodless grafts: the bland has become the only meeting ground for the old and the new . Can the bland be amplified? The featureless be exaggerated? Through height? Depth? Length? Variation? Repetition? Sometimes not overload but its opposite, an absolute absence of detail, generates Junkspace. A voided condition of frightening sparseness, shocking proof that so much can be organized by so little. Laughable emptiness infuses the respectful distance or tentative embrace that starchitects maintain in the presence of the past, authentic or not. Invariably, the primordial decision is to leave the original intact; the formerly residual is declared the new essence, the focus of the intervention. As a first step, the substance to be preserved is 

wrapped in a thick pack of commerce and catering-like a reluctant skier pushed downhill by responsible minders. To show respect, symmetries are maintained and helplessly exaggerated; ancient building techniques are resurrected and honed to irrelevant shine, quarries reopened to excavate the ‘same’ stone, indiscreet donor names chiseled prominently in the meekest of typefaces; the courtyard covered by a masterful, structural ‘filigree’-emphatically uncompetitive-so that continuity may be established with the ‘rest’ of Junkspace (abandoned galleries, display slums, Jurassic concepts ...). Conditioning is applied; filtered daylight reveals vast, antiseptic expanses of monumental reticence and makes them come alive, vibrant as a computer rendering . The curse of public space: latent fascism safely smothered in signage, stools, sympathy . Junkspace is postexistential; it makes you uncertain where you are, obscures where you go, undoes where you were. Who do you think you are? Who do you want to be? (Note to architects: You thought that you could ignore Junkspace, visit it surreptitiously, treat it with condescending contempt or enjoy it vicariously ... because you could not understand it, you’ve thrown away the keys ... But now your own architecture is infected, has become equally smooth, all-inclusive, continuous, warped, busy, atrium-ridden.) JunkSignature™ is the new architecture: the former megalomania of a profession contracted to manageable size, Junkspace minus its saving vulgarity. Anything stretched-limousines, body parts, planes-turns into Junkspace, its original concept abused. Restore, rearrange, reassemble, revamp, renovate, revise, recover, redesign, return-the Parthenon marbles-redo, respect, rent: verbs that start with re-produce Junkspace . Junkspace will be our tomb. Half of mankind pollutes to produce, the other pollutes to consume. The combined pollution of all Third World cars, motorbikes, trucks, buses, sweatshops pales into insignificance compared to the heat generated by Junkspace. Junkspace is political: It depends on the central removal of the critical faculty in the name of comfort and pleasure. Politics has become manifesto by Photoshop, seamless blueprints of the mutually exclusive, arbitrated by opaque NGOs. Comfort is the new Justice. Entire miniature states now adopt Junkspace as political program, establish regimes of engineered disorientation, instigate a politics of systematic disarray. Not exactly ‘anything goes’; in fact, the secret of 

Junkspace is that it is both promiscuous and repressive: as the formless proliferates, the formal withers, and with it all rules, regulations, recourse ... Babel has been misunderstood. Language is not the problem, just the new frontier of Junkspace. Mankind, torn by eternal dilemmas, the impasse of seemingly endless debates, has launched a new language that straddles unbridgeable divides like a fragile designer’s footbridge ... coined a proactive wave of new oxymorons to suspend former incompatibility: life/style, reality/TV, world/music, museum/store, food/ court, health/care, waiting/lounge. Naming has replaced class struggle, sonorous amalgamations of status, high-concept, and history. Through acronym, unusual importation, suppressing letters, or fabrication of nonexistent plurals, they aim to shed meaning in return for a spacious new roominess ... Junkspace knows all your emotions, all your desires. It is the interior of Big Brother’s belly. It preempts people’s sensations. It comes with a sound track, smell, captions; it blatantly proclaims how it wants to be read: rich, stunning, cool, huge, abstract, ‘minimal’, historical. It sponsors a collective of brooding consumers in surly anticipation of their next spend, a mass of refractory periods caught in a Thousand Year Reign of Razzmatazz, a paroxysm of prosperity. The subject is stripped of privacy in return for access to a credit nirvana. You are complicit in the tracing of the fingerprints each of your transactions leaves; they know everything about you, except who you are. Emissaries of Junkspace pursue you in the formerly impervious privacy of the bedroom: the minibar, private fax machines, pay-TV offering compromised pornography, fresh plastic veils wrapping toilets seats, courtesy condoms: miniature profit centers coexist with your bedside bible ... Junkspace pretends to unite, but it actually splinters. It creates communities not out of shared interest or free association, but out of identical statistics and unavoidable demographics, an opportunistic weave of vested interests. Each man, woman, and child is individually targeted, tracked, split off from the rest ... Fragments come together at ‘security’ only, where a grid of video screens disappointingly reassembles individual frames into a banalized, utilitarian cubism that reveals Junkspace’s overall coherence to the dispassionate glare of barely trained guards: video-ethnography in its brute form. Just as Junkspace is unstable, its actual ownership is forever being passed on in parallel 

disloyalty. Junkspace happens spontaneously through natural corporate exuberance—the unfettered play of the market—or is generated through the combined actions of temporary ‘czars’ with long records of threedimensional philanthropy, bureaucrats (often former leftists) that optimistically sell off vast tracts of waterfront, former hippodromes, military bases and abandoned airfields to developers or real-estate moguls who can accommodate any deficit in futuristic balances, or through Default Preservation™ (the maintenance of historical complexes that nobody wants but that the Zeitgeist has declared sacrosanct). As its scale mushrooms—rivals and even exceeds that of the Public—its economy becomes more inscrutable. Its financing is a deliberate haze, clouding opaque deals, dubious tax breaks, unusual incentives, exemptions, tenuous legalities, transferred air rights, joined properties, special zoning districts, public-private complicities. Funded by bonds, lottery, subsidy, charity, grant: An erratic flow of yen, Euros, and dollars creates financial envelopes that are as fragile as their contents. Because of a structural shortfall, a fundamental deficit, a contingent bankruptcy, each square inch becomes a grasping, needy surface dependent on covert or overt support, discount, compensation and fund-raising. For culture, ‘engraved donor bricks’; for everything else: cash, rentals, leases, franchises, the underpinning of brands. Junkspace expands with the economy but its footprint cannot contract—when it is no longer needed, it thins. Because of its tenuous viability, Junkspace has to swallow more and more program to survive; soon, we will be able to do anything anywhere. We will have conquered place. At the end of Junkspace, the Universal? Through Junkspace, old aura is transfused with new luster to spawn sudden commercial viability: Barcelona amalgamated with the Olympics, Bilbao with the Guggenheim, Forty-Second Street with Disney. God is dead, the author is dead, history is dead, only the architect is left standing ... an insulting evolutionary joke ... A shortage of masters has not stopped a proliferation of masterpieces. ‘Masterpiece’ has become a definitive sanction, a semantic space that saves the object from criticism, leaves its qualities unproven, its performance untested, its motives unquestioned. Masterpiece is no longer an inexplicable fluke, a roll of the dice, but a consistent typology: its mission to intimidate, most of its exterior surfaces bent, huge percentages of its square footage 

dysfunctional, its centrifugal components barely held together by the pull of the atrium, dreading the imminent arrival of forensic accounting ... The more indeterminate the city, the more specific its Junkspace; all of Junkspace’s prototypes are urban—the Roman Forum, the Metropolis; it is only their reverse synergy that makes them suburban, simultaneously swollen and shrunk. Junkspace reduces what is urban to urbanity ... Instead of public life, Public Space™: what remains of the city once the unpredictable has been removed ... Space for ‘honoring’, ‘sharing’, ‘caring’, ‘grieving’, and ‘healing’ ... civility imposed by an overdose of serif . In the third Millennium, Junkspace will assume responsibility for pleasure and religion, exposure and intimacy, public life and privacy. Inevitably, the death of God (and the author) has spawned orphaned space; Junkspace is authorless, yet surprisingly authoritarian ... At the moment of its greatest emancipation, humankind is subjected to the most dictatorial scripts: from the pushy oration of the waiter to the answering gulags on the other end of the telephone, the safety instructions on the airplane, more and more insistent perfumes, mankind is browbeaten into submitting to the most harshly engineered plotline ... The chosen theater of megalomania—the dictatorial—is no longer politics, but entertainment. Through Junkspace, entertainment organizes hermetic regimes of ultimate exclusion and concentration: concentration gambling, concentration golf, concentration convention, concentration movie, concentration culture, concentration holiday. Entertainment is like watching a once-hot planet cool off; its major inventions are ancient: the moving image, the roller coaster, recorded sound, cartoons, clowns, dinosaurs, news, war. Except for celebrities—of which there is a dramatic shortage—we have added nothing, just reconfigured. Corpotainment is a galaxy in contraction, forced to go through the motions by ruthless Copernican laws. The secret of corporate aesthetics was the power of elimination, the celebration of the efficient, the eradication of excess: abstraction as camouflage, the search for a Corporate Sublime. On popular demand, organized beauty has become warm, humanist, inclusivist, arbitrary, poetic, and unthreatening: water is pressurized through very small holes, then forced into rigorous hoops; straight palms are bent into grotesque poses, air is burdened with added oxygen—as if only forcing malleable substances into the most drastic contortions 

maintains control, satisfies the drive to get rid of surprise. Not canned laughter, but canned euphoria ... Color has disappeared to dampen the resulting cacophony, and is used only as cue: relax, enjoy, be well, we’re united in sedation ... Why can’t we tolerate stronger sensations? Dissonance? Awkwardness? Genius? Anarchy? ... Junkspace heals, or at least that is the assumption of many hospitals. We thought the hospital was unique—a universe that identified by its smell—but now that we are used to universal conditioning we recognize it was merely a prototype; all Junkspace is defined by its smell. Often heroic in size, planned with the last adrenaline of modernism’s grand inspiration, we have made them (too) human; life or death decisions are taken in spaces that are relentlessly friendly, littered with fading bouquets, empty coffee cups, and yesterday’s papers. You used to face death in appropriate cells; now your nearest are huddled together in atriums. A bold datum line is established on every vertical surface, dividing the infirmary in two: above an endless humanist scroll of ‘color’, loved ones, children’s sunsets, signage, and art . below a utilitarian zone for defacement and disinfectant, anticipated collision, scratch, spill, and smudge ... Junkspace is space as vacation; there once was a relationship between leisure and work, a biblical dictate that divided our weeks, organized public life. Now we work harder, marooned in a never-ending casual Friday ... The office is the next frontier of Junkspace. Since you can work at home, the office aspires to the domestic; because you still need a life, it simulates the city. Junkspace features the office as the urban home, a meeting-boudoir: desks become sculptures, the work-floor is lit by intimate downlights. Monumental partitions, kiosks, mini-Starbucks on interior plazas: a Post-it universe: ‘team memory’, ‘information persistence’; futile hedges against the universal forgetting of the unmemorable, the oxymoron as mission statement. Witness corporate agitprop: the CEO’s suite becomes ‘leadership collective’, wired to all the world’s other Junkspace, real or imagined. Espace becomes E-space. The twenty-first century will bring ‘intelligent’ Junkspace: on a big digital ‘dashboard’: sales, CNNNYSENASDAQC-SPAN, anything that goes up or down, from good to bad, presented in real time like the automotive-theory course that complements driving lessons . Globalization turns language into Junkspace. We are stuck in a speech- 

doldrums. The ubiquity of English is Pyrrhic: now that we all speak it, nobody remembers its use. The collective bastardization of English is our most impressive achievement; we have broken its back with ignorance, accent, slang, jargon, tourism, outsourcing, and multitasking ... we can make it say anything we want, like a speech dummy ... Through the retrofitting of language, there are too few plausible words left; our most creative hypotheses will never be formulated, discoveries will remain unmade, concepts unlaunched, philosophies muffled, nuances miscarried ... We inhabit sumptuous Potemkin suburbs of weasel terminologies. Aberrant linguistic ecologies sustain virtual subjects in their claim to legitimacy, help them survive ... Language is no longer used to explore, define, express, or to confront but to fudge, blur, obfuscate, apologize, and comfort . it stakes claims, assigns victimhood, preempts debate, admits guilt, fosters consensus. Entire organizations and/or professions impose a descent into the linguistic equivalent of hell: condemned to a word-limbo, inmates wrestle with words in ever-descending spirals of pleading, lying, bargaining, flattening ... a Satanic orchestration of the meaningless ... Intended for the interior, Junkspace can easily engulf a whole city. First, it escapes from its containers — semantic orchids that needed hothouse protection emerging with surprising robustness—then the outdoors itself is converted: the street is paved more luxuriously, shelters proliferate carrying increasingly dictatorial messages, traffic is calmed, crime eliminated. Then Junkspace spreads like a forest fire in L.A... . The global progress of Junkspace represents a final Manifest Destiny: the World as public space ... All of the resurrected emblems and recycled ambers of the formerly public need new pastures. A new vegetal is corralled for its thematic efficiency. The outing of Junkspace has triggered the professionalization of denaturing, a benign eco- fascism that positions a rare surviving Siberian tiger in a forest of slot machines, near Armani, amid a twisted arboreal Baroque ... Outside, between the casinos, fountains project entire Stalinist buildings of liquid, ejaculated in a split second, hovering momentarily, then withdrawing with an amnesiac competency . Air, water, wood: All are enhanced to produce Hyperecology™, a parallel Walden, a new rainforest. Landscape has become Junkspace, foliage as spoilage: Trees are tortured, lawns cover human manipulations like thick pelts, or even toupees, sprinklers water 

according to mathematical timetables ... Seemingly at the opposite end of Junkspace, the golf course is, in fact, its conceptual double: empty, serene, free of commercial debris. The relative evacuation of the golf course is achieved by the further charging of Junkspace. The methods of their design and realization are similar: erasure, tabula rasa, reconfiguration. Junkspace turns into biojunk; ecology turns into ecospace. Ecology and economy have bonded in Junkspace as ecolomy. The economy has become Faustian; hyperdevelopment depends on artificial underdevelopment; a huge global bureaucracy is in the making to settle, in a colossal yin/yang, the balance between Junkspace and golf, between the scraped and the ‘scaped, trading the right to despoil for the obligation to create steroid rainforests in Costa Rica. Oxygen banks, Fort Knoxes of chlorophyll, eco-reserves as a blank check for further pollution. Junkspace is rewriting the apocalypse; we may die of oxygen poisoning ... In the past, the complexities of Junkspace were compensated for by the stark rawness of its adjunct infrastructures: parking garages, filling stations, distribution centers routinely displaying a monumental purity that was the original aim of modernism. Now, massive injections of lyricism have enabled an infrastructure—the one domain previously immune to design, taste, or the marketplace—to join the world of Junkspace, and for Junkspace to extend its manifestations under the sky. Railway stations unfold like iron butterflies, airports glisten like cyclopic dewdrops, bridges span often negligible banks like grotesquely enlarged versions of the harp. To each rivulet its own Calatrava. (Sometimes when there is a strong wind, this new generation of instruments shakes as if being played by a giant, or maybe a God, and mankind shudders ...) Junkspace can be airborne, bring malaria to Sussex; 300 anopheline mosquitoes arrive each day at GDG and GTW with ability, theoretically, to infect eight to twenty locals in a three-mile radius, a hazard exacerbated by the average passenger’s reluctance, in a misplaced gasp of quasi-autonomy, to be disinfected once he or she has buckled up for the return journey from the dead end of the tourist destination. Airports, provisional accommodation for those going elsewhere, inhabited by assemblies united only by the imminence of their dissolution, have turned into consumption gulags, democratically distributed across the globe to give every citizen an equal chance of 

admission ... MXP looks as if all of the leftovers of East Germany’s reconstrnction—whatever was needed to undo the deprivations of Communism-have been hurriedly bulldozed together according to a vaguely rectangular blueprint to form a botched sequence of deformed, inadequate spaces (apparently willed into being by the current rulers of Europe, who extort limitless Euros from the community’s regional funds, causing endless delays for its duped taxpayers too busy on cell phones to notice). DFW is composed of three elements only, repeated ad infinitum, nothing else: one kind of beam, one kind of brick, one kind of tile, all coated in the same color—is it teal? Rust? Tobacco? With symmetries scaled beyond any possibility of recognition, the endless curve of its terminals forces its users to enact relativity theory in their quest for the gate. Its dropoff is the seemingly harmless beginning of a journey to the heart of unmitigated nothingness, beyond the animation provided by Pizza Hut, Dairy Queen ... Valley cultures were thought to be the most resistant to Junkspace: at GVZ you can still see a universe of rules, order, hierarchy, neatness, coordination, poised moments before its implosion, but at ZHR huge ‘timepieces’ hover in front of interior waterfalls as an essay in Regionaljunk. Duty-free is Junkspace; Junkspace is duty-free space. Where culture was thinnest, will it be the first to run out? Is emptiness local? Do wide open spaces demand wide open Junkspace? Sunbelt: huge populations where there was nothing; PHX: warpaint on every terminal, dead Indian outlines on every surface-carpet, wallpaper, napkins—like frogs flattened by car tires. Public Art distributed across LAX: the fish that have disappeared from our rivers return as public art in the concourse; only what is dead can be resurrected. Memory itself may have turned into Junkspace; only those murdered will be remembered . Deprivation can be caused by overdose or shortage; both conditions happen in Junkspace (often at the same time). Minimum is the ultimate ornament, a self-righteous crime, the contemporary Baroque. It does not signify beauty, but guilt. Its demonstrative earnestness drives whole civilizations into the welcoming arms of camp and kitsch. Ostensibly a relief from constant sensorial onslaught, minimum is maximum in drag, a stealth laundering of luxury: the stricter the lines, the more irresistible the seductions. Its role is not to approximate the sublime, but to minimize the shame of consumption, drain embarrassment, to lower what is higher. 

The minimum now exists in a state of parasitic codependency with the overdose: to have and not to have, craving and owning, finally collapsed in a single signifier ... Museums are sanctimonious Junkspace; there is no sturdier aura than holiness. To accommodate the converts they have attracted by default, museums massively turn ‘bad’ space into ‘good’ space; the more untreated the oak, the larger the profit center. Monasteries inflated to the scale of department stores: expansion is the Third Millennium’s entropy, dilute or die. Dedicated to mostly respecting the dead, no cemetery would dare to reshuffle corpses as casually in the name of current expediency; curators plot hangings and unexpected encounters in a donor-plate labyrinth with the finesse of the retailer: lingerie becomes ‘Nude, Action, Body’, cosmetics ‘History, Memory, Society’. All paintings based on black grids are herded together in a single white room. Large spiders in the humongous conversion offer delirium for the masses . Narrative reflexes that have enabled us from the beginning of time to connect dots, fill in blanks, are now turned against us: we cannot stop noticing—no sequence is too absurd, trivial, meaningless, insulting ... Through our ancient evolutionary equipment, our irrepressible attention span, we helplessly register, provide insight, squeeze meaning, read intention; we cannot stop making sense out of the utterly senseless ... On its triumphal march as content provider, art extends far beyond the museum’s ever-increasing boundaries. Outside, in the real world, the ‘art planner’ spreads Junkspace’s fundamental incoherence by assigning defunct mythologies to residual surfaces and plotting three-dimensional works in leftover emptiness. Scouting for authenticity, his or her touch seals the fate of what was real, taps it for incorporation in Junkspace. Art galleries move en masse to ‘edgy’ locations, then convert raw space into white cubes . The only legitimate discourse is loss; art replenishes Junkspace in direct proportion to its own morbidity. We used to renew what was depleted; now we try to resurrect what is gone . Outside, the architect’s footbridge is rocked to the breaking point by a stampede of enthusiastic pedestrians; the designer’s initial audacity now awaits the engineer’s application of dampers. Junkspace is a look-no-hands world . The constant threat of virtuality in Junkspace is no longer exorcized by petrochemical products, plastic, vinyl or rubber; the synthetic cheapens. Junkspace has to exaggerate its 

claims to the authentic. Junkspace is like a womb that organizes the transition of endless quantities of the Real-stone, trees, goods, daylight, people—into the unreal. Entire mountains are dismembered to provide ever-greater quantities of authenticity, suspended on precarious brackets, polished to a blinding state of flash that renders the intended earnestness instantly elusive. Stone only comes in light yellow, flesh, a violent beige, a soaplike green, the colors of Communist plastics in the 1950s. Forests are felled, their wood all pale: maybe the origins of Junkspace go back to the kindergarten ... (‘Origins’ is a mint shampoo that stings the anal region.) Color in the real world looks increasingly unreal, drained. Color in virtual space is luminous, therefore irresistible. A surfeit of reality-TV has made us into amateur guards monitoring a Junkuniverse . From the lively breasts of the classical violinist to the designer stubble of the Big Brother outcast, the contextual paedophilia of the former revolutionary, the routine addictions of the stars, the runny makeup of the evangelist, the robotic body language of the conductor, the dubious benefits of the fund-raising marathon, the futile explanations of the politician: the swooping movement of the TV camera suspended from its boom—an eagle without beak or claws, just an optical stomach-swallows images and confessions indiscriminately, like a trash bag, to propel them as cybervomit in space. TV-studio sets — garishly monumental — are both the culmination and the end of perspectival space as we’ve known it: angular geometric remnants invading starry infinities; real space edited for smooth transmission in virtual space, crucial hinge in an infernal feedback loop . the vastness of Junkspace extended to the edges of the Big Bang. Because we spend our life indoors—like animals in a zoo—we are obsessed with the weather: 40 percent of all TV consists of presenters of lesser attractiveness gesturing helplessly in front of windswept formations, through which you recognize, sometimes, your own destination/current position. Conceptually, each monitor, each TV screen is a substitute for a window; real life is inside, while cyberspace has become the great outdoors ... Mankind is always going on about architecture. What if space started looking at mankind? Will Junkspace invade the body? Through the vibes of the cell phone? Has it already? Through Botox injections? Collagen? Silicone implants? Liposuction? Penis enlargements? Does gene therapy announce a total reengineering 

according to Junkspace? Is each of us a mini-construction site? Is mankind the sum of three to five billion individual upgrades? Is it a repertoire of reconfiguration that facilitates the intromission of a new species into its self-made Junksphere? The cosmetic is the new cosmic ... 

HAL FOSTER  - Running Room - 

Autonomy 

A utonomy, or the notion that each art stands apart, in its own area of competence, is the first principle of modern aesthetics, in place at least since the time of Kant, and it is a bad word for most of us informed by the hybrid style of postmodern practice, not to mention the interdisciplinary moves of postmodern theory. We tend to forget that autonomy is always provisional, situated historically and politically, and that the arts are always defined in relation to one another, never absolutely; in short, we tend to forget that autonomy is always  semi.  This is all the more true for architecture, of course, bound up as it is with constraints of purpose and program. 

Enlightenment thinkers advocated political autonomy in order to resist the absolute power of the  ancien regime,  while modernist artists advocated aesthetic autonomy in order to counter the persistent demand for illustrational meanings (illustrational as in ideological or commercial). Like essentialism in debates about identity, then, autonomy might be a bad word, but it is not always a bad strategy, especially at a time when the hybrid and the interdisciplinary have become almost the routine: call it ‘strategic autonomy’. In  Junkspace,  Rem Koolhaas uses the term only once, and he qualifies it as ‘quasiautonomy’; nevertheless, at least implicitly, it is a value he wants to reassert, even a position he wants to reclaim. Is this possible in a world of Junkspace? 

Bigness 

One approach to Junkspace is to see it in relation to another Koolhaas notion, that of Bigness. In a 1993 text on the subject he proposed five theorems: 

1. Beyond a certain critical mass, a building becomes a BIG Building. Such a mass can no longer be controlled by a singular architectural gesture, or even by any combination of architectural gestures. The impossibility triggers the autonomy of its parts, which is different from fragmentation: the parts remain committed to the whole. 

2.    The elevator—with its potential to establish mechanical rather than architectural connections— and its family of related inventions render null and void the classical repertoire of architecture. Issues of composition, scale, proportion, detail are now moot. The ‘art’ of architecture is useless in BIGNESS. 

3.    In BIGNESS, the distance between core and envelope increases to the point where the fafade can no longer reveal what happens inside. The humanist expectation of ‘honesty’ is doomed; interior and exterior architectures become separate projects, one dealing with the instability of programmatic and iconographic needs, the other—agent of dis-information—offering the city the apparent stability of an object. Where architecture reveals, BIGNESS perplexes; BIGNESS transforms the city from a summation of certainties into an accumulation of mysteries. What you see is no longer what you get. 

4.    Through size alone, such buildings enter an amoral domain, beyond good and bad. Their impact is independent of their quality. 

5.    Together, all these breaks—with scale, with architectural composition, with tradition, with transparency, with ethics—imply the final, most radical break: BIGNESS is no longer part of any issue. It exists; at most, it coexists. Its subtext is fuck context. 

In 1993 Koolhaas was optimistic about Bigness. It was a ‘model of programmatic alchemy’ that allowed for internal diversity; better still, it suggested a way to design at an urban scale again, ‘to reconstruct the Whole’; in fact, through Bigness architecture might ‘regain its instrumentality as a vehicle of modernization’. But that was then. In 1993, just a few years after the fall of the Wall, the New Europe was still a fresh idea, its leaders were in an expansionist mood, and Koolhaas was a beneficiary of this big thinking (for example, his Office of Metropolitan Architecture, or OMA, did the master plan for ‘Euralille’ (1990-94), a complex of buildings for a provincial city in northern France that suddenly became a hub for the revised continent). Moreover, China had unleashed its Market-Leninism, and countless commissions would soon appear on the eastern horizon. In short, a new wave of modernization had built up, and Koolhaas called on architects to ride it. 

Eight years later  Junkspace  reads as a repudiation of Bigness. Here Koolhaas laments the passing of both architectural art and modernist honesty. If Junkspace is also ‘beyond good and bad’, beyond the usual terms of critical judgment, there is no more promise in this surpassing. And if the ‘fuck context’ of Bigness once offered a thrill, there is no such 

bravado with Junkspace: for Koolhaas it is the only context we have, and it sucks. Junkspace is the ‘fallout’ of the modernization that Bigness hoped to manage; it is the bad hangover after the big debauch. And today, another decade on, after the crash of 2008 and with Europe in trouble, the entropy has sped up. It is as though the latest wave of modernization had crashed, and left us strewn on the beach with all the other junk. 

Bonaventure 

In his influential analysis of postmodern space, ‘Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism’ (1984), Fredric Jameson used the vast atrium of the Bonaventure Hotel in Los Angeles, realized by John Portman in 1974, as the primary symptom of a new architectural sublime, one that seems almost intended to derange the human sensorium. Jameson saw this spatial delirium as a particular instance of our general incapacity to comprehend the late-capitalist world, to map it cognitively. Strangely, what Jameson offered as a  critique  of postmodern culture such architects as Frank Gehry and Zaha Hadid took as a  model:  the creation of extravagant spaces that tend to overwhelm the subject, of a neoBaroque architecture dedicated to the glory of the powers of the day. (In the original Baroque the primary patrons were prince and church; in the new version they include giant corporations, ambitious governments, sports empires, and cultural institutions like art museums.) It is as though these architects designed not in contestation of ‘the cultural logic of late capitalism’ but according to its specifications, and for this feat they were touted as the most original artists of the age. 

In 1987 Koolhaas penned his own appreciation of Portman that pointed to the architectural potential of buildings like the Bonaventure; now he calls such architecture ‘JunkSignature™’, and argues that its mission is ‘to intimidate’. ‘You thought that you could ignore Junkspace,’ Koolhaas writes in a challenge to his peers, ‘but now your own architecture is infected, has become equally smooth, all-inclusive, continuous, warped, busy, atrium-ridden’. Clearly, the thrill of delirious space, as elaborated by the Guggenheim in Bilboa and other master 

buildings, is gone. Belying its name, the Bonaventure is aging badly, sagging like an old movie star whose facelifts have failed. 

Conditional 

Without the elevator and the automobile, the old arrangement of dense downtown and sprawling suburb could not have emerged, as the elevator allowed the skyscraper to rise, and the automobile assisted in the commute from distant home and back. Similarly, the escalator and the air-conditioner permitted the big structures that soon spread from city to suburb and beyond—from the department store to the shopping mall, casino, theme park, airport terminal, and so on. According to the authors of  The Harvard Guide to Shopping  (2001), where  Junkspace  first appeared, the escalator allowed for ‘smoothness’ of flow through these structures, while the air-conditioner supplied ‘life support’ for the consumers who pass through them. Like Bigness, Junkspace also depends on these mechanisms—it too is ‘the product of an encounter between escalator and air-conditioning’—but it is one ‘conceived in an incubator of sheetrock’. This image plays on the old line from Lautreamont about ‘the chance encounter of a sewing machine and an umbrella on an operating table’, which the Surrealists took up as a readymade definition of the irrational effects of collage; in Junkspace, however, such absurd juxtapositions are the planned norm. The tables are turned in another way too, for Junkspace is ‘subsystem only, without superstructure’, which is to suggest that the elevator and the air-conditioner have taken on a monster life of their own, and together have ‘launched the endless building’, one which, because it is endless, ‘is never closed’. Indeed, ‘Junkspace can easily engulf a whole city,’ Koolhaas warns in his apocalyptic mode, and under its domain everything becomes provisional:  ‘conditioned  space inevitably becomes  conditional  space, and sooner or later all  conditional  space turns into Junkspace’. 

Consumerist 

Provisional architecture seems a contradiction in terms, but if ‘the only certainty is mutation’ it is a contradiction that architects must confront. Planned obsolescence is so natural to us we no longer see how crazy a construction it is, and its cycle becomes only more frantic: in an economic world based on computing, the commodity is no longer an object to be produced so much as a datum to be manipulated—designed and redesigned, consumed and reconsumed. Junkspace thus concerns time as much as space: it is an effect of the continual transformation of space according to the accelerated temporality of consumption, not to mention the projected temporality of speculation. In Junkspace upgrades are so fast that they are difficult to distinguish from breakdowns; ‘instead of development, it offers entropy’, and ‘Under Construction’ becomes a permanent state of affairs. It is this ceaseless consumption that drives Junkspace, and transforms structures once thought to be separate from shopping, such as airports and museums, accordingly. Junkspace is not merely junk in space, then, nor is it simply all the junky buildings out there (most of which are not designed by architects at all); it is junk  as  space. In his account of consumer capitalism, Jean Baudrillard argued that the commodity had refashioned the sign in its own image; so too, in his vision of Junkspace, Koolhaas suggests that the commodity is now suffused into space. 

Design 

Today everything from jeans to genes is treated as so much design, which is a prime reason for the increased mixing of the old categories of object and subject. (Is a ‘personal device’ a person or a device?) One need not be rich to be designer and designed in one, whether the product in question is a home or a business, a drooping face (designer surgery) or a lagging personality (designer drugs). Is this designed subject of consumerism an unintended offspring of the ‘constructed subject’ of postmodernism? One thing is clear: design supports a dizzying circuit of production and consumption. And in this political economy the old heroes of industrial culture—the author as producer, the artist as constructor, the architect as engineer—are displaced. ‘In this war,’ 

Koolhaas states in  Junkspace,  ‘graphic designers are the great turncoats’. Architects must become designers, it seems, or lose. 

Environment 

The world of total design is an old dream of modernism, but it only comes true, in perverse form, in our pan-capitalist present. In post-Fordist production commodities are tweaked and markets niched in such a way that a product can be mass in quantity yet appear personal in address. Desire is not only registered in countless products; it is specified there, and so too is identity. ‘That’s me!’ we say, in unison with millions of other semi-unique selves who receive the same catalogue or click on the same webpage. ‘If you liked that,’ our algorithmic double prompts, ‘you’ll  love  this’. Again, it is largely this perpetual profiling of the commodity that drives the political economy of design today. Yet what happens when this economy breaks down, as consumers go broke and markets crash, as sweatshop workers resist and environments give out? 

Finitude 

An early version of total design was advanced by Art Nouveau with its drive to ornament all surfaces. This  Style 1900  had its foes; its greatest nemesis, Adolf Loos, attacked it in several texts. In one satirical skit of 1900 ‘a poor little rich man’ commissions a designer to put ‘art in each and every thing’. ‘The architect has forgotten nothing, absolutely nothing,’ Loos writes. ‘Cigar ashtrays, cutlery, light switches — everything, everything was made by him.’ This  Gesamtkunstwerk  does more than combine art, architecture, and craft; it commingles subject and object too: ‘the individuality of the owner was expressed in every ornament, every form, every nail’. For the Art Nouveau designer, the result is perfection: ‘You are complete!’ he exults to his patron. But the patron is not so sure; his Art Nouveau interior feels more like a coffin than a sanctuary. ‘The happy man suddenly felt deeply, deeply unhappy ... He was precluded from all future living and striving, developing and desiring. He thought, this is what it means to learn to go about life with 

one’s own corpse. Yes indeed. He is finished.  He is complete!  For the Art Nouveau designer, such completion reunites art and life, with all signs of death banished. Yet for Loos and patron this triumphant overcoming of limits is a catastrophic loss of the same—the loss of the objective constraints required to define any ‘future living and striving, developing and desiring’. Far from an overcoming of death, this loss of finitude is like living ‘with one’s own corpse’. 

Gesamtkunstwerk 

Initially the  Gesamtkunstwerk  was pledged to undo the separation not only of the different arts but also of the different senses that orient them; faced with the Medusan reifications of industrial capitalism, the ‘total work of art’ aimed to reinvigorate cultural practice and bodily experience alike. For Loos, however, the excessive vitalism of Art Nouveau (with all its languid vines and vampish outlines) worked to the opposite effect: it suggested a death-in-life. For Koolhaas Junkspace is more than this tragedy returned as farce; it is hell on earth. 

Hell 

If hell is other people, as Sartre writes at the end of  No Exit  (1944), then Junkspace updates this inferno: ‘Junkspace is like being condemned to a perpetual Jacuzzi with millions of your best friends.’ The Jacuzzi is a nice touch, redolent as it is of the lifestyle 1970s capitalizing on the liberated 1960s. Koolhaas implies a regression in age too, when he describes Junkspace as ‘a kindergarten grotesque’, and other phrases associate it with the promiscuous (its ‘couplings’ are ‘transient’) as well as the diseased (its ‘passages’ are ‘gangrenous’). In sum,  Junkspace  reads as a picturing of hell by a contemporary Bosch, a hell where opposites are confused and distinctions are overrun, where all autonomy is lost: ‘A fuzzy empire of blur, it fuses high and low, public and private, straight and bent, bloated and starved, to offer a seamless patchwork of the permanently disjointed.’ And for Koolhaas there is no exit from this inferno of the neutral. Towards the end  Junkspace  presents a roll call of 

airport hells, and like a J. G. Ballard character we are lost in an interminable terminal. 

In/discipline 

Autonomy might be a fiction, but periodically it is clarifying, as it was at the high-modernist moment of Loos and company one hundred years ago. Periodically, too, this fiction can be constricting, as it was several decades ago when late modernism had hardened into rote abstraction and postmodernism promised a new opening. This is no longer our situation. Today advanced capitalism has exacted its revenge on postmodern culture, recouping its crossings of the arts for its own infotainment; if Junkspace is the fallout of Bigness, it is also the implosion of postmodernism. It is time to recapture a sense of the political situatedness of both autonomy and its transgression, of the historical dialectic of disciplinarity and its contestation. 

At moments in this ‘fuzzy empire of blur’ nothing less than the survival of architecture is at stake for Koolhaas. How can architecture persist when the conditional is the norm, when ‘there is no form, only proliferation’, and when spaces ‘search for function like hermit crabs looking for a vacant shell’? At such moments  Junkspace  reads like a litany of architectural loss: ‘The ground is no more ... The absolute horizontal has been abandoned ... Transparency has disappeared ... All perspective is gone ... Successive transformations mock the word “plan”. There is zero loyalty—and zero tolerance—toward configuration . Landscape has become Junkspace, foliage as spoilage ...’ Is there no architectural response to this ‘terminal hollowness’? 

Junk 

Koolhaas sees Junkspace everywhere. It is all around us: ‘Traffic is Junkspace, from airspace to the subway; the entire highway system is Junkspace .’ And, in another instance of lost autonomy, it is within us as well: with Botox injections, cellphone connections, and the like, each of us is ‘a mini-construction site’ of Junkspace. What, then, is  not 

‘Junkspace’? Might it function as a  mana  word for Koolhaas, a floating signifier that soaks up as many signifieds of our spatial predicament as possible? ‘Language can only have risen all at once,’ Levi-Strauss argues in his 1950 essay on Marcel Mauss. ‘A shift occurred from a stage when nothing had a meaning to a stage when everything had meaning.’ After this linguistic Big Bang, Levi-Strauss contends, there was a surplus of signification, a non-fit between signifiers and signifieds, such that a given signifier might exist as ‘a symbol in its pure state, therefore liable to take on any symbolic content whatever’. Such, according to Levi-Strauss, is the Polynesian term  mana  in the relevant writings of Mauss. Such, too, is the neologism ‘Junkspace’ for Koolhaas, with this key difference: it concerns a collapse of signification, not its emergence. 

Kool 

In  Delirious New York  Koolhaas evoked ‘the paranoid-critical method’ [PCM] of Salvador Dali, whereby, in a ‘delirium of interpretation’, a single motif is read in multiple ways: ‘The PCM promises that, through conceptual recycling, the worn, consumed contents of the world can be recharged or enriched like uranium.’ This ‘systematic overdetermination of what exists’ has served Koolhaas well: often in his designs one architectural element drives an entire scheme, and often in his writings one urban structure becomes an historical agent in its own right (as is the case with the urban grid in  Delirious New York,  which is taken to be the engine of ‘Manhattanism’). In part this was a lesson learned from  Learning from Las Vegas  (1972), where Robert Venturi and Denise Scott Brown embraced the Strip for what it seemed to indicate about architecture in a Pop world of signs. Yet Koolhaas not only learns from ‘what exists’; he also invents with it, and often does so through its exaggeration, even its exacerbation. 

Can one ‘learn’ from Junkspace in a similar way? It seems to defeat the strategy of systematic overestimation twice over, for it is not only excessive in its own right but also resistant to further excess in its very neutrality. ‘Can the bland be amplified?’ Koolhaas asks, ‘The featureless be exaggerated?’ The architecture of Manhattan, he wrote in  Delirious 

New York,  ‘related to the forces of the  Groszstadt  like a surfer to the waves’. Junkspace is a vast sea of static chop that cannot be ridden like this. 

Lite 

How does  Junkspace  jibe with the pervasive idea that ours is an information society? One architectural response to the apparent immateriality of a networked world is to advocate the use of ‘light construction’—the most rarefied of materials, techniques, forms, spaces, structures (the elegant designs of Renzo Piano are exemplary here). This dream of dematerialization is attractive, but, viewed suspiciously, it is little more than the old fantasy of technological disembodiment retooled for a cyberspatial age, and it has become a familiar ideology to us all. Viewed even more suspiciously, this lightness advances not only the fantasy of human disembodiment but also the fact of social derealization. 

In his 1984 novel about the unreal life of Communist Czechoslovakia, which was saturated with an ideology that few still believed, Milan Kundera coined the phrase ‘lightness of being’. For Kundera this kind of lightness was no ideal at all; it was ‘unbearable’. And since the Fall of the Wall the capitalist version of this derealization has become a condition of life for countless more of us. Perhaps the two versions of lightness —the dream of disembodiment and the nightmare of derealization—must be thought together. And, indeed, this is what  Junkspace  attempts: it is both a riposte to the dream and a representation of the nightmare. 

Mimetic 

If the strategy of systematic overestimation is not viable in architecture, might it still be possible in other practices such as criticism?  Junkspace  is a mimetic performance in which one long string of words is run into a dense tangle of dis/connections in a way that acts out its subject dramatically. There appears to be no hope for critical distance here, so 

Koolhaas dives into this world, riffing on its language, pushing its il/logic, seeking to charge its fragments ‘like uranium’ from within. 

Precedents exist for this kind of mimetic criticism. A key example is  One-Way Street  (1928), in which Benjamin does not reflect on the Berlin of the tumultuous 1920s so much as he enacts its disruptive effects through an imaginary  derive.  Only the ‘prompt language’ of ‘leaflets, brochures, articles, and placards’ is ‘actively equal to the moment’, Benjamin writes, and he plays on these factographic forms in fragmentary notes on ‘the denaturing of things’ in the modern metropolis. ‘Criticism is a matter of correct distancing,’ he argues in one section titled ‘This Space for Rent’. ‘It was at home in a world where perspectives and prospects counted and where it was still possible to adopt a standpoint. Now things press too urgently on human society.’ Here Benjamin wagers that criticism might be recast in terms of urban distraction (in his view we receive architecture above all in this state). Over seventy years later, the pressing of things on us is much more extreme, and in Junkspace we have passed beyond distraction to immersion. There seems to be no choice but to seek running room inside its world. 

Junkspace  recalls Pop prose too. Just as Benjamin went to school on Dada and Constructivism, so Koolhaas has learned from Independent Group figures like Reyner Banham, Richard Hamilton, John McHale, and Eduardo Paolozzi. With a rambunctious mix-and-match of images and words, they developed an idiom that was mimetic of the new consumerist world of products and signs, a lingo that played on the commodification of language, both visual and verbal, in media and advertising. Yet just as Koolhaas came to question the ‘Main Street is all right’ populism of the Venturis, so too does he now reject the ‘Plastic Parthenon’ of Pop architecture proposed by McHale and company. The idea of disposable design was taken up by Archigram, three of whose members (Warren Chalk, Dennis Crompton, and Ron Herron) taught at the Architectural Association when Koolhaas studied there in the late 1960s. In a series of schemes Archigram proposed a ‘clip-on’ and ‘plug-in’ architecture that might be assembled and disassembled on the go. Four decades later it is as if those fantasies had become real and spread like mad, only to be abandoned in pieces and left to turn into Junkspace. In his support of 

Archigram Banham developed a style of writing that was also plastic and Pop. With Koolhaas this delight in a clip-on and plug-in lingo turns into disgust at the deliquescent language of Junkspace: ‘Verbs unknown and unthinkable in architectural history-clamp, stick, fold, dump, glue, shoot, double, fuse-have become indispensable.’ 

Nobrow 

‘Shopping is melting into everything, everything is melting into shopping’: this hyperbolic thesis of  The Harvard Guide to Shopping  governs  Junkspace  too. In the same vein one might claim that marketing is merging with almost every discourse. Some say this merging has produced a ‘nobrow’ culture in which the old distinctions of taste (highbrow, middlebrow, and lowbrow) no longer apply, and some view ‘nobrow’ less as a dumbing down of intellectual culture than as a wising up to commercial culture, which becomes a source of status in its own right. Today, this argument runs, we are all in the same megastore, and that is a good thing: it is our own version of democracy. Yet this is to conflate democracy with consumption, and this conflation underwrites the principal product on sale in the megastore, the fantasy that class divisions are thereby resolved. This fantasy is the contemporary complement to the foundational myth of the United States: that such divisions never existed here in the first place. It is this delusion that allows millions of Americans to vote against their interests at least every four years. 

Junkspace  shows little of the Pop delight in popular culture, and none of the populist politics of postmodern architecture. But what politics does it imply? Junkspace suggests Junkpeople, which suggests in turn the  Lumpenproletariat  that Marx viewed with such disdain-‘the scum, the leavings, the refuse of all classes’, the mass too ragged  (Lumpen  is German for rag) to form a politics of its own. 

Outmoded 

Junk is ‘seemingly useless rubbish’, the Urban Dictionary tells us, ‘seemingly’ because sometimes a little value can be squeezed out again, or at least this was true in the past. Witness the figure of the  chiffonier  in Baudelaire, the ragpicker who also intrigued Benjamin as a figure thrown up by early capitalism as a recycler of its refuse. For Benjamin the ragpicker became a cipher not only of residual value but also of unexpected critique, which he theorized in the notion of ‘the outmoded’. 

‘Balzac was the first to speak of the ruins of the bourgeoisie,’ Benjamin wrote in his  Arcades Project  (1927-40). ‘But only Surrealism exposed them to view. The development of the forces of production reduced the wish symbols of the previous century to rubble even before the monuments representing them had crumbled.’ The ‘wish symbols’ in question were the capitalist wonders of the nineteenth-century bourgeoisie at the height of its confidence, such as ‘the arcades and interiors, the exhibitions and panoramas’. These structures fascinated the Surrealists a century later, just at the time when further development had turned them into ‘residues of a dream world’. For the Surrealists to haunt these outmoded spaces, according to Benjamin, was to tap ‘the revolutionary energies’ that were trapped there. In a less redemptive register we could say that the Surrealists sought to read the mnemonic signals encoded in these old structures, signals that might not otherwise have reached their own present. This deployment of the outmoded can query the claims of capitalist culture to be total and timeless; it can also remind this culture of its forfeited principles (liberty, equality, and fraternity above all). Can this mnemonic dimension of the outmoded still be mined today, or is the outmoded somehow outmoded too? Are there any wish symbols left in Junkspace? 

At times of transition artists have played critically with capitalist junk. With his manifold practice called  Merz,  Kurt Schwitters turned bits of rubbish in post-World War I Germany—fragments of advertisements, cashiered tickets, odd items stolen from friends —into the stuff of collages and constructions (including, in his  Merzbau,  a kind of architecture). In effect Schwitters refashioned the  merde  of his world into a critical reflection on its  Commerz  (the term  Merz  derived from the tearing apart of this word as Schwitters found it in an ad). Other examples in this vein include the ‘Bunk’ collages produced by Paolozzi 

out of American glossies in post-World War II England, as well as the installations of objects based on the lowly stuff of the Lower East Side staged by Claes Oldenburg in  The Street  and  The Store  in the early 1960s. In the present, too, artists such as Isa Genzken, Thomas Hirschhorn, and Rachel Harrison excel in this practice of mimetic exacerbation. If there is no other side of Junkspace, indeed no outside at all, they are still able to find fissures within this world, to pressure these cracks, and open up a little running room. 

Post-Fordism 

The object world of the industrial city was relatively fixed: factories and warehouses, skyscrapers and bridges, railways and highways. These iconic structures inspired countless architects, which is to say that this old stage of modernization supported modern architecture in its formmaking and space-creating. Does the present stage do the same for architecture today? ‘The built product of modernization is not modern architecture but Junkspace,’ Koolhaas states. ‘Junkspace seems an aberration, but it is the essence, the main thing.’ This is so largely because, in a post-Fordist economy, capital flows rapidly in search of cheap labor, innovative manufacture, financial deregulation, and new markets, and the life expectancy of buildings has plummeted as a result. Pronounced in the United States, this process is rapacious where development is even less restricted or even more mandated. ‘His task is truly impossible,’ Koolhaas writes of the architect, ‘to express increasing turbulence in a stable medium’. In a post-Fordist context what can the criteria of architecture be? 

Postmodern architecture is not much of a guide here: its response to consumer capitalism was to reconcile traditional iconography with contemporary advertising, as if the art of architecture could be thereby updated and so preserved. ‘Light construction’ has not fared much better: as noted, it attempted to evoke an information society, as though it could somehow match electronic networks in immateriality. More recently, we have seen a run of architectural surfaces conjured by computer programs that evoke the ambient environment of ‘datascapes’. In the end, however, 

all these responses are based on representation or analogy—they are imagistic in this sense—and so reflect back the world with little difference. 

Quarantine 

In  Delirious New York  the skyscraper is the crux of the ‘culture of congestion’ of the old Manhattan, and Koolhaas presents it as a mating of two forms — ‘the needle’ and ‘the globe’—that were used as emblems of the city at world fairs and theme parks. The needle grabbed ‘attention’, while the globe promised ‘receptivity’, and ‘the history of Manhattanism is a dialectic between these two forms’. After 9/11 the discursive frame of this Manhattanism shifted dramatically. New fears clung to the skyscraper as a terrorist target, and the values of ‘attention’ and ‘receptivity’ were rendered suspect. The same was true for the values of congestion and ‘delirious space’, which were overshadowed by calls for surveillance and ‘defensible space’. In short, the ‘urbanistic ego’ and cultural diversity celebrated in  Delirious New York  came under enormous pressure. In this light Junkspace is not the only ‘built product of modernization’; another such product is its corollary, ‘control space’ (as  The Harvard Guide to Shopping  terms it). Even more starkly, there is the camp (such as the one at Guantanamo Bay), which, Giorgio Agamben has argued, might well be the ‘new biopolitical  nomos  of the planet’. What is the relationship between Junkspace and camp? Can these two hypotheses be reconciled? 

Running Room 

Sometimes distinctions are crucial to cultural practice. ‘Adolf Loos and I —he literally and I linguistically—have done nothing more than show that there is a distinction between an urn and a chamber pot,’ Karl Kraus wrote in 1912, ‘and that it is this distinction above all that provides culture with running room [ Spielraum ]. The others, the positive ones [i.e. who fail to make this distinction], are divided into those who use the urn as a chamber pot and those who use the chamber pot as an urn.’ This 

tight formula requires a little unpacking. ‘Those who use the urn as a chamber pot’ were Art Nouveau designers who wanted to inject art (the urn) into the utilitarian object (the chamber pot). Those who did the reverse were functionalist modernists who wanted to elevate the utilitarian object into art. For Kraus the two mistakes were symmetrical —both confused use-value and art-value—and both risked a regressive indistinction: they failed to safeguard the running room necessary to liberal subjectivity and culture, to ‘living and striving, developing and desiring’. Note that nothing here is said about an intrinsic essence of art or an absolute autonomy of culture; the stake is one of proposed differences and provisional spaces, of  Spielraum,  which translates literally as ‘play room’ or ‘room for play’. ‘Play’ has been a crucial term in aesthetics since Schiller, who associated it with imaginative invention: to insist on play in art is to prepare for freedom in life. 

Junkspace is the urn/chamber pot problem a hundred years later and a hundred times worse, and Koolhaas rivals his Austrian predecessors in the ethical asperity of his reaction.  Junkspace  begins and ends on a Loosian note, with an aspersion cast on the fraudulent (‘rabbit is the new beef’) and a warning about the ornamental (‘the cosmetic is the new cosmic’), and its second line presents a modernist opposition between the utilitarian and the arbitrary that was fundamental to Loos as well. If ornament was a crime for Loos, so is Junkspace for Koolhaas (who also associates it with crap via junk food). Both critics dream of a motivated architecture with a clarified language; both seek an autonomous place in a heteronomous world. This points to an apparent contradiction in  Junkspace:  its method, that of mimetic exacerbation, seems at odds with its mission, that of autonomy; the text goes for broke and resists at the same time. Yet maybe that double move is what the search for running room requires from all of us today. 

Spectacle 

To make a big splash in the global pond of spectacle culture, one has to have a large stone to drop, and here famous architects have an obvious advantage. In  The Society of the Spectacle  (1967) Debord defined 

spectacle as ‘capital accumulated to the point where it becomes an image’. In the forty-five years since this definition, the reverse has proved to be true as well: spectacle is ‘an image accumulated to the point where it becomes capital’. Such is the logic of many cultural centers, sports complexes, business towers, and city halls today, designed as they largely are for iconic value, that is, to assist in the corporate branding of the client. After the 9/11 attacks this political economy was expected to change, but it didn’t change much, and even after the 2008 crash it isn’t displaced. 

Junkspace  assumes that spectacle, or the transformation of almost everything according to the logic and in the image of the commodity, is still the dominant operation of advanced-capitalist culture, and certainly it is hard to argue with this view. Yet the concept of the spectacle remains within the discursive universe of visual representation; that is, it assumes that we are subjects addressed by commodity-images above all, that we are  spectators  first and last. More and more, however, we are also projected as statistical entities by algorithmic doubles in computer arrangements that often have visual interfaces but are not otherwise visual in operation, and we are managed, literally tracked, as such entities with every swipe of our cards and every click of our mouses. (Every time we hit ‘I agree’ on-line, we also become contractors to deals we do not fully comprehend, with value extracted from this agreement in ways we cannot easily follow.) This is a new kind of interpellation, especially effective because we perform it voluntarily and on our own—all those hours monitoring email, Facebook, and so on—in a form of attention that is difficult to distinguish from attention-deficit disorder. In this condition we need to come to terms with electronic surveillance as well as ‘spatial disorientation’, with Spamtime as well as Junkspace. 

Typology 

‘Traditionally, typology implies demarcation, the definition of a singular model that excludes other arrangements,’ Koolhaas writes. ‘Junkspace represents a reverse typology of cumulative, approximative identity, less about kind than about quantity. But formlessness is still form, the 

formless also a typology.’ Yet is it? It was not so for the first theorist of the  informe,  Georges Bataille, who insisted that the formless is the undoing of form. More pertinently here, is the shopping mall, the type that promoted Junkspace most of all, a type in the aforementioned sense? 

The Harvard Guide to Shopping  reviews two masters of mall design, Victor Gruen at the middle of the twentieth century and Jon Jerde at its end, and credits them with two transformations. ‘The Gruen Transfer’ shifted the focus of shopping from the department store to the suburban mall, which was conceived as a ‘refuge from the city’ and designed as an ‘abstract minimal context’. ‘The Jerde Transfer’ reversed both these moves: his malls are returned to the city in an ‘attempt to inject new life into derelict downtowns’, and, rather than minimal context, they ‘throw large amounts of architectural matter at the shopper: countless turns ... unlikely ramps ... thresholds over thresholds’. Indeed, an ‘entire repertoire of architecture’ returns—returns as farce—in these megastructures that refashion shopping as entertainment, theater, lifestyle. In this account, if the mall is a type, it is a type that threatens to end all others, even to undo typology as such: rather than ‘a singular model that excludes other arrangements’, it includes them and, in doing so, makes them over into Junkspace. 

Universal 

A type also has a cultural function as an architectural index of an historical moment. ‘Each age dreams the next,’ Michelet wrote in a line dear to Benjamin, who, again, viewed the Paris arcades not only as a brilliant invention of a confident bourgeoisie on the rise but also as a wish symbol of that class for posterity to puzzle over. For Benjamin the arcades came into consciousness as an index of their age only at the moment of their eclipse by the next type of consumer architecture, the department store (this is one of his Hegelian theorems about cultural history in general). For Koolhaas and company, the department store suffered the same fate at the hands of its replacement, the mall. Yet is there any way to see the mall as a wish symbol, a ‘dream house of the collective’, a type in the Benjaminian sense? It would take a great 

dialectician to do so, and Koolhaas seems defeated on this front. His text implies that Junkspace voids the architectural registration of historical change: if it announces any period at all, it is only (as the horror-flick master John Carpenter foresaw) the period of the undead. 

At moments Junkspace seems to signal the end not only of architectural history but also of history as such. Here triumph turns into defeat: ‘Soon we will be able to do anything anywhere. We will have conquered place. At the end of Junkspace, the Universal?’ For Koolhaas Junkspace is as claustrophobic as the Art Nouveau interior was for Loos —the end of all ‘future living and striving’. In fact  Junkspace  describes a stage of modernization whose energies no longer project forward into time but fall back entropically into space. Its ‘fuzzy empire of blur’ undoes oppositions—it is both ‘old and new, permanent and temporary, flourishing and at risk’, ‘overdetermined and indeterminate’, ‘aimless and purposeful—in a way that also undoes any dialectic of history. ‘There is no progress,’ Koolhaas concludes; ‘like a crab on LSD, culture staggers endlessly sideways’. 

Virtual 

If, with postmodern architecture, scenography again became as important as space, with Junkspace this development has reached a new level: often image and space are melded through design. Influential designers like Bruce Mau (who has often collaborated with Koolhaas) strive for programs ‘in which brand identity, signage systems, interiors, and architecture would be totally integrated’. This integration depends on a deterritorializing of both image and space, which had depended in turn on a digitizing of the photograph, its loosening from old referential ties, and on a computing of architecture, its loosening from old tectonic principles. This deterritorializing is second nature to us today; yet, as Deleuze and Guattari (let alone Marx) taught us long ago, it is the path of capital, not the avant-garde. 

Without Qualities 

Modern architecture purported to be about function, that is, about need, which is not as protean as desire. Certainly it was driven by desire too— the desire to appear modern above all—but nowhere near to the extent that contemporary design is. Often, however, this desire seems almost subject-less, or at least almost lack-less: paradoxically, design appears to advance a narcissism that is all image and no interiority—an apotheosis of the subject that may be one with its disappearance. In our neo-Art Nouveau world of total design, the fate of ‘the poor little rich man’ of Loos, ‘precluded from all future living and striving, developing and desiring’, is on the verge of realization. Robert Musil, a Loos contemporary, anticipated this  Style 2000  already from the moment of  Style 1900.  ‘A world of qualities without man has arisen,’ Musil wrote in  The Man without Qualities  (1930-42), ‘of experiences without the person who experiences them, and it almost looks as though ideally private experience is a thing of the past, and that the friendly burden of personal responsibility is to dissolve into a system of formulas of possible meanings. Probably the dissolution of the anthropocentric point of view, which for such a long time considered man to be at the center of the universe but which has been fading for centuries, has finally arrived at the “I” itself.’ 

Two models above all others guided critical studies of postwar architecture as well as postwar art: the oppositional logic of the ‘post’, of a postmodernism that sought to open up a modernism that had hardened over time, and the recursive strategy of the ‘neo’, of neo-avant-gardes that looked back to neglected moments in prewar avant-gardes for new points of departure (for example, as ‘Deconstructivist’ architects like Hadid once looked back to Constructivism). Today these models of ‘post’ and ‘neo’ are played out; neither suffices as a strong paradigm for practice, and no other model stands in their stead. For many this double demise is a good thing, as it seems to allow for diversity. But our paradigm-of-no-paradigm also abets a stagnant incommensurability, a flat indifference, and this posthistorical default is no improvement on the old 

teleologies of modernism. All of us (architects, artists, critics, curators,  amateurs)  need a narrative to focus our practices — situated stories, not  grands recits.  Without such a guide we remain swamped in the double wake of post/modernism and the neo/avant-garde, that is, in a zone of methodological Junkspace, not moving forward like a horse on a chessboard, say, but scuttling sideways like a crab on LSD. 

Yes 

‘Railway stations unfold like iron butterflies, airports glisten like cyclopic dewdrops, bridges span often negligible banks like grotesquely enlarged versions of the harp. JunkSignature™ seems to return the engineer to heroic status with such figures as Cecil Balmond (who has often collaborated with Koolhaas, as on the CCTV building in Beijing) and Santiago Calatrava (who Koolhaas has in mind with his images of iron butterflies and grotesque harps). Yet if such engineering-as-architecture signals a recovery of tectonics, it is a tectonics devoted to image-making, a post-9/11 Prometheanism in which humanist spirit and imperial technology can scarcely be told apart. In such instances advanced engineering is placed in the service not only of corporate logomaking but also of mass moral-uplift, and in this respect spectacle is far from dead. ‘Why do they never say NO?’ Koolhaas asks such engineers in a rhetorical question in  Content  (2003). Yet where would architects like Koolhaas be if they demurred? In the war of jingles  Just do it  wins over  Just say no  every time. What we need is a new kind of ‘negative capability’. 

Zone 

In  The Man without Qualities  Musil suggests a ‘dissolution’ of the subject, and in  Junkspace  (which might be called ‘Space without Qualities’) Koolhaas suggests a ‘disorientation’ in space. But he also states that this disorientation is ‘engineered’, and it is true that Google not only knows where we are but also, more and more, who we are, or should be, according to its data. ‘Control space inaugurates the triumph 

of the statistical,’  The Harvard Guide to Shopping  argues, but perhaps beyond the regime of the statistical lies the order of the algorithmic, which not only predicts where we will be but also co-determines what we will do when we get there. ‘Authorless’ yet ‘authoritarian’, Junkspace models ‘a latent fascism safely smothered in signage, tools, sympathy’. In  Junkspace  we are in a scripted zone, then (one that has antecedents perhaps in the zones of  Gravity's Rainbow  and  Stalker),  yet this zone is not as total as Koolhaas, with his inspired paranoia, makes it out to be. Again, even if there is no outside to Junkspace, there is still running room to be made in its cracks. 