Images of the Void
It is no longer possible to think in our day other than in the void left by man's disappearance. For this void does not create a deficiency; it does not constitute a lacuna that must be filled. It is nothing more, and nothing less, than the unfolding of a space in which it is once more possible to think. Foucault1
For over a century now, philosophical modernity has been aware of fundamental problems in the nature, function, and limits of human subjectivity. Special attention has been paid to the critique of the classical representations of the subject, as exemplified in seventeenth- \^--cenfury~fationalism. This vision of subjectivity has become as much a 'contested object ~as the Enlightenment project of the historical progress of humanity through the adequate use of reason. Anti-Cartesianism has therefore been put on the agenda of modernity; it raises questions concerning the structure of subjectivity in such a way as to challenge dualism, of which the Cartesian body-and-soul dichotomy is the paradigm, and in so doing to change the very definition of the function of philosophy.
The contemporary theoretical climate, at least in 'Continental' and especially French philosophy is dominated by the discourse of the 'crisis', meaning the questioning of 'subjectivity' and 'rationality'.
The object of this study is the intersection of philosophical modernity, defined as the discourse of the crisis of the rational subject, and the question of the feminine and of women in philosophy. Bordering this territory are, on the one hand, analyses of the state of contemporary philosophy by such philosophers as Michel Foucault or Gilles Deleuze; and on the other, the research into theory, politics, and subjectivity pursued by a growing number of women working in the field of philosophy.
Diagnosing the Crisis
According to Foucault, our age, as a whole, is trying to escape from the heritage of classical rationalism.2
We are all epistemological orphans, and the ontological insecurity we suffer is our unavoidable historical condition. Afflicted by the melancholy which henceforth3 marks the end of this millennium, haunted by a feeling of loss, philosophy is no longer the queen of knowledge, nor is it the master-discipline any more. At the most it can claim the status of a merry widow,4 sadly trying to find her place in the new cynicism of postmodern society. As a famous graffito on the Paris walls put it: 'God is dead, Marx is dead, and I'm not feeling too well myself'.
The French school of philosophical modernity builds upon and works through the issue of the crisis of rationality and, contrary to the German critical tradition, focuses on the decline of reason as the ideal and the appropriate definition of human subjectivity. At times, this approach drifts into a critical, nihilistic mode, but it never ceases to bring the discourse of the crisis to bear upon the issue of changing notions of subjectivity.
The state of intellectual 'crisis' we are in is not necessarily the sign of the imminent death of theoretical practice, or of those whose living and pleasure depend on exercising it. The issues - the death of the subject, the end of man(kind) - which the post-structuralist generation put on the agenda, are in my view a set of figures of speech that express the will to go on theorizing, that is, to engage in philosophical discourse by all possible means. Far from being a metaphor for the void, this set of questions is the sign of an irrepressible theoretical vitality: the problema-tization of the 'crisis' of the subject, far from being related to any 'death of man(kind)', is rather the leitmotiv for a whole generation of French philosophers. As I see it, the so-called 'death' of the subject is less important than the funeral ceremony which marks it as a central theoretical event,
Another example of this crisis is a series of plaintive meta-narratives about the crisis of rationality and of the rationalist subject, which forms the essence of the theoretical legacy of the sixties. Precipitate, inaccurate and often aberrant readings of Foucault, Lacan or Derrida are part of the air one breathes in France today.6 The tendency is not simply to lower the intellectual level but also to trivialize texts and their authors, if not positively to despise them. The discourse of the crisis of philosophy has been hijacked to the profit of a loose form of neo-humanism which accuses the 'post-structuralist' generation of failing to respect the basic rights of 'Man'.
The so-called 'neo-liberals/humanists' shift the grounds of the argument from the idea of 'crisis' to that of the 'void' and so too to the notion that any questioning of subjectivity tends to endanger the 'human
person'. These are conceptual slippages which I would rather resist, for there is a world of difference between the statement that a quite specific form of philosophical ratio is now outmoded and the most banal forms of nihilism. What I call nihilistic in this respect is the attempt to trivialize both the theoretical complexity and the subversive potential of poststructuralist philosophy, replacing them with a generalized nostalgia for humanistic ideals.
Contrary to this regressive tendency, the post-structuralist insight is that the subject of modernity does not coincide with self-reflecting consciousness; s/he therefore cannot fulfil the role of founder of discourse. The philosophy of the 'crisis' thus expressed is both critique and act of creation of new forms of thought. It calls into question the very foundations and premises of what we recognize as 'thinking'.
This way of approaching modernity implies that strong emphasis is laid on the historicity of philosophy as discourse; according to Foucault, 'We are destined historically to history', that is, to the repetition of discourses on discourses.7 In this sense we are still involved with the last century, though only by negation.
Consistent with the premise that philosophy today can only be conjugated in the plural, contemporary French philosophers are not systems-builders. They rather prefer to define themselves as providers of services, of 'toolboxes', working with ideas which are programmes for action rather than dogmatic blocks. First and foremost is their concern for the relevance of their work in drawing up connections and linkages between philosophy and the fundamental problems and preoccupations of our age. Faithful to the insight that one never thinks in a void, the French post-structuralists present themselves as diagnosticians of their time and age. In their perspective, 'thinking' is akin to Levi-Strauss's idea of a constructive 'bricolage'.
Deleuze defines this mode of thinking as 'problematic',8 that is, a line of questioning that is organized around the problematization of ideas in the 'nomadic' style. I shall return to this later. Theoretical work, especially philosophy, is rather like a building site: the selection of elements, the distribution of tasks, and the overall plan for the project are the keyTo what is called the 'materiality' of ideas. Thinking is a skill that requires a certain craftsmanship: homo sapiens turns out to be a slightly more elaborated version of homo faber.
To adopt the 'problematic' model of philosophy is therefore a political gesture, which connects the act of reflection to the context which engendered it. It consists in locating the 'apologetic or polemical targets'9 which sustain the theoretical process, attaching it firmly to its material and theoretical conditions of production. Setting up a problematic in philosophy means setting the margins, tracing the frontiers of a line of questioning which - by being thus framed - can be formulated as discourse, that is to say: it becomes utterable just as it becomes visible.
The crisis in the speculative function of ratio, which has also led to the
liquidation of the principle of the subject's identity with consciousness, ultimately poses the question: what is the relation between thought and the subject? What do we call 'thinking'? This question challenges the very legitimacy of philosophical discourse as a specific style and mode of thinking.
In the French context, the questioning of the rationalist vision of the subject merges with a broader debate concerning the role of the intellectual. This topic stems not only from the prestige which French culture has traditionally accorded to its intellectuals,10 but also from the fact that the philosopher represents the prototype of the French intellectual. The philosopher stands for the masterful self-control that is expected from the thinker but also from the average citizen. This contributes to the political dimension of this discipline, as if the debates of ideas were analogous to political combat.11
As Descombes argues, the relationship between philosophy and public opinion has been mediated in France via the literary and political milieux. 2 Since the fifties, it has in fact been impossible in France to separate the institutional practice of philosophy from avant-garde thought, literature, and philosophy. The monumental figure of Sartre as intellectual-philosopher represents most effectively this vision of the social function of philosophy.
The political events of the May 68 students' and workers' riots are very significant in this respect and they deserve independent analysis.13 As regards philosophy, one of the fundamental effects of May 68 was the questioning of the power of institutions of learning, such as the university, with its traditional faculty and disciplinary distinctions. The idea of the institution itself became the centre of a reflection on the link between power and knowledge; supported by the insights of psychoanalysis, linguistics, and semiology, French philosophy evolved towards a structured reflection on the power of discourse. The work of Michel Foucault, which I shall shortly analyse, clearly exemplifies this.
Another significant effect of the cultural prestige of philosophy outside the university in France has been the role played by philosophers in places such as critical journals, reviews, the media, journalism, and publishing.
A painfully clear example of the potential dangers of this vision of philosophy is the episode in the mid-seventies known as the 'new philosophy'.14 Launched by a series of television shows, it proved the power of the mass media as a vehicle for intellectual ideas, transforming thought into a sales system subject to literary marketing. Deleuze has quite rightly emphasized that it represents a 'new type of thought, interview-thought, talk-show-thought, instant-thought'.*
In a socio-economic climate dominated by increasing budgetary cuts for the humanities in general and philosophy in particular, it is, therefore, important to recognize the far from accidental coincidence
between the 'increasing scarcity of teaching posts and the increasing number of television sets'.16
The controversy over the intellectual power of the media and the difficulties inherent in the transmission of a post-68 theoretical legacy add a significant new light to the question of the crisis: isn't it true, after all, that the function of self-questioning suits philosophy rather well? Has this discipline ever been anything other than a reaction and an attempt to respond to a crisis situation: what is to be done? What should we think? How do we get out of it? Are these not the sempiternal questions underlying the philosophical discursive order, endemic to this discipline and as such constitutive of its field of enunciation? If so, what is the specificity of the crisis we are going through?
Instead of falling into the nostalgic rhetoric of the void, could it not be said, in the post-structuralist context, that the history of philosophical thought is inevitably linked with its decline, that is to say, with the transition of this discipline from the prestigious role it had played as dominant discourse to a much humbler role? The post-modern condition which Lyotard analyses so lucidly is marked by the fact that philosophy loses to the hard, technological sciences the function of cultural codification which had been its historical prerogative.17 This in turn marks a shift towards an instrumental conception of thought which brings the classical rationalism of the seventeenth century to the brink of implosion: reason turning against itself.
While recognizing the significance of these shifts, I maintain that what is, historically and structurally, the strength of this discipline is also its fundamental belief in the power and aesthetic beauty of thinking. Philosophy thus defined is an act of faith, however illusory, in the exercise of thought. As such it can be seen as the living stock of cumulated knowledges about reason, rationality, and the structure of the thinking subject itself.
This is why it is important to resist all temptation to vulgarize or trivialize the current discourse on the crisis of rationality, by keeping in mind the historical and discursive conditions which produced it. The very notion of 'crisis' should be understood as an opening up of the field of philosophy to other, new, extra-philosophical preoccupations. Unless it is understood in this sense, there is a risk of defining the crisis in an unhistorical or, even worse, ideological way.
In this work I will approach the French philosophers' emphasis on the crisis or on the death of the subject not in the sense of a low-key anti-humanism, but rather as the mode of enunciation best suited to their redefinition of what it means to think. For me the 'void' is not a substantial concept: it is not the mark of an absence, or of a hole in the heart of the subject; rather, it signifies the transcendance of absence. Neither nothing, nor something, the conceptual value of the crisis as void should not be understood by negative reference to theoretical
plenitude, but rather, as the historical impossibility for philosophy today to postulate yet another global theory - as a rupture in its tradition of representation and legitimation of the subject.
It is on this level that I also take my distance from the 'postmodern' stance in Baudrillard's sense of the term, which implies the reduction of theoretical thought to a process of signification that bears no link to its empirical referents, the material conditions of its production.18
I would therefore propose to displace the problematic of the void and suggest that both the vitality and the relevance of the redefinition of philosophy undertaken by post-structuralist thinkers can be assessed by taking into account the impact and the extent of the problem of femininity, women, and woman in contemporary French philosophy. To relate these two aspects of the same discursive universe seems to me a much more fruitful way of evaluating both the question of modernity and the specificity of post-structuralist thought in France than the vain rhetoric of the crisis.
For in the midst of all this, philosopy is far from being dead: to be dead - isn't this what Sartrean philosophy taught us? - is to be in the hands of the living.
The kind of critical reading I propose stems less from a sociology of knowledge than from an 'analytics', that is, an analysis of the conditions of possibility of its enunciation. It is therefore an epistemological analysis quite as much as a political one.
If crisis there be, it marks the opening of the borders of this discipline, affirming the obligation to respond to the historical context. This fundamental questioning has enabled, amongst other things, the emergence of the question 'women and philosophy'. As an offshoot of the crisis of the rationalist, 'logocentric' subject, it is coextensive with it.
The Feminine at Stake
The relations between femininity, women, feminism, and philosophical modernity do not yet form an established, well-defined problematic, perhaps because as a whole, questions concerning women in philosophy have not received enough attention from professional philosophers. So, the problematic which interests me here is still theoretically rather amorphous.
The sheer possibility of enunciation of this however, is significant as an epiphenomenon: as evidence, above all, of the remarkable historical coincidence described above as the intersection of two parallel phenomena: on the one hand, the resurgence in the last thirty years of women's struggle in social, political, private and theoretical domains, which has raised a whole range of questions and analyses of the role, lived experience and modes of existence of women. I shall refer to this heterogeneous and polymorphous set of open questions as 'feminist
reflection', or 'feminist thought'. And on the other hand, the 'crisis' of classical reason, a rupture inside the Western order of discourse. This 'crisis', which has profound links with the socio-economic conditions of late capitalism, has radically called into question not only the epistemic structures of the rational subject, but also its role as guardian of the transmission of discourse. That is to say, it has unveiled the structural links between rationality and the spirit of mastery. As Foucault puts it:
I would say, then, that what has emerged in the course of the last ten or fifteen years is a sense of the increasing vulnerability to criticism of things, institutions, practices, discourses. A certain fragility has been discovered in the very bedrock of existence - even, and perhaps above all, in those aspects of it that are most familiar, most solid and most intimately related to our bodies and to our everyday behaviour. But together with this sense of instability and this amazing efficacy of discontinuous, particular and local criticism, one in fact discovers something that perhaps was not initially foreseen, something one might describe as precisely the inhibiting effect of global, totalitarian theories.19
An in-depth analysis of the crisis that constitutes the very threshold of modernity falls outside the framework of my project. I shall simply outline the aspects that are most relevant for the question of the feminine. Thanks to the logic of a very precise historical situation, philosophy finds itself sharing, for the first time in its long history, the unhappy and contradictory destiny of the oppressed. One of the positive effects of this marginalized position has been to make philosophical discourse aware of everything which had previously been constructed as 'other' than the global and totalitarian knowing rational subject. Foucault calls this moment at which the centre of philosophical discourse shifts the 'insurrection of subjugated knowledges'.20
Faced with the same crisis, women have reacted in profoundly different theoretical ways. The age of 'crisis' and/or the 'death' of rationality is also, historically and discursively, the age which has witnessed the social and theoretical emergence of feminist theory and practice. What has emerged is not a unified or monolithic phenomenon, but rather, a variety of modes of reflection which take as their point of departure a female/feminist/feminine perspective. Chapter 6 is entirely devoted to a theoretical reading of feminist thought as I see it.
The focus of my reading is the way in which feminism has put into question the corporeal nature, and above all the sexuation of the subject. The following examples, the first drawn from an American feminist, the second from a French, stress this point and set the boundaries of this complex set of problems. In the words of Adrienne Rich:
I am convinced that 'there are ways of thinking that we don't yet know about. I take those words to mean that many women are even now
thinking in ways which traditional intellection denies, or is unable to grasp ... In arguing that we have by no means yet explored or understood our biological grounding, the miracle and paradox of the female body and its spiritual and political meanings, I am really asking whether women cannot begin, at last, to think through the body, to connect what has been so cruelly disorganized.21
Or Luce Irigaray:
Those who have distanced themselves from their bodies so greatly that they have forgotten them, need to have the truth. But their 'truth' immobilizes us, like statues, unless we lose our fondness for it, unless we shake ourselves free of its power, by trying to say, here, there, at once, how we are moved.22
One of the main issues for women in contemporary philosophy is the need to speak about the bodily roots of the thinking process, of all human intellect, and to reconnect theoretical discourse to its libidinal and consequently unconscious foundations. How are women to overcome the objectified state in which they have been fixed by the male gaze? How are women to elaborate a truth which is not removed from the body, reclaiming their body for themselves? How are women to develop and transmit a critique which respects and bears the trace of the intensive, libidinal force that sustains it? What must women do to keep truth not ossified but alive?
Although women pose these questions with their own specific inflection, they cannot claim exclusive rights to them: the issue of the sexuation and embodiment of the subject is part and parcel of the non-Cartesianism of our era. For instance, the urgency of a return to the body and to the affective roots of all thought is also one of the most significant traces of the psychoanalytic revolution, the effects and implications of which are particularly crucial for feminism and philosophy alike. Thus, in order to mark clearly the discursive frontiers within which it has been possible to formulate the question of 'femininity' and of women, I will take psychoanalysis as one of the central axes of my argument. I will return to this in the next chapter.
The assumption of this book is that, genealogically speaking, the problematization of woman, women and the feminine in contemporary French philosophy is a major factor in the critique and deconstruction of the rational subject. My approach consists in pointing out and then assessing the extent and structure of the relationship between the discourse of the crisis and the new feminist reflections on subjectivity. That the two discursive areas should be connected is obvious, considering that in my reading of modernity the emergence of women's socio-political and theoretical struggles is one of the main factors that bring about the 'crisis' of the subject. The gender-specific analysis of the
feminists splits open the complicity between the dominant notion of 'subjectivity' and the image of triumphant masculinity.
What I will show in the course of this book is that it is clearly not accidental that certain forms of post-Hegelian philosophy (though not all), victims of an unprecendented crisis of legitimation, resort, as the only way out, to a redefinition of the feminine, or of the 'becoming-woman'. I think it essential to analyse philosophy's 'marketing of the other'23 as well as its 'becoming woman' in terms of their relation to the theoretical, political, and affective transformations brought about in and by the women's movement. The many discourses on the feminine as symptom of the crisis and malaise of the masculine subject and of his homosocial bond - the male corpus socians,24 is also, incontrovertibly, a positive moment of affirmation by women of a new female subject.
In this perspective, I think that the relation between the heterogeneous and complex field that is feminist theory and the 'dominant' discourse of philosophy can only be political. I would even argue that this dimension of active strategy, this emphasis on the implicitly political nature of the act of thinking, is the trademark of feminism as a discursive practice.
The link is obviously not causal and perhaps it is not simply a question of the historical coincidence of two phenomena, but rather, an extraordinary concomitance of effects: the new feminism AND the crisis of philosophical knowledge. Here the conjunction AND marks not only the point at which two series converge, but also the point at which they diverge, opening into an infinite series: women and philosophy and crisis and psychoanalysis, and so on. So, for the problem to be adequately articulated, the conjunction AND, which both conjoins and disjoins, and which makes the link between my two discursive poles, would have to be multiplied indefinitely.
In other words, the desire which sustains this work is both a response to a theoretical challenge - women and philosophy in the age of modernity - and also the will radically to restructure this question, so as to do justice to the theoretical impact of feminism.
In the following chapters I shall read some of the French poststructuralist thinkers in terms of their definition of the feminine and respective positioning of women in their system, spelling out the various reactions they embody: some nostalgic, others nihilistic, a few envious of the newly-born feminist subject. Despite the variety of discourses on the topic of the feminine, women, and woman within contemporary French philosophy, I shall take their proximity as my point of departure. It is as if the growing social recognition of women were a sign or a symptom, echoing on the one hand the crisis of classical rationality (as in the work of Foucault and Deleuze) and on the other, the de-phallicization of philosophical thought, particularly in the work of Derrida.
What I want to emphasize, above all, is that what makes the
enunciation of the problem at all possible is the set of multiple and often contradictory transformations that this historical conjuncture has operated in both the social and the discursive representation of the relations between the sexes and especially of their differences. In other words, the problem of 'women and philosophy' has become visible and utterable in a 'here and now' that cannot be detached from the very groundwork of modern philosophical dislocations of the subject. In this respect, feminism is THE discourse of modernity.
All the same, I cannot help wondering about certain aspects of this proximity which borders on promiscuity if not concubinage. Coincidences are always suspicious. Is it not strange that the legitimation of the philosophical 'other', of all that traditionally had been constructed as other-than the rational subject occurs precisely at the theoretical and historical moment when the privileged subject of knowledge is at crisis-point? Is it not strange that the reflection on the feminine is so closely connected to a masculine disorder, to the 'death of man', meant as the questioning not only of philosophical truth but of knowledge? For it is in part thanks to this crossing into the void, this phenomenal acting-out on the part of the philosophical subject, that the problematic of the feminine has been given status, as the carrier of a 'new' truth. It is as if the modern subject, the split subject, discovers the feminine layer of his own thought just as he loses the mastery he used to assume as his own. He discovers his gender-specificity as a loss of the former universal value that was attributed to the masculine gender. Under the impact of feminist criticism, in fact, the complicity between the masculine and the universal is unveiled and rejected.
Faced with such discourses on radical otherness as feminine, and on women as the hew horizon of theoretical discourse, in other words, faced with a trend towards the feminization of the postmodern field of knowledge, feminists would be advised to exercise their critical judgement. For all this emphasis on the feminine is no guarantee that the concerns and the revendications of women are actually being taken into account. On the contrary, there is a danger that the new metaphors will be as much a snare as a present for women. Could it be rather that Man, in his historical exhaustion, is holding out the poisoned apple of knowledge to his female companion as she becomes emancipated? Will this new Woman be Man's future? What if this exchange amounts to nothing more than a simple exercise of substitution, a plain reversal of roles, turning the former slaves into new mistresses, replacing the old, depreciative definition of the feminine with a new but not a less normative one in the end?
What is at stake in the formulation of a new problem called 'women and/in philosophy' is not just the description of the points of contact between women, feminism and philosophy, so as to put a new 'topos' on the map. It is rather the quest for a new mode of relation between the two. The heart of the matter is the sense and force we give to the
con/dis-j unction AND as a strategy both in the theoretical and the discursive sense of the term: what is the theoretical significance of women's political struggles in terms of the development of our thinking on the feminine? If it is evident that feminist thought is firmly located in its socio-political context, so as to enact transformations of the status of women, what are the theoretical foundations of this movement? What are the discursive agendas that accompany the political ones? And inversely, what is the political significance for feminism of contemporary philosophical positions on the subject?
While we are bound to recognize, following Nietzsche,25 that at times of crisis every culture tends to turn to its 'others', to become feminized, in the sense of having to face its limitations, gaps and deficiencies, on the other hand it should also be said that the thought, speech and actual agency of these same 'others', namely, feminist theory and practice, do play an important function in bringing about this 'crisis'. If feminist thought is clearly situated in the field of modernity, in the critique of the subject, it is because women's struggles are one of the facets of the same 'crisis', and act as one of its deepest theoretical and political rhizomes or roots.26
It follows that although the crisis of the rational subject is not exclusive to French philosophy, being rooted in the last one hundred years of European history, it has nevertheless been developed in very significant ways in this culture. These deserve attention from a feminist perspective, not only for their own intrinsic value, but also if one considers the enormous influence that 'French theories of the feminine', often hurriedly assimilated to 'French feminist theory', have had upon American and British women's movements. As Alice Jardine points out in her very important book, how does one explain the fact that in and through French culture it has become both possible and necessary to question classical reason by advancing a series of configurations of the 'feminine'?
In an excellent introduction to the English translation of texts by Lacan,27 Jackie Rose argues that the strategic position occupied by the 'feminine' in the French framework is due to the influence that Lacanian redefinitions of 'Woman' have had on the discourse of the human sciences. According to Rose the cross-fertilization of post-structuralist philosophy by psychoanalysis results in the setting up of the feminine as the emblem of a new vision of subjectivity as anchored in language, and therefore in alterity.
My question would then become: even assuming that the new, post-structuralist vision of subjectivity requires a redefinition of the self's relation to otherness, to difference, is the trip into the discourse of the crisis the necessary precondition for the recognition of the other(s) who were traditionally excluded from the enlightened circle of reason? Just how far must a culture become engulfed in a crisis before it begins to question its relationship to alterity, difference and to the patterns of
exclusion that accompany them? How far must we walk into cultural decline, before the notion of gender gets top rating on the intellectual agenda?
On a more conceptual level, how does the thought of alterity and difference lead to or result in the question of 'sexual difference'? Is this connection necessary, and if so on what grounds? Is it the case that only at times of crisis a culture actually does ask questions about sexuality and the sexed nature of the human subject? In other words, is the discourse about the embodied, sexed structures of subjectivity a sign of the troubled times of crisis, a symptom of loss of stability and certainty? Does the question of sexual difference have to be associated with decline and nihilism — as in the Nietzschean legacy — or, even worse, be rejected as decadent as in the fascist nostalgia for a 'strong, wilful subject'? Can we posit the question of sexual difference positively? Translated into feminist terms the question becomes: is the emergence of discourses on the feminine symptomatic of, and therefore dependent on, the vicissitudes of the classical, masculine subject? Or does it rather reflect another dynamic: that of women's emergence as a political and theoretical subject of enunciation? This comes down to how we assess the notion of the crisis as the pretext for fundamental renewals of the notions of subjectivity, knowledge and the function of theoretical discourse.
Alongside the questioning of the political economy of modernity, the question of the feminine in philosophy posits problems of even greater moment concerning the role of creation in theoretical thought. How does one go about defining a new field of reflection? Where do new ideas in philosophy spring from? What is meant by a 'new' philosophical idea? How does one explain, for instance, the fact that contemporary French philosophy's questioning of philosophical reason and of its others has entailed the critique of the conceptual barriers which used to separate theory from fiction'? How does one explain that this blurring of disciplinary boundaries has led to the glorification of a notion of the feminine as privileged place of creativity, as sign of creation? I shall return to this.
The Female Feminist28
Faced with such a wide array of theoretical possibilities, tracks, and open questions, I must insist on stating precisely my place of enunciation as a woman, a philosopher, and a feminist. The last expresses my commitment to a political women's movement, which is far from being an all-encompassing ideological point of reference. In theory and practice alike, feminism for me is the critical and living experience of discovering new woman-based modalities of existence, creation, and communication of knowledge. At no point in this book will it be a question of trying to formulate feminist thought as a counter-
philosophical system: the definitive synthesis has not taken place yet.
True to the spirit of my initial premises, I hope, instead, to work towards new formulations of the question of women and philosophy as a singular multiplicity of related issues. A plurality of questions. This position is due not only to a vision of what the task of philosophy can be today, but also to the conviction that at this precise historical moment feminist thought cannot be systematized, cannot be represented as a continuous sequence of clearly elaborated theoretical points. As a relatively new and fast-growing field, it can only be a discontinuous line which from time to time intersects with socio-political realities, and then is confronted by new potentialities for action. A line that keeps on tracing theoretical itineraries which differ from traditional reflection -and deviate from our established mental habits. After all a discontinuous line is only a collection of points. The philosophical style I want to argue for in my defence of 'women and/in philosophy' is one of carefully considered nomadism.
The woman, the philosopher and the feminist refer to different linguistic instances, or discursive registers, that encompass various structural aspects of my 'self', but never quite coalesce into full synthetic unity. My own split subjectivity being at stake in the pages of this book, I shall not propose a counter-subject but rather leave room for the 'differences within the self' to play a role in the production of a discourse that will not be a monolithic One.
Least of all do I undertake this work in what I can only describe as the perfectly illusory hope of reaching the fusion of my terms of reference. The question of 'women and philosophy' is a forked formula, which cannot be developed without continuously splitting itself, in a constant movement of self-transcendance towards what is beyond, multiple, and plural.
If we pursue this line of argument far enough, we shall realize in the end that the fragile dis/conj unction AND which dis/conjoins women and philosophy is an in-between space that separates, in terms of both category and quality, two discursive spheres, two referents. Like the two banks of a single river, the feminine in feminist discourse and the feminine of philosophical modernity are kept apart by the very matter which unites them.
It will indeed be a question of differences: differences between men and women, differences among women, differences within the woman that T is. The difference that is thus marked and enacted is such that it would disqualify any attempt at synthesizing the referents. Like weaving parallel lines which will never meet as one; like the contours of two bodies in a film by Marguerite Duras, hermetically empathic; like 'pure', that is, irreducible and fertile difference. A sign of infinite possibilities of difference. This is how I understand Luce Irigaray's warning. I think this open-ended definition of difference is just, in both its poetic justice and its political justness, because by refusing to be fixed, it underlines the
mortal dangers of a mimetic relation to the master's knowledge.
The danger is that of homologation, and hence of disappearing into the other's text, the master's voice, in established conceptual frameworks. Like an acrobat who steps onto the tightrope without a safety net, the feminist theoretician of difference runs the risk of a fall into the void. The stronger her desire to emulate, the dizzier she may become. Hence the necessity for an other mode of relation to the void left by the crisis of the master's discourse.
I shall call it: dissonance, for what interests me is the play of this irreducibility, the ultimate non-coincidence of the two objects of this study: the discourse of the crisis in philosophical modernity and the elaboration of feminist theories of subjectivity, the total lack of symmetry. I would like to raise them to the status of a new style of thought; I will call it the female feminist way: it consists in devising my own flying paths through the multiple points of intersection that make up the discontinuous line. The interest of these conceptual trajectories and intellectual tracks is that they are not interchangeable. They constitute a nomadic project, aiming to exhaust its own premises by following them through a voyage as complex as it is refractory: women and philosophy - patterns of dissonance, a polyphonic play, a game of multiplicities that may collapse into cacophony and even shock some sensitive ears.
The very novelty of this problematic and the kind of style I advocate expose my research to some unexpected dangers. On the one hand I do enjoy some freedom of action in setting up the case, insofar as feminist thought is by definition resistant to syntheses and still too much alive to turn into a sedentary truth-system. This leaves me open, on the other hand, to charges of illegitimacy: by being pre-philosophical, the female feminist philosopher is in danger of collapsing into the non-philosophical. The nomadic style of thinking that I advocate as a new feminist position requires the talents of a tightrope-walker, an acrobat. To avoid falling headlong, I will seek after a precarious balance: the dis/conjunctions, the sheer size of the field, all force me to concentrate on a precarious conceptual geometry of the non-Euclidian type.
This search for a dynamic balance also determines the shifts in mood and mode of enunciation: from one chapter to another, like variations on a theme, different levels of intensity come into play. These respond to the demands of my object of research, which is interdisciplinary in its very conception; it therefore transposes knowledge from many different fields, derives theory from practice and draws material from several disciplinary sources. Is also made necessary by the fact that this is a work of translation. I mean that quite literally, insofar as the text was originally written in French, but also conceptually, because many of the sources used here are foreign in origin, above all Italian, French, and English (of the British, American and Australian kind). Translation, transposition, transferral: these are the ways of being of ideas within a
dynamic theoretical field. This style contributes considerably to the creation of the effect of dissonance.
These discontinuous variations also call for modulations of an affective order; indeed, for me, this work, which constituted the main corpus of my doctoral thesis,29 also traces a personal itinerary, a discursive trajectory which, taking as its point of departure a constellation of ideas, has followed its course, often turning away from its initial objectives, taking new and unexpected paths. Let this be taken as evidence of my total confidence in the activity of thinking, meaning a constantly evolving creative drifting. This affective element is in my view absolutely essential: the effort to theorize is always sustained by passion. It has often been said that writing is only a way of witnessing; so I, too, write this in witness of my intellectual gratitude for the vast theoretical, philosophical AND feminist corpus which has nurtured my reflection over the last ten years.
These 'other' voices inhabit my text, all the way through, and by the same token are in excess of it, they transcend it. In acknowledging my intellectual passions and debts I therefore also mourn that which cannot be repaid: the influence of those who came before me, whose anteriority in time places them forever beyond my reach. Time, the great master, only leaves us some space in which to trace some semblance of continuity with the past. It is the space of a written page, but also the mental space within, where those 'other' voices, those 'other' presences can freely play- That which, in me, is the others' voice marks that inner dissonance that I take both as evidence of the non-unity of the subject and also as guarantee against the formulation of new falsely dogmatic or pseudo-universal discourses. Allowing free play within my text to the others' voices, I will stress the fundamental otherness of the 'self' whose signature marks this text as my own.
I will give full reign to this notion of dissonance, so as to stress the point that all elaboration of theory today - especially for a feminist woman — can only be a play of lines which intersect only to break up instantly, of breaches which open into the void, of tracks which multiply indefinitely. There is no longer any ultimate truth to establish: free at last from the encumbering pursuit of completion, synthesis, fullness, women as philosophers need to establish new balances, to invent new ways of thinking. For if Ariadne has fled from the labyrinth of old, the only guiding thread for all of us now, women and men alike, is a tightrope stretched above the void.
Desidero Ergo Sum
The Improbable Tete-a-Tete between Philosophy and Psychoanalysis
On the horizon of any human science, there is the project of bringing man's consciousness back into its real conditions, of restoring it to the contents and forms that brought it into being, and elude us within it; this is why the problem of the unconscious - its possibility, status, mode of existence, the means of knowing it and bringing it to light - is not simply a problem within the human sciences which they can be thought of as encountering by chance in their steps; it is a problem that is ultimately coextensive with their very existence. A transcendental raising of level that is, on the other side, an unveiling of the non-conscious, is constitutive of all the sciences of man. Foucault1
What exactly is modern about us? In attempting to answer the question of modernity, we are confronted by the necessity to reconsider the relation between thought and social reality, between theory and creation. How can we invent new ways of thinking? What philosophical style is appropriate to modernity? Francois Chatelet proposes the 'practice of disrespect' as the distinctive trait of contemporary philosophy: the philosophers of today 'invite us scrupulously and learnedly to follow - in mourning clothes but in a spirit of intense jubilation - the funeral cortege of the Family, the Word, and Being'.2 The crisis of philosophy is thus translated into a climate of loss, of a break in filiation, or, as Jean-Frangois Lyotard observes, into a loss of legitimacy, which obliges the sons to celebrate with all due traditional ceremony the death of the philosophical father.3
The decline of the paternal metaphor is the subtext of the philosophical discourse of modernity. It is as if the crisis of this discipline could be read in terms of the displacement of the network of symbolic relations which centre on the paternal figure as emblem of authority and, through his mediation, structure the field of knowledge. What sort of thought can a 'fatherless society' have?4
The decline of the paternal metaphor is at the heart of the discourse of psychoanalysis and as such it contributes to our understanding of the crisis of the rational subject. Psychoanalysis is the discourse of this crisis par excellence: it has come gradually to be accepted as a radically new reading of the structures of human subjectivity.
The focus of this critical tradition of thought is the corporeal roots of subjectivity (Nietzsche) and more specifically, the dynamic interaction between the body and the human psyche (Freud). The project of thinking the subject as a corporeal entity is one of the key events of the philosophy of modernity.
In The Gay Science Nietzsche claims that, from the outset, philosophy has had to think the body. But this inevitability has the force of a necessary exclusion. Anticipating Freud's discoveries, Nietzsche stresses the fundamental incompatibility of theoretical thought, institutionalized as philosophy, and the body. It is clear that this onslaught on philosophy, as being a fundamental misunderstanding of the bodily roots of human subjectivity, could not fail to have repercussions for the discourse about women and the feminine - traditionally assigned to the corporeal or the physical.
The epoch of modernity, seen in terms of the crisis of the paternal metaphor, also implies that new emphasis is placed on the structure of female sexuality, on the woman's body as the maternal site of origin. The revaluation of the feminine thus defined is an effect of the malaise which affects the paternal metaphor, the law of the father. The proliferation of discourses about the mother's body and female sexuality is symptomatic of the crisis of the masculine social contract and its self-legitimating discourses. The feminine body is the subtext of the major theoretical confrontations in modern discourse.
In order to make sense of the seemingly paradoxical relation between the crisis of the paternal metaphor and the emergence of theoretical discourses about the female subject in sexuality, that is to say of the feminine-maternal site of discourse, we need to reconsider the relation between philosophy and psychoanalysis. Already in The Future of an Illusion Freud underlined the deep-seated misunderstanding that marks the philosophical attitude towards psychoanalytic practice. Freud identifies philosophy with religion insofar as both are neurotic structures which nurture the illusion of all-powerful totality and unity of the subject. Philosophy, by definition a 'noble' discipline, is the basis of a system of knowledge which implicitly supports a scale of ethical values based on rationality. We shall see in chapter 4 how the radical critic of psychoanalysis, Gilles Deleuze, develops this idea.
In the Freudian perspective philosophy is not just one cognitive system among others but rather the discipline which operates the hierarchical systematization of different stages of knowledge. It therefore creates conditions of possibility for the elaboration of other discourses. This philosophy is for Freud the intellectual emanation of
the spirit of mastery: it rests on the misunderstanding of the structure of the very object it takes as its central point of reference: the subject. Philosophy fixes the subject in an idealizing image of him/herself. According to Freud, philosophy remains behind the conceptual advances operated by psychoanalysis in our understanding of the structure of subjectivity.
The most far-reaching critique Freud advances of philosophy is that it establishes a de facto and de jure identification between human subjectivity and rational consciousness. P. L. Assoun names this tendency 'conscientialism',5 which he opposes to the analytic insight that promotes the interrogation of, and challenge to, the subject in terms of his/her relation to structures that lie structurally beyond his/her reach.
In psychoanalytic discourse, it is less a question of producing another cognitive positivity than of disclosing the subject's structural incapacity to be 'master in his own house'. All claim to synthetic unity of the subject is thus reduced either to ignorance of his/her real structures or the expression of a will to master and dominate the self that borders on pathology. Psychoanalysis effects a critical reading of conceptual thought, such as it is manifest in the specific mental operations of philosophy.
Its central challenge touches upon the relation between unconscious and conscious thought, which Freud formulated as follows: how are we to understand, and theorize, the form of thought which is at work in dreams? How are we to take the fact that clear, distinct and pertinent forms of thought can reproduce themselves without the intervention of consciousness?
To postulate, after Freud, the primacy of the demands of the unconscious is to relegate consciousness to a place which is vital but not determinant, as a mechanism that relays and transforms the fragments of libidinal life into forms of mental activity that are self-consciously representational. The dominant system of representation being organized around rationality, consciousness can only play a normative role in psychic life.
The process of transmutation and transposition of unconscious material makes consciousness one of the key faculties in psychical life, but not its motor or its dynamic: on the contrary, its function is rather to purify the libidinal residues, and to master them so as to offer the subject the stability of a reassuring self-image.
Thus an equation between on the one hand consciousness and rationality and on the other, self-affirmation and ideal self is established. The originality of analytic thought lies less in its having 'discovered' the unconscious - as Freud emphasizes, poets had always known it - than in having shown and conceptualized the primacy of unconscious elements in psychical life.
Psychoanalysis places a question mark beside the hard kernel of the philosophical equation of subjectivity with consciousness, by emphasizing the paradox of unconscious thought. This implies a view of
consciousness which is animated by effects beyond its control, and of thought which paradoxically has no thinker. The idea of unconscious signifying structures throws down a fundamental challenge to the sovereignty of the subject. The inevitable consequence of this is that the identification of the subject with consciousness, stricto sensu, is a radical misunderstanding of human subjectivity.
The rational subject who, like a mirror, grasps the world with his/her gaze and governs its representations, ignores all of the affective, libidinal and unconscious bases which govern his/her relation to knowing. This illusory fixed point is not the whole of rationality, nor does it sum up what thinking is all about.
This suspicion as to the limits of consciousness - a space of questioning and crisis - is where philosophy and psychoanalysis meet face to face. It is interesting to note that, from the outset, Freudian psychoanalysis has been unable to resist addressing itself to philosophy, as well as to the other human sciences, to ask them to come to terms with the subversive event that is a theory of unconscious thought.6
Of all the reasons that may shed light on the beginnings of the discursive exchange between philosophy and psychoanalysis, we must take into consideration the fact that, in Freud's Vienna, the spirit prevailing in the scientific world stemmed from a positivist tradition. Neurobiology and psychiatry thus provided the obligatory points of reference in the medical circles which had always been overtly hostile or indifferent to Freudian discoveries. There was however a philosophical tradition - represented by Brentano, whose student Freud had been -which concerned itself with experimental and speculative psychology.
Despite his open aversion to philosophical abstraction, Freud's work was caught between positivist scientism and horizons of thought which far exceeded the conceptual categories established by the medical science of his day. One may therefore read his dialogue with philosophy as an effect of the discursive framework which characterized Viennese culture.7 The same tension is apparent in the early attempts to apply psychoanalysis to philosophy: this interdisciplinary tug-of-war can be read in terms of territorial rights: psychoanalysts turned rather revengefully against the master-discourse of philosophy because it was the most stubborn in resisting the new practice of the unconscious. In this spirit A. F. van Winterstein suggests that philosophy be put to the test of psychoanalysis.8 Winterstein elaborates a critique of theoretical thought which could lead to an intensive, or affective history of philosophy; he calls it 'psychography'. The scope of this project is to unveil the unconscious elements in different philosophical theories, and to suggest the characteristic psychic traits of the 'philosopher'. The assertion of the unconscious roots of philosophy has restored to the agenda the relation between the personal and the philosophical. Winterstein's project is based on an assumed conceptual parity between analytic theory and philosophy; as if, being equal, they could be superimposed. He hopes to
achieve the reciprocal commensuration of the two discourses, both readjusted as new theories of subjectivity.9
In my perspective, these attempts to apply psychoanalysis to philosophy are rather precipitate and unconvincing. What emerges is a sort of theorized autobiography which tries to prove that systems of thought derive from their authors' psychical structures. In the first psychoanalytic circle, this 'application' of psychoanalysis met with Freud's scepticism.10
The application of psychoanalysis to philosophy goes no further than the attempt to thwart the ruses of the theoretical process, by stressing the part played in it by unconscious structures. If on the one hand this throws into relief the fact that all reflective activity is rooted in the personal, on the other, it is a rather reductive application of psychoanalytic thought.
After all, Freudian psychoanalysis does not aim simply to resituate the complexity of the human personality by inscribing it in its unconscious roots. In other words, its aim is not in the end to include the unconscious in consciousness, but rather, to think the structures of subjectivity differently, starting on the basis of the unconscious. The early episodes in the psychoanalysis-philosophy relation are extremely significant in that they set the terms of the debate: ever since, philosophical thought has approached psychoanalysis precisely in terms of the inclusion and the incorporation of the unconscious, trying to transform it into another system of representation (as is the case, for instance, with Ricoeur's hermeneutics).
The dialogue between philosophy and psychoanalysis was always fraught with contradictions and tensions; a particularly complex episode further enriched its history. The name of this episode is Lacan. The better to evaluate this phenomenon, we must bear in mind the specific French context which engendered it.
France occupies a singular place in the history of the psychoanalytic movement.11 In Freud's time, France tended to distance itself from the analytic revolution, for many reasons, including not least the time-honoured hostility between the French and the German-speaking cultures. During his short stay in Paris Freud on several occasions experienced this antagonism personally. The anti-semitism of late nineteenth-century France, which was just as strong as in Germany and Austria, together with the prevailing scientific positivism, did not help psychoanalysis either.
The institutionalization of psychoanalysis in France was not organized by Freud and mediated by the official presence of a recognized disciple. It happened thanks to a voluntary intermediary, Princess Marie Bonaparte, who created the first psychoanalytic society according to orthodox Freudian principles and started translating Freud's works.
Significantly enough, France was one of the last West European countries to possess a complete translation of all of Freud's works. Lacan's much-celebrated 'return' to the text thus seems rather ironic. The recent completion of the translation of the Freudian corpus by Presses Univer-sitaires de France became the object of a very violent polemic: the French, by now accustomed to Lacan's terminology, were shocked by the German-sounding lexicon and the medical connotation of Freud's terminology. In a significant if predictable triumph of the simulacrum, the original - becoming available so much later than the copy - had trouble establishing its credentials.
Recently psychoanalysts have begun to break their self-imposed silence regarding the history of the analytic movement in the disturbed and tormented context of pre-world-war Europe. After the rise of Nazism had broken up the first Freudian circle and brought about its massive emigration to the Anglo-Saxon world, scarcely any core of psychoanalytic activity in continental Europe remained. Across the Atlantic, on the other hand, once psychoanalysis has acquired serious 'medical' status, it became widely popularized, especially as ego-psychology and depth-therapy.
It was precisely in reaction to what psychoanalysis had become in the United States of America and in response to the normative status of the psychoanalytic society that in France, in the fifties, Lacan advocated his 'return to Freud'. There is no need here to explain the vicissitudes of the Lacanian phenomenon - there is no lack of documentation and evidence on this topic.12 Suffice it to stress that Lacan's 'return' to Freud took the form of reading and commenting the texts of Freud, as opposed to passively assimilating the orthodoxy of the International Psychoanalytic Association. It also took the shape of a clean break from this association and the refusal of its leadership. When Lacan launched his own school the I.P.A. was run by Anna Freud and the French branch by Marie Bonaparte. The 'return' to Freud was also the reassertion of the self-appointed son over the daughters.
Lacan's work and personality were to give French psychoanalysis a completely new national and international resonance; paradoxically, his success relied a great deal upon many dutiful 'daughters'. In chapter 8 I will deal in more detail with the debate between feminism and psychoanalysis; for the moment let me just point out that some of the followers of Lacan, like J. Rose and J. Mitchell, stress the clinical and theoretical relevance of his work; others, like Gallop, emphasize rather the positive implications of the Lacanian approach to feminist literary criticism.13 Others, like Catherine Clement, argue that Lacan marks the European reappropriation of the discourse of the unconscious, after it became over-psychologized and vulgarized by contact with North American culture.14 The cultural politics of this operation resulted in the
conjunction of Lacanism with the political revolts of the late sixties in
ranee, a simultaneous return to Europe of both psychoanalysis and Marxism, both the unconscious and the revolution, both of which were violently opposed to the conformism and the liberal pluralism of the United States.
Lacan devoted a great deal of attention to the problem of clarifying the points of contact and divergence between psychoanalysis and philosophy. It may even be argued that, in Lacan's work, philosophy is the favourite target insofar as Lacan addressed himself to the question of human subjectivity in its relation to symbolic structures.
The recentring of the subject in relation to the laws which regulate his/her access to language may be taken as a critique of the 'knowing subject' of philosophy; in Lacan's terms, our era is anti-Cartesian. This attitude, characteristic of the entire 'structuralist' generation in France, was based on the rejection of the primacy traditionally assigned to conscious thought.
According to Lacan, the human subject, far from being transparent to himself, is ex-centric, decentred in relation to his deep structures:
We have to move away from the 'religious' conception of consciousness. Modem man implicitly thinks that everything that has happened in the universe since its origin has done so in order to converge towards this thinking thing, creation of life, unique and precious being, pinnacle of all creatures, that is himself, and in whom there is tins pnvileged point called consciousness.15
The decline of the unitary vision of the subject is the premise for a new conceptualization of subjectivity based on the data of linguistics and structural anthropology. It is highly significant, especially in comparison with the earlier attempts to assimilate philosophy to psychoanalysis, hat Lacan questions from the start the conceptual compatibility of the two discourses. He argues that they cannot be reduced one to the other, irmly convinced of the primacy of the unconscious, he turns his psychoanalytic position into a privileged place from which to interrogate the other human sciences. The confrontation between philosophy and psychoanalysis thus becomes simultaneously more complex and more problematic than it was in Freud's day.
Psychoanalysis is not obliged to explain philosophical error to philosophy, as if philosophy would then have to be aware of it. Nothing of the sort comes into it, because to imagine it possible is precisely to fall into philosophical error. It's not that in so doing the subject is making the mistake of identifying itself with its consciousness, as you would have me say, God knows why; rather the mistake is in only letting go of the topology which deludes it in making this identification.16
The stakes of this warning against the integration of psychoanalysis and philosophy are the limits of philosophical reason itself. For Lacan, philosophy, as a consciousness-based, logocentric discourse, cannot ever include the dimension of the unconscious, except as its dialectical opposite, that is, within the logic of the same logocentrism. To be capable of imagining an operation which would locate and recuperate this other is precisely philosophy's innermost desire and tragic mistake.
The dividing lines between the unconscious and the speaking subject, the psyche and the archive, truth and discourse, constitute just so many objects of reflection in the Lacanian perspective. And this, of course, inevitably refuelled (the) debate about the Cartesian cogito.
Several voices within the structuralist generation in France - from Lacan to Foucault by way of Levi-Strauss - have taken up the challenge of developing a critique of the notion of the subject and his/her place in the history of Western philosophy, and have traced the sources of this issue back to Descartes's Meditations.
The cogito is the founding moment in the modern philosophy of the subject, the turning point at which the subject is posited as the focus of all knowledge: it is clarity of thought, thought transparent to itself, which legitimates all the sciences. The ontological security which characterizes the Cartesian cogito contrasts with the weakness of the modern subject, and, from that angle, functions as his/her converse. Unlike his/her parent cogito, the modern subject is constitutionally incapable of playing the role of founder of any discourse.
As regards Descartes's speculative system, Lacan underlines the desire for mastery which animates the Cartesian subject and which drives him/her (the subject) to justify the ontological foundations of his/her knowledge. Fie suggests that 'at an important point in the Cartesian scheme consciousness and subject coincide. It is the assumption that this privileged moment is the be all and end all that is erroneous.'17
The Cartesian position, as paradigm of the subject of knowledge, has to do with obsessionality and desire for mastery. Lacan adds that the cogito is all-seeing: it sees and sees itself in the act of seeing - which, in his geometrical universe, gives it an immense reflective power. But this certitude is, in turn, based on a misunderstanding: what Descartes is unaware of, precisely because his attention is fixed elsewhere, is that the cogito finds its legitimacy not in the transparency of its perception of self, but rather in the fact of being able to say it. It is through having taken its place on the level of enunciation that the subject exists, but will always exist, that is, will always be decentred and not a total and abstract unity. We shall see later how feminist philosophers such as Luce Irigaray and others have taken up this visual metaphor and developed it into a wholly new critical system.
Philosophy therefore displays, according to Lacan, the conceptual symbolic that is at work in our entire system. The privilege that the
Cartesian subject attributes to introspection - which constitutes, from the psychoanalytic perspective, the conscientialist obstacle - reveals philosophy's endemic belief in the hegemony of the rational self. What is guaranteed by the dualism of the Cartesian distinctions is the subject's continuity as a rational entity.
The voluntarism of this position becomes clear in the hypothesis of the Evil Daemon - the deceitful God who evokes the possibility of the toal annihilation of the subject, and who will be denied by the absolute truth of the Cartesian God. The cogito is the originary act of legitimation of the subject, who simply takes the place of origin: a beginning without a trace of what went before, and therefore capable of reproducing itself in an always present perpetuity.
Lacan concludes from this that the Cartesian project stems from the desire to occult unconscious reality: the cogito is the paranoid subject of human knowledge and the 'hold' it assumes for itself on external reality is a - completely illusory - attempt to master the forces which drive it. The philosophical text is thus read as a 'document of desire', the discursive content being reduced to its unconscious silences and unspoken things. The cogito, argues Lacan, this spectacular certitude which animates the subject of the 'I think', must be replaced by the Freudian subject, who comes second in terms of the chain of signifiers and whose ontological status does not exceed the rather precarious certitude of 'it [ga] speaks'.
Elizabeth Roudinesco summarizes the narcissistic illusion of the Cartesian subject as follows: 'The cogito's bad dream is none other than this attempt to overcome the subject's initial lack, that is, of being only an effect of the signifier.'18
First, philosophy is taken as the prototype of theoretical discourse in our culture; then, through a sort of isomorphism between the philosophers' individual subjectivity and philosophical discourse qua cultural institution, Lacanian psychoanalysis reduces the speculative drive of philosophy to a rejection of unconscious truth.
The psychoanalytic critique of philosophy comes to the conclusion that all theoretical thought is just one mediating structure among others, and that the prestige it enjoys is due to the fact that it possesses a very strong internal logic. Philosophy is special because it is anchored in values whose rationality is not in question. At the same time, however, it tends to function as a mechanism of denial of the unconscious roots of all thought. As a radical misunderstanding of the subject, the philosophical position seems to exclude a priori all conceptual coexistence with the procedure - both discursive and technical - of psychoanalysis.
The conclusion as to the highly improbable nature of a dialogue between these two disciplines is rather paradoxical in so far as it actually dominated the intellectual debate for years, creating the very special context that is post-structuralist France. One strand of the contemporary
philosophy of the subject turned towards psychoanalysis with great interest in the new sources of knowledge it may have to offer; psychoanalysis, however, is no less implicated in this exchange. As M. Dayan emphasizes:
Psychoanalytic writings lend themselves to similar treatment. Minimizing the role of clinical practice, revealing an excess of theoretical writing, giving free rein to an individualism as regards discursive production, these texts cannot escape a 'philosophical' reading, even if such a reading is only a perverse betrayal and a refusal to understand.19
'Mit Affekt': The Psychoanalytic Critique of What It Means to Think
French psychoanalysis is in danger of falling ill with philosophy. Not at all because it tends to be over-inclined to be theoretical and dismissive of clinical practice, as some commentators foolishly remark, but because it may fail to understand that, by definition, the experience of decentring cannot be given the absolute status of a position and that no-one - least of all the psychoanalyst - can claim to speak in the place of a subject supposed to know, or not to know, or to make laws in the name of the unconscious. No 'psychoanalytic' discourse is possible. Pontalis20
In the last section we saw that in a psychoanalytic perspective theorization is an effort which stems, as a secondary activity, from the psychical elaboration of the question of the subject's origin. All theory is an abstract formulation of a libidinal experience.
The act of thought - in psychoanalysis - is intransitive, for desire is always already inscribed in it: all knowledge is desire for knowledge, or knowledge about desire. Just as Freud will propose that man's 'soul' and his neurosis are homogeneous, so analytic knowledge is coextensive with pathology.
In comparison with the ordinary definition of the act of thinking, the process of theorization represents the acute desire to give form, structure, unity, and finality to thinking. The philosophical illusion, so often criticized by Freud, rests on the 'dressing up' of this epistemophilic desire by a will-to-know that conveys the socially accepted rules, conventions and norms. Theoretical structures are the result of mastery over the libidinal, unconscious material which is the source of all thought. All that on the discursive level constitutes the specificity of intellectual disciplines like philosophy, becomes on the level of the unconscious libidinal drives dangerously close to paranoia, insofar as it
denies the unconscious fabric of subjectivity.
And yet there is a fundamental ambivalence at the heart of the psychoanalytic undertaking, for while it denounces the illusion of universality in any globalizing discourse, it still finds itself obliged to confront the 'error' that is philosophy, especially when it tries in its turn to theorize itself as discourse, science, or theory of the unconscious. It seems to me that on this point, French psychoanalysis of the Lacanian brand has tended to put aside the ironic distance with which Freud protected analytic practice from theoretical illusions. Without this distance as safeguard, analytic theory runs the risk of colliding with recognized discursive structures and of ending up in an uncomfortable encounter with the philosophical theories of the subject.
The theorization of analytic practice, in terms of a Freudian epistemology, has always been a problematic and controversial operation. The conceptual difficulties already emphasized are compounded by others which touch on the very framework of the analytic situation. The transition from the couch or armchair to the blank page of writing is fraught with obstacles. The transcription of psychoanalysis outside the strictly therapeutic context - the analysis with its more or less ritualized modalities, its carefully maintained constraints: time, money, the rituals of gesture - poses both theoretical and ethical questions. Is it possible to think what one hears in the highly codified context of the cure? Bearing in mind the fact that the driving force of the therapeutic situation itself is the relation of 'transference' which links the analyst/analysand couple in a pact in which all and every sort of dependence is played out, is it possible to transcribe this relation outside the context in which it is deployed?
Flow, therefore, is the passage effected from the spoken word, from this dialogue which constitutes the raw material of the analysis, to the written material which constitutes the privileged medium of the process of theoretical transmission? Is it possible to transcribe what makes the understanding between the analyst and the analysand, and legitimates it? Is it realistic to hope to preserve in writing the specific intelligence of the analytic communication?
What the passage into writing seems to suggest, rather, is the bracketing-out of the analytic context, the suspension of the floating kind of attention to the other which alone makes the therapy hold good. It is human to engage in dialogue, and thereby to present oneself in speech (to an other), but can one present oneself in writing with the other?
In this sense, analytic writing is a nonsense which more closely resembles the work of translation or transposition than the reductive gesture which would totalize the production of the unconscious, to the detriment of the singularity of the effects which play through it.
As if all that could be transcribed of psychoanalysis were its inter-
subjective affective margin. As if the specificity of the analytic situation were finally reduced to the interpersonal process of verbalizing that which affects the body: how could that ever be produced in writing? And yet, in a peculiar reversal that structuralist psychoanalysis has succeeded in theorizing, in the psychoanalytic scene the body is but written text, traversed by codes and affects. So much so that the question arises whether the modalities of interaction and communication that take place in what after all used to be called the 'talking cure' can be reproduced in the rather linear process of writing. And we have yet to agree on the sense of the term 'writing' and of the precise link one aims to establish between the written and the theoretical.
On this point also, psychoanalysis and philosophy confront each other in an impossible clinch; philosophy in fact originates in the art of dialogue, in the spoken exchange between master and disciple, conducted according to the rules of truth-telling and the will to truth which Foucault so remarkably analyses in the second volume of his History of Sexuality.21 And yet what legitimates theoretical discourse, including psychoanalysis, is precisely the written form.22 It is on the codification of utterances that the philosophical discipline has based its prestige, binding itself intrinsically to the law and the contractual model.
In the light of Foucault's analysis of the order of discourse, it seems to me that psychoanalysis is theorizable outside the therapeutic context only at the expense of being inscribed in the strategic network of discourse, thus losing all privilege of extra-territoriality vis-a-vis the logocentric system which it claims to deconstruct. Written, codified and canonized, psychoanalytic discourse will be subject to the same rules as any utterance admissible inside the field of knowledge. This is to say that psychoanalysis would be affected by non-analytic notions and by registers of speech which are not only alien but antithetical to it. To write psychoanalysis in the theoretical mode is, it seems, to be caught in a vicious circle whose sole great advantage is to unveil the strategies which govern the production of knowledge in our culture.
However the question of the theoretical formalization of psychoanalysis is crucial because it challenges the very status of its practice. It touches on the problem of the transmission of psychoanalysis and therefore on the professional training of analysts. From its origins as the study of the aetiology of neuroses and mental illness, psychoanalysis has evolved towards a reading of the so-called normal structures of the human psyche. Between the pathological and the normal, psychoanalysis has a complex discursive status, to which the Lacanian pretence to a scientific status adds nothing. As Freud emphasized, neurosis is perhaps far from containing the whole human being, but it nonetheless does include a good part of what we would call his or her 'soul'. The homogeneity of soul and 'neurosis' is the paradox that complicates even
further the theoretical status of psychoanalysis: it is not only therapeutic but is also a revealing index of what is proper to the human being, as a being of language and desire.
As we have already seen, Freud, with characteristic caustic wit, often spoke out against global theoretical synthesis as illusion, and, while elaborating his own theory of the libidinal, bodily and affective genesis of thought, resisted the narcissistic temptation to produce a closed system. In his writings we discover a radical non-belief in the viability of the theoretical mode, whose proximity to neurosis is undeniable. As Michel Schneider suggests: 'When we theorize, we run the great risk of doing so upon the body of an other/23 For psychoanalysis the act of thinking can only be represented as a topology of displacement of desire. The positionality of thinking means that its libidinal structures matter as much, if not more than the actual object of thought. This is possibly the aspect of Freudian epistemology which causes the most problems for the philosopher, for whom the constitution of objects of reflection, according to the rules of verification and legitimacy, is the fundamental concern.
This is not the case in the Freudian perspective, where there is no separation between affective and intellectual life, between on the one hand thought, and on the other, dreams and fantasy. The exemplar of 'homo theoricus', Schreber, comes in his schizophrenia within a hair's breadth of the extreme intelligence of the theorist. To think is to bring into play the different registers of experience and representation which structure the subject. No more no less.
What characterizes psychoanalysis in this respect is the literal value it grants to all language: that is, the fact that all utterances, the most high-brow and the most casual alike, have the same weight to the analyst's ear. There is no meta-language in the analytic situation. All representations and ideas are levelled down with an equanimity that destabilizes the established moral values of the intellectual world and the acquired conceptual habits of the subject. Furthermore, both on the level of its epistemology and in its practice, psychoanalysis privileges everything missing from linear discourse, the most imperceptible utterances: the lapses, the flaws, the falterings, the fragments of dreams through which the unconscious manifests itself. The scandal of the unconscious lies in its challenging the centuries-old association of thinking with consciousness.
On this issue, a double tendency can be detected today within the corpus of psychoanalytic literature: on the side of the analysts, there is firstly a so-called 'clinical' tradition: this is a mixture of case histories, avowedly theoretical reflections on (clinical) practice itself, and so on. Secondly, there are also the often esoteric theoretical texts, best exemplified by the Lacanian opus. On the side of the patients or analysands, on the other hand, a new literary genre has emerged: the literature of 'transference', or the diary in the form of a narrative of the actual cure.
The diary of the psychoanalytic experience often blends with reflections of a more theoretical or intellectual order. But whether it is transposed into a conceptual mode or whether it is written in the form of an interior dialogue, this literature of transference is a significant phenomenon. It would be very interesting to make an inventory of the transference literature which has been produced during the last ten years around Lacan, but this task far exceeds the aims of my study. What I would like to emphasize, as regards the phenomenon of this new psychoanalytic literature, is its privileged relation with the lived experience of the transference during the cure. It also seems to me to be important to indicate the significance of the role played by women analysts in this debate, especially in France.
As this whole tradition shows, psychoanalysis's place of enunciation is caught in an endless in-between: the cure as analytic process takes place somehwere between the organic or the corporeal, and the symbolic or the linguistic, and it can only be elaborated within the relational bond of the exchange between analyst and analysand.
By contrast with the specular model of the reflective consciousness, analytic thought is to be understood in the mode of the 'trouvaille', or 'find', as Lacan put it. A discontinuous way of thinking that does not claim to purify and filter the libidinal residues from the act of thought. According to Schneider: 'For Freud, thought operates a difference, marks a gap, reveals a separation. It is a difference between the register of objects' existence or non-existence, and the register of the pleasure or unpleasure they give.'24
Given the set of complex questions posed by the writing of psychoanalysis, as symptomatic of the difficulties of its development towards theoretical formalization, it is not surprising to note that the task of its written transmission has been highly polemical. The tendency for psychoanalysis to be constituted as a closed system is answered by the tendency to open psychoanalysis to the multiplicity of singular utterances which constitute its raw material. As J. Rousseau-Dujardin writes:
Given that psychoanalytic theory holds as its foundation and stated aim the uncoding of unconscious processes (I dare not use the term 'unconscious' as a substantive) ... it follows that its transmission cannot be understood as the communication of knowledge from one subject to another (even through writing). This would be a psychological trivialization of the whole process. The only possible ways of verifying the transmission of psychoanalysis - which have nothing to do with the actual success or failure of the cure, in conventional terms - require that we take into account the specific constituents of the psychoanalytic situation. Only in this framework, in fact, is the theory questioned, and continuously questioned; this should be the only status allowed to theory within psychoanalysis. The best way to verify this theory is to put oneself in the position of reinventing it.25
Far from falling back on abstract formulations, veritable mathemes of the unconscious, which would be absolutely verifiable and therefore perfectly transmissible, it is in its very openness and loyalty to its own initial premises that analytic theory is likely to legitimate and theoretically develop its project.
Jeanne Favret-Saada emphasizes the same point:
Freud often repeated that one can only really listen to a patient on condition that one forgets all that one thinks one knows, that one forgets existing theory, even if it is one's own invention, and that one lets oneself be ^shaken out of one's certainties by an unexpected feature of the analysand's discourse. The work of theorization, if it is always necessary, can nonetheless only be done after the event, through taking stock of one's own surprise and taking this opportunity to interrogate existing theory.26
To return the analytic situation to its basis in clinical practice is not only to restore the transferential and therefore intersubjective context of the analytic situation, but also to underline the quality specific to analytic 'thought'. As Schneider ironically points out: 'Isn't thinking always about filling in the holes? From first, the maternal womb, to last, the hole we'll be buried in?'27
In an analytic perspective, thought is always thinking of sexual matters, as manifested in the theories of infantile sexuality. All thinking turns on and around the essential thought, the only one that really 'matters': 'Where do I come from?'
If we posit as the basic frame of reference for thinking the infantile curiosity which cannot be exceeded, it follows that thought, as a mental act of self-reflection, enjoys neither a 'pure' nor an autonomous status in analytic theory. Insofar as everyone's first perceptual object or horizon is the mother, thinking is also the gesture which allows one to rationalize both her presence and her absence. In other words, in the psychoanalytic perspective, thinking implies the confrontation with the mother's body; as such it contributes to the problematization of female sexuality and the maternal site of origin.
The movement of thought is an activity which traces a dividing line that compensates for, and gives a meaning to, the absence of the desired object. It is a trace of violence and separation. It is a gesture of 'thinking oneself with' or 'in relation to' the other, in the exchanges and the silences of an in-between which generates its dynamic force in a constant displacement.
And it is this space which is recreated in the analytic situation, through the dynamic of transference. In this closely 'framed' situation, the act of thinking is always already response, gift, commerce, exchange - which poses some puzzling problems concerning the copyright, the moral and legal status of the exchanges themselves.
Whose are they, these words, these thoughts, dreams, images, fantasies, these writings which are the food or the product of the analytic situation? Plagiarism stages and reveals in tragi-comic fashion a number of questions which are at the heart of the analytic experience. What do we call thinking an analysis? Who elaborates the thought in the treatment? Who is the author of the analytic interpretations, constructions, and theories? How does the analyst's own thought confront that of other analysts, and that of the institution or institutions to which he belongs or refers? What influences, dependencies, alienation and consequences are born of this confrontation? When analytic thought remains under the influence of primary processes, is it a thought? A thought which does not think, like that of the dream?28
In stressing the question of authorship as self-origin, psychoanalytic theory emphasizes thought's maternal bond - the game of 'fort'l'da', 'presence/absence', which weaves the itinerary of all thought: a remarkable spider's web which traces the space of desire.
One can only start thinking in experiencing the visceral fear of the loss of the primary object that is the mother's body. Every effort to theorize is the effect of this double terror: terror of an excessive distance from, but also of an overwhelming presence of, the maternal site. The distancing of the maternal through the introduction of the Law and the name of the father is advocated as an indispensable stage in the development of all self-reflective activity. The act of thinking, a never-ending game of substitution, is indissociable from an archaic cri de coeur. Thus, the act of reflection will forever resonate with the vital necessity to balance oneself on the oscillation between presence and absence of this privileged 'other' that is the maternal body. Psychoanalysis is a phenomenal putting into discourse of the maternal-feminine body.
The ethical dimension is thus inscribed at the very heart of thought, in an incontrovertible relation to the other. All thought, and therefore to an even greater extent all theorization, is riddled with debts: it is a heterogeneous mixture of the said and non-said, in response to the other's constant interpellation. It is an inevitable plagiarism, due to the fact that every human being, as a being of language, is caught in a circular economy of traces, signs, and letters, traversed by the shadow of ancient speech. To think, after all, is to quote unknown, unrecognizable authors, the better to adapt them, for the space of a sentence, a line, a page.
The problem of the signature remains; that is, precisely, the problem of the 'proper' noun which - out of grubby and recycled bits and pieces - fabricates a purified and autonomous whole. This strange literary property/propriety (propr(i)ete) of the name, which every subject cuts deep into their own flesh. Thinking is the means of grasping the fluid mass of the affects which animate the body as a libidinal space. All semiology is impregnated with corporeal fluids. The process of theorization - like every other gesture of creation - is the art of transforming
lived experience, of representing it (to oneself) through the play of the imagination. To put one's signature to it is the magic act of compensation and capitalization, of a subject left suffering. Consequently, it may be that the best means of respecting the specificity of psychoanalytic thought, would be to foster an ironic distancing in relation to the written text: to write as if one were quoting the words of the other who inhabits oneself.
In these terms, quotation would be a true way of telling: 'Quotation remains a foreign body in the body of the text ... It functions not as sense (which "knows itself") but as a signifier which is always displaced, always imported from another text, another scene. Therefore quotation is articulated on the text, in the manner of the signifier, through the gaping of an unarticulated displacement: the connection of the signifiers, the articulation of the different references quoted, is what by definition can never be thematized, or present to itself in the text.'29
This structural modification of the relation between theory and writing also serves to reduce the power of the person of the analyst. For all notions of conceptual truth serve above all to legitimate his position as privileged keeper of a knowledge over the unconscious. As if he could exercise a prescriptive function and thus maintain power over the other.
As Cahn underlines, psychoanalysis carries a triple ethical requirement: that of the truth, that of the disengagement of interrelational affects and counter-affects, and that of the rejection of all power over the other.30 Schneider emphasizes this point, and reminds us that in 1937 Freud said that 'good' analysts are the analysts who are capable of showing their inadequacy to the task they undertake:
They are those who do not confuse giving food for thought and giving thought. The second formula is caught in a relationship of subjection. One gives a constituted object, a finite product, wholly transmissible and incorporable. The first formula is at the heart of an unmaster able process, beyond power. One gives not an object but a path, the trace of a labour, the mark of a desire. Nothing completed, finished, reproducible, which is, besides, the best reply to the danger of plagiarism. Your ideas may be stolen, but not your thinking.31
Psychoanalysis's ethical obligation may therefore be summarized as the search for subjective truth by the unfolding, in an established context, of the relational affects of the analyst and his or her patients.
On the Borderlines of the Political: The Discursive Marketing of the Feminine
The question of the status of analytic theory and therefore also of the
ethics of analysis leads to another problem, that of the cultural and political spin-offs of psychoanalysis as institution.
From the outset, psychoanalytic circles had laid claim to a grand neutrality in relation to the political and cultural sphere. In his concern to legitimate psychoanalysis as a rigorous practice, Freud required a strict professional ethics. In the first Freudian society, the scientific ideal of some, coupled with the power of rationalization of others, was channeled by Freud towards the elaboration of the technique and the practice of analysis as being independent of medical science and religious authority. This resulted in an enormous effort of concentration on itself, on its modalities of operation and its own objectives. The need to develop psychoanalysis as a discursive practice and for it to be recognized as such left the early analysts very little time for critical reflection on the place in history occupied by their discipline (if indeed it was one). Freud reveals very little in his psychoanalytic writing about his relation with his very troubled political context. It is as if psychoanalysis and politics belonged to two dissociated and different dimensions.
Even if the problematic of the social bond and the relation to the state and, especially in the meta-psychological period, the critique of social contract theory was to be explicitly raised by Freud as part of the question of the institutionalization and transmission of psychoanalysis, he nevertheless insisted that psychoanalysis had nothing specific to say about political power in the broad sense of the term. Between one fin-de-siecle and another, however, the modes of relation between psychoanalysis and politics have evolved; it has become apparent that the diffusion of analytic thought poses a number of problems which touch on the deep structure of the practice. Clearly psychoanalysis cannot be held responsible for the use a culture makes of some of the material it provides. The problem of 'cultural spin-offs' of psychoanalysis tends to raise the opposite question: that of the points of conjunction and therefore of interference between a given culture and analytic practice itself. It is because it is deeply inscribed in the fibre of a certain social and cultural order that it has been possible for psychoanalysis to be so widely published and vulgarized.
A new mode of questioning of psychoanalysis has thus become not only possible, but also necessary. Lacan, for his part, has always denounced the 'managerial exploitation' of psychoanalysis, that is, its psychologizing uses, which aim to evaluate and improve the performance and productivity of individuals in business, schools, and so on. Lacan was, however, peculiarly blind to the managerial exploitations to which his own practice lent itself.
Foucault and other so-called 'post-structuralists' attacked certain aspects of the analytic institution, as well as its theoretical foundations. Foucault argues that the whole question of a 'psychoanalytic politics' is
paradoxical: how is it that a practice avowedly subversive of the deep structures of subjectivity can lend itself to repressive and normalizing social utilizations?
In a study inspired by Foucault devoted to the politics of the analytic institution, Robert Castel tries to resolve the paradox by demonstrating that the so-called vulgarization of analysis is not an effect of chance and is in no way arbitrary: rather, it seems to be the externalization of the rules of operation implicit in the practice itself.32 He imputes to psychoanalysis a sort of exacerbated reductivism, insofar as it would seem to encourage the rotation of all problematics around that of the subject.
Thus the socio-political dimension would be deliberately evacuated from the 'purely' analytic domain and, on the basis of this distinction between the social context and the fantasmatic scene of analysis, the privilege of extra-territoriality would be reiterated. Analysis would be, in short, a sort of non-place, an elsewhere beyond the existing norms in the social context.
If on the one hand this privileges clinical practice, it also deprives psychoanalysis of the possibility of a real politics. Everything happens as if, Castel adds, it were impossible to think the double reality of the analytic situation, its specificity as 'other scene', but also as established social institution, which is formalized through very precise rules and methods, a contractual act made material by the spending of money.
Just how far is it possible to accord this institution a status as really 'other'? What limits can one place on the tendency for everything to revolve around the subjective? These questions, which outline a critique of the power of the analytic institution in contemporary societies, also preoccupy analysts, and give rise to a debate with far-reaching consequences:
Analysis is greatly at risk when, in a society in which the symbolic structures are gradually crumbling away, it becomes the cultural referent and the place of transmission of culture. If analysis takes over from the declining institutions: the Church, the political parties, the family, the university, then it becomes a recycling enterprise among others, instead of affirming its position as an extra-territorial field of enunciation.33
Notice, once again, the crossing of ways which, acting as real axes of research, structure the landscape of modernity: the climate of loss and crisis, 'where the symbolic structures are gradually crumbling away'; deterioration of the social bond, because of the progressive decay of the paternal metaphor as bearer of the Law.
What is at stake in this radical change is the status of difference in a society resistant to seeing difference as a positive value. In this perspective the paternal metaphor's loss of authority implies the risk of
dissolution of the social bond; the consequences of this would be disastrous: a frenzied individualism would replace the notion of contract and the brothers' rivalry that Freud presents in Totem and Taboo as the basis for the social contract would triumph over all other modes of relation. An important implication of Freud's mythological anthropology is the association of masculinity with war and, on the other hand, the positioning of women as objects of exchange in a symbolic discourse dominated by men. The feminine is the symbolic glue that sticks the social contract together.
The political philosophy of the Frankfurt School has developed this insight about the decline of the power of the father: the crisis of paternal authority can only lead to new forms of totalitarianism disguised as mass conformism. I want to focus on this anguished interrogation, for it is at this point of intersection that psychoanalysis confronts the questionings advanced by social and political movements. The problematic of sexed identity intersects with projects for the critique of the structures of human subjectivity and of its modes of knowledge.
It is clear that this proliferation of questions and the intersections between different discursive fields which it effects also displaces the question of the status of psychoanalytic theory. The fact that psychoanalysis questions itself and is in turn questioned by other discursive authorities cannot be resolved into a new division of labour between on the one hand, the human sciences and on the other, psychoanalytic theory.
Quite the contrary: what interests me in this discursive configuration is the questioning of the dividing lines themselves and of the nature of the issues they involve. The specificity of psychoanalysis as theory and its contribution to the definition of modernity has primarily ethical implications: how do we manage to dismantle the hegemonic view of the subject and reject the univocal tendencies implicit in all discursive models?
The subject of the unconscious demands that the subject of philosophy - insofar as the latter claims the prerogative of rationalism - faces his/her incompleteness, recognizes the libidinal, bodily roots of intelligence and accepts the partiality of his/her modes of thinking. This realization requires the problematization of the maternal/feminine site of origin. This challenge stresses the problem that post-Hegelian philosophy has also been struggling with, of knowing how to develop a form of discourse that would not reduce the affective, the pre-rational, the libidinal, but rather restore them to the central role they play in the life of the mind. Will philosophy be able to accept the limits which the corporeal origin of all knowledge imposes on the primacy of the reason it incorporates? How do we establish the philosophical enterprise on foundations other than those of the coincidence of subjectivity with self-reflexive consciousness?
If the unconscious means anything, in fact, it is precisely the guaran-
tee against a return to the traditional idea that the subject is one, full, self-transparent entity, governed by the laws of rational discourse. The epistemological challenge of the unconscious lies precisely in thinking the subject as an open-ended entity.
What is proper to the crisis philosophy is undergoing is the challenge of the primacy of rationality. The resurgence of interest in the body, the affects, the passions, the irrational are so many manifestations of this 'crisis' of rationality, which constantly fissures the horizon of our conceptual context.
Philosophy and its Doubles
In The Order of Things Foucault presents the irruption of the unconscious as the distinctive trademark of modernity. At the end of the nineteenth century, the discourse of psychoanalysis, following on from a century-old tradition of medical and psychiatric practice, turned the human psyche into an object of study. The 'unthought', the pre-rational, surfaced as the empty core of the human, turning the subject into an 'empirico-transcendental doublet' ,34
Another way of talking about the same fundamental epistemic shift is by recounting the genesis of the human and social sciences, the archetypic discourse of modernity. The sheer possibility of existence of something we call the 'human' sciences assumes a definition of the 'human' as being split between reason and the unconscious. This in turn implies the collapse of the metaphysical edifice which for centuries had sustained the unity of the subject as a rational entity.
What is significant in the Foucauldian analytic of the modern is that the boundaries which separate rational and pre-rational, human and other-than-human, are coextensive with the emergence of certain types of discourse, namely psychoanalysis and the human sciences, as the aftermath of the death of metaphysics. What we are confronted with is the simultaneous setting of new dividing lines and utterance of new discourses. This epistemological style, from the early genealogy through to the technologies of the self, will remain a constant of the Foucauldian philosophy. I would even argue that it is one of the factors that make him, still, and despite himself, a philosopher, as opposed to a historian or a sociologist of knowledge.
Thus from the point of view of the genealogy of modernity, the critical self-scrutiny of philosophical thought on the one hand and the conceptualization of the subject proper to psychoanalysis on the other, emerge as concomitant and simultaneous discourses. It is at the convergence of these two registers of thought that interesting innovations in theoretical reflection today occur. On a more institutional level, however, the epistemic link thus established between philosophy and psychoanalysis
is anything but easy and the two discourses seem to have settled into a relationship of mutual and double-crossing love-hate.
Psychoanalysis is defined, from a Foucauldian perspective, and most significantly in The Order of Things, as what stands "as close as possible ... to that critical function which, as we have seen, exists within all the human sciences'.35 Psychoanalysis pushes the critique of the subject to the extreme, bringing to the surface the set of rules, conflicts, and conditions of enunciation underlying the register of subjectivity. Thus the crisis of philosophy manifests itself both in the elaboration of a new field of knowledge, namely, the human sciences, and also in the insistence of the unconscious.
One of the implications of Foucault's point about the genealogical coextensivity of the crisis of philosophy, resulting in the discourse of the human sciences, and the emergence of psychoanalysis, is that one cannot speak of an actual Freudian epistemological break of any sort. This claim, made insistently by Lacan, is one of the main points of disagreement for Foucault. Whereas Lacan posited the Freudian theorization of the unconscious as an incontrovertible 'narcissistic wound' to the rational subject of philosophy, Foucault sees it as the 'historical a priori of all the human sciences'.36 The discourse of the unconscious is, for Foucault, a signpost directed towards 'that which, beyond man, allows one to know, with positive knowledge, what is given to, and what escapes, his consciousness'.37
This implies that psychoanalysis and the human sciences are so closely linked together that psychoanalysis is structurally incapable of providing a general theory of the subject, or an anthropology. Quite the contrary: the epistemic terrain on which this practice rests enables it to undo, rather than establish, the foundations of the idea of 'man' implied by the 'human' sciences. Despite the Lacanian claim, psychoanalysis cannot be the new 'philosophy of desire'.
According to Foucault, therefore, modernity marks a fundamental split between the subject and the universal, between thinking, consciousness and rationality. Foucault defines this break as the move to 'thinking about man from the outside', away from Cartesianism, towards an exteriority of the thought processes in relation to the thinker, which then got translated into the movement of ideas known as the 'death of man'. He therefore concludes that the philosophy of modernity 'could not avoid reviving the theme of the cogito'.38 Foucault retraces the genesis of the human sciences, that is, the constitution of 'man' as an object of knowledge, around this break which founds the modern discursive order. The very emergence of the man who constitutes the subject of the human sciences is marked by a series of splits, which Foucault analyses in the chapter 'Man and his doubles'. On the one hand this 'man' is one discursive event among others, insofar as he can be studied empirically. This is the definition of man at work in the
human sciences - man as studied by biology, economy, sociology. But at the same time, he remains the transcendental condition of possibility of knowledge.
The empirico-transcendental doublet is posited by Foucault as a subject subjected by/to his unconscious, and yet also the subject as self-reflexive consciousness, the source of all potential intelligibility (this is the cogito/unthought doublet). Man is also the product of a very long history whose origin escapes him, while being at the same time the point of origin of human history (this is the withdrawal/return to origin).
For Foucault the central question is: what is the subject of modernity? What is it to be modern? Although he offered varied responses to this question at different stages of his own work, he remained faithful to the project thus described. The coherence of his work is due to the consistency of this intellectual passion: tracing the genealogy of the present.
The constitution of the modern subject, of this 'man' which the aptly named 'human' sciences claim to analyse, coincides with the end of the transparency, universality, eternity, and transcendence of the Cartesian subject. For Foucault, the subject is not to be understood as an internally self-referential rational entity, but as other, a dynamic exteriority. The structures of the organism, the bodily roots of the self; the insistence of language; the conditioning of the social order; the whole accumulated stock of human knowledge, are the equally vital sites where meaning is given to human subjectivity. It is this set of complex structures that constitutes the very heart of Foucault's notion of 'discourse' meant as one of the fundamental structures of the subject.
This spells the end of classical humanism, of the myth of inferiority, and therefore marks a dislocation of the position of philosophy itself. This transformation proper to our epoch means that, for Foucault, the ethical foundations of subjectivity are also shaken. Eccentric in relation to him/herself, the subject is situated in the void opened up by the discourse on and in him/her, and it is in this space, which nudges nihilism whilst at the same time resisting it, that it becomes possible to think anew about the modern subject.
By 'discourse', therefore, Foucault refers to the interplay of the material and the symbolic, the 'monument' and the 'document', as simultaneous elements in the production of subjectivity. The point of departure for his redefinition of the subject is the corporeal entity, the intelligible and intelligent flesh and blood, taken as the foundation of subjectivity. It is by this bias, which will be reformulated later in the notion of bio-power, that Foucault confronts psychoanalytic discourse once again.
It seems to me that this confrontation constitutes a real conceptual critique of psychoanalysis on the part of the Foucauldian genealogy. The starting point - the corporeal nature of being - is an idea which stems from at least three distinct currents in contemporary French philosophy:
1	phenomenology in its Sartrean form and its existentialist variants, as well as the impact of Merleau-Ponty and of a certain form of existentialist psychoanalysis;
2	the epistemological school which, from Canguilhem to Bachelard, has elaborated a form of non-Marxist materialism and has systematically applied it to the redefinition of the subject of knowledge;
3	French Marxism, as represented primarily by Althusser, whose attempt to bring historical materialism closer to psychoanalysis has a significant impact on Foucault.
These three pathways combined pass on to Foucault a radical reformulation of the term 'materialism', in terms of the materiality, corporeality and historicity of the subject and his/her discourses. From this point of view, the confrontation between Foucault and psychoanalysis was both inevitable and also no more important than a chance encounter in a theoretical itinerary which has quite different sources and horizons.
What serves as the meeting point of Foucault's project and psychoanalysis is the problematic whole that is the corporeality of the subject. On the level of genealogy, it needs to be pointed out that the irruption of the body into the space of Foucauldian philosophy is contemporary with the appearance of the discourse of modernity on the unconscious and on the splitting of the subject. I will argue that this dislocation also implies a redefinition of the discourse on the maternal feminine. On the level of discourse, on the other hand, each one of the discourses of philosophy and psychoanalysis separate, in their respective singularity.
Psychoanalysis is therefore, for Foucault, symptomatic of the crisis of the classical subject, like most of the human sciences; it does not, therefore, possess the conceptual means to take the place of classical philosophy. Nor do the human sciences rest on epistemological foundations solid enough to formulate a real critique of metaphysics, for, together with psychoanalysis, they rest a priori on the collapse of the metaphysical system. As for psychoanalysis itself, it possesses neither a verifiable epistemological framework nor a conceptual system which can be transposed beyond the therapeutic situation. Psychoanalysis is strictly regulated by a contractual system and by a clinical context and has no other ethics than a fundamental professional code.
However conceptually incapacitated they may be, the discourses of modernity nonetheless perpetuate at least one of the features of the old metaphysical edifice: they still perform a normative function. They are regulatory sorts of discourses whose claim to scientificity is undisputed. The point is that, according to the logic of modernity, philosophy itself no longer has the force and legitimacy necessary to exercise a standardsetting function in an epistemological or ethical sense.
What it does have, on the other hand, is, in its ancient archives, the conceptual instruments and the stock of ideas needed to operate a
proper critique of its own practice. This is the grounds for Foucault s passionate defence of philosophy at the same time as maintaining a non-humanist attitude towards it. I think that when put in these terms, the Foucauldian problematic raises a number of very interesting questions: firstly, what, in terms of the genealogy of modernity, is the relation between philosophical and psychoanalytic discourse? Then, from a feminist point of view, what for women are the implications of the fact that the corporeality of being has been put onto the theoretical agenda? It seems to me, in fact, that this putting into discourse of the 'body' from such different perspectives converges on the exploration of the structure and the relation to the privileged site that is the maternal body as the inscription of the origin.
This point is shared - though it is developed differently - by psychoanalysis. Psychoanalysis's role in the decompartmentalization of the recognized conceptual categories has been to lead to the reintegration of the relational dimension, that is, the relation to the other. This interrogation finds a privileged place of investigation in the question of sexual difference and the feminine.
The question of the feminine in psychoanalysis touches on that of its legitimation as discourse; it raises the question of writing (ecriture), that is, of the process of formalization as a transmissible body of established concepts. The theorization of psychoanalysis plays around with a certain concept of the 'feminine .
In the first place this is because of the role women have played in the elaboration of analytic practice and theory. It is evident that it is due to the 'hysterics' that psychoanalysis has been theorized, insofar as they have guaranteed their therapist or doctor access to the unconscious knowledge they incarnated. If the 'talking cure' has succeeded in becoming a new 'knowledge', it is by rejecting and reflecting (throwing back) women's words.
That Freud has subsequently been able to capitalize on this unconscious knowledge very clearly makes all the difference between the place of the master and that of the hysterics. The complicity, contradictions, and non-saids of the master-hysteric couple form the threshold of the psychoanalytic scene. They inscribe 'the feminine' at the heart of the question of analytic praxis.
Granoff stresses that the place of the feminine and the process of theoretical elaboration of psychoanalysis are one and the same problem.40 This process began in the context of the transference relationship Freud sustained with his friend Fliess. It was already a question of a correspondence, of an act of 'thinking oneself with', where reflection on 'the feminine' is freighted with vast theoretical stakes for psychoanalytic discourse. The discourse of psychoanalysis takes as its point of departure the hysterical complaint, that is, the relation which Freud himself maintained with 'his' women.
The question this 'feminine' poses seem to me to give rise to the
problematic of the actual legitimacy of psychoanalytic discourse, that is, its theoretical status. On another level, as Pujol points out, there remains the question of the 'analytic construction of femininity, which is the only part of Freud's work to have given birth to dispute, indeed to challenge, among the Freudians'.41
The problematic of femininity affects the constitution of two human 'types', whose difference stems from biological evidence - that is, from anatomical differences. The history of disagreements which have divided psychoanalysts on this question is fully documented.
The most significant accounts have been produced by women: Luce Irigaray and Michele Montrelay offer outstanding summaries of what is at stake in the debate.42 Montrelay writes:
For Freud, the libido is identical in both sexes. What is more, it is always in essence male. For it is the clitoris, an external and erectile part, and therefore homologous to the penis, that is the girl's erotic organ. And when, at the Oedipus moment, the girl desires a child by her father, this new object is still invested with a phallic value: the child is nothing other than the substitute for the penile organ of which at that point the girl knows she herself is dispossessed. Thus feminine sexuality is elaborated constantly in function of phallic references 43
For Jones and the English school (Melanie Klein, Karen Horney and Josine Muller), the feminine libido is specific to women. The girl immediately privileges the interior of her body and her vagina: whence the archaic experiences of femininity which leave an indelible trace. It is therefore not enough to account for feminine sexuality from a 'phal-locentric' perspective. The impact which anatomy and specific genitalia have on the girl's unconscious must also be measured. Whereas Freud spoke of one libido, Jones distinguished between two types of libidinal organization, male and female. Montrelay indicates that the problem of femininity continues to be posed in terms of the Jones-Freud contradiction.
It is therefore by means of its theorization of feminine sexuality that psychoanalysis has, to a certain extent, perpetuated its privileged relation with the 'feminine place' of its own thought. In this sense, psychoanalysis cannot move beyond the question of femininity.
In his fifth lecture on femininity, Freud recognizes this impasse when he says to his own disciples: 'Nor will you have escaped worrying over this problem - those of you who are men; to those of you who are women this will not apply - you are yourselves the problem.'44
The slippage of the personal pronoun, from women as subjects to women as objects of discourse, marks - to my way of thinking - the space of a questioning which psychoanalysis cannot do without. By attributing the preoccupation with femininity to the male psychoanalysts Freud addresses an invitation to women to reply to the
following question themselves:
But do not forget that I have only been describing women insofar as their nature is determined by their sexual function. It is true that that influence extends very far; but we do not overlook the fact that an individual woman may be a human being in other respects as well. If you want to know more about femininity, inquire of your own experiences of life, or turn to the poets, or wait until science can give you deeper and more coherent information.45
The tension between the incitement to 'say more' about femininity and the place woman is assigned remains unresolved. P.-L. Assoun underlines the importance the 'inhibition of thought' plays in the Freudian conceptualization of femininity.46
Insofar as she is a being who is deprived of the empirical referent of the phallus, woman is marked with the sign of lack. Woman remains structurally eccentric in relation to the system of representation (of desire) and signification. Pujol sums this up in the following terms: 'Insofar as she lacks the penis, she represents the absolute alienation of speech. To be, endlessly, the phallus because in having it she lacks something destines her, as phallus, to offer her body to be inscribed where nothing can be inscribed, that is, between two signifiers.'47
Insofar as she is a being who is 'already castrated', woman is sign of that part of truth (and therefore of the unconscious) which will forever escape the control of the sign. In not having the phallus, in knowing that she lacks 'the Whole', she is in the true - and therefore in the non-said. Meaning is hidden from her, stolen from her.
In the Lacanian perspective, this fundamental dissymmetry between the masculine and the feminine position in the process of signification is developed into a veritable algebra of the process of sexuation. To analyse this far exceeds the aims of this book. What I want to focus on are simply the aspects which are paradoxical as regards the place of Woman.
In her essay on 'Femininity' Piera Aulagnier-Spirani suggests that:
For him it is from the mouth of a woman that insight into the truth of Eros has emerged: this, it seems to me, is what immediately allows us to pose the question, what is femininity: 'the enigma on which', Freud tells us, 'men have always meditated', faced with which Lacan will write: 'It is worth pointing out that the unveiling of the most hidden signifier, that of the mysteries, was reserved for women.' But let us not forget that the sacred Texts, such as the Symposium, are men's work; it is they who have wished to reserve exclusively for women the right to unveil... You see, I think, my drift: femininity is above all a matter for men and, if I would not go so far as to say, along with Freud, that for women 'the question does not apply because they are themselves the enigma we are talking about', I nonetheless do think that we cannot
separate the question (the) woman asks herself about her own enigma, and likewise her response to it, from the man who comes to tell her that the truth about femininity is only acceptable to him if it remains a mystery, that she alone is able to raise the veil covering this mystery, and that as a man his desire is to deck her with those magic emblems, those love philtres, those charms which allow him to affirm that all interrogation is vain because, by definition, the irrational and the sacred are to be accepted but are not disputable.48
But between the time of Freud and the time of Lacan, there have been a lot of changes as regards the feminine condition - in terms of the social and political status of women. It is in the intervening period that the women's movements have been most active in their claims and have brought about the most tangible changes in the existence of women and their discursivity. Suffice it to recall that in 1938 Virginia Woolf was still arguing for the admission of women to university, and that minimal political rights were scarcely assured, for us to measure the scope of the social transformations propelled by feminism.
Psychoanalysis cannot account for these changes in the social and political register. It can only take note of some of the fundamental upheavals of our time. So some psychoanalysts have established a close relation between on the one hand the emancipation of women - the fact that they have begun to act, speak and write in their own name - and on the other, the discovery - by medical and biological science - of contraceptive methods which liberate women from the burden of reproduction of the species.49
Once the dissociation between sexuality and procreation has been made, anatomy is no longer a destiny. Finally liberated from the tyranny of their biology, women might throw themselves into forms of substitute (pro)creation: writing, economic activity, and so on. And moreover, this entry of women into the symbolic and cultural field which had been the privileged territory of men is also analysed in terms of 'crisis', in the discourse of the decline of the paternal metaphor analysed above.
It seems to me that feminism and psychoanalysis disagree, among other things, on the reading and evaluation of the effects that the transformations in the historical condition of women are likely to trigger off not only in social and economical, but also in cultural terms. These changes are likely to alter not only the status of women, but also their relation to psychoanalytic practice and the ways in which psychoanalysis deals with the feminine. I shall return to this intense debate in chapter 8.
If in his work on femininity Freud has transposed the question of woman onto art, poetry and literature, Lacan, a man of another century and another culture, could not resist inscribing it in the human sciences, and in philosophy in particular. But from one fin-de-siecle to another, the constant question mark still remains: 'Femininity, and with it, the body -
in consequence the mother's body - today is found to constitute the principal focus of the immense and polymorphous question of writing (iecriture).'50
In the context of contemporary French thought the debate between philosophy and psychoanalysis remains largely unheeded. The differences in methodological orientation, in the conceptualization of the subject, and in the theory of knowledge are too great. Nevertheless the cross-fertilization is evident: for Foucault, as for most of the so-called structuralist generation in France, the subject of knowledge, the subject of philosophical reason, the split subject of the crisis of metaphysics is unable to think (about) what upholds his/her own activity of thinking. Caught in an oscillation between its corporeality and the network of social representations which occupies it, the activity of thinking does without the anthropocentrism characteristic of classical thought. As if thinking were an intransitive act, as if thinking were always thinking (about) thinking, as if philosophy could only be meta-theory, in an exasperating circularity the repetition of which allows for the unspoken to be expressed: desire is what remains silent at the heart of thinking, because it is that which sustains it as an autonomous activity.
Insofar as it is a philosophy of desire, psychoanalysis has surely had a decisive impact on the thought of Foucault. In an interview in 1966,51 as well as in his lectures at the College de France in 1983, Foucault stressed the intellectual debt which linked him to Lacanian psychoanalysis. When in The Order of Things he suggests that 'Desire is what remains unthought at the heart of thought', he is situating his reflection in the space left open by the exhaustion of the rationalist conception of the subject.
Foucault, along with Derrida, Deleuze, Lyotard and other contemporary French thinkers, is committed to a philosophical course which is not antinomic to the fundamental insight of psychoanalytic theory. They nevertheless uphold not only the specificity but also the superiority of philosophy as a discipline of thought. Thus the links established between a certain current of contemporary philosophy and psychoanalysis are far from simple.
They immediately reactivate the question of whether it is possible to transpose or apply psychoanalytic thought from the clinical context into the domain of philosophy. Is it possible to complete the destabilization of the subject from within the philosophical camp? And is it even desirable? Won't this deconstruction mark instead the end of philosophy as a discipline of thought? Seeing that even in its most disrespectful formulations, philosophy rests entirely on the promotion of conscious thought, how could it give 'the unconscious all its corrosive force with regard to despotic representation?'53
Is it realistic to think that philosophy might operate other than through the systematic universalization of meaning, according to a scale of rational values? And if the philosophical subject, hunted down in
his/her unconscious depths, lost ontological security, how could s/he legitimate his/her place of utterance? If the subject supposed to know had to adapt to the rigour of a knowledge which is supposed to escape him/her, how could s/he retain this discursive stance? Deprived of his/her foundations, can the subject of philosophy continue to philosophize? Is his/her survival contingent upon the speed and efficiency with which s/he proceeds to open new discursive spaces to the "others', his/her "doubles', all those who were historically excluded or disqualified? Consequently, is the feminine as the eternal other of theoretical discourse the central question of modernity?
This question expresses something of a radically new fear which affects not only the objects of contemporary theories of subjectivity, but also the very core of the discourse of the human sciences, philosophy included.
Un-Cartesian Routes
In the previous chapter I have argued that the discourse of psychoanalysis is symptomatic of the non-Cartesian style of thinking and the epistemological uncertainty of 'modernity', the moment of the 'crisis' of metaphysics. In this chapter, I would like to turn my attention more closely to some of the French philosophical approaches to the crisis of the modern, with special emphasis on the question of sexual difference.
Let us start with Michel Foucault, whose philosophical itinerary, although unfinished because of his premature death, is extremely significant and representative of the post-structuralist generation.
Michel Foucault is not a system-builder. On the contrary, he has explicitly tried to explode the notion of property - both literary and conceptual - in philosophy. For instance, in the Introduction to Madness and Civilization, Foucault expresses his fundamental objection to the figure of the philosopher as author, sovereign, king and owner of the meaning of the text.
Foucault's work follows less an axiomatical than a problematic model: a philosophical problem is a question well posed. Reading Foucault means entering into a game of reading, writing, and exchange, in a complex partnership which forces us to review, amongst other things, our own expectations of the philosophical text. The text is the in-between space between reader and writer, where forces are at play that determine the structure, value and reception of theoretical utterances. The Foucauldian text requires an active effort on the part of the reader: it stimulates the critical faculty of questioning the presuppositions and often tacit assumptions that govern our own position as readers.
The point of departure - which invests the whole of his thought - is that contemporary philosophy can only be conjugated in the plural, that it is historically impossible for it to produce a unitary discourse.
This fracturing of philosophy into many different forms of reflective activity marks a critical point of no return. The task left is the critical analysis of the steps of the process which structures the production of 'true' discourse. He therefore addresses the discourses of modernity: the
human and social sciences, and especially psychoanalysis and ethnology, as two distinctly modern ways of dealing with 'radical otherness' which 'relentlessly make away with the man who makes and remakes his positivity in the social sciences'.1 Foucault sees these two discourses as a critique of the a priori on which the process of signification itself rests.
By turning the focus of philosophy onto unconventional subject-areas, such as madness, confinement, penal institutions, sexuality as an intricate web of desires and pleasures, Foucault never ceased to respond to the challenge of the post-Hegelian universe: how can we renew our thinking within the conceptual categories we have inherited, which have structured our system of thought? How can we learn to think differently? How can we at least be equal to the discursive world of modernity, in which there are no longer any possible globalizing responses?
Foucault's project rests wholly on another definition of the places of enunciation of writer and reader: he is the technician of discourse analysis. In his approach the notion of the text draws the act of 'reading' and 'interpreting' out of the scene of writing and inscribes it in the larger register of discourse. This approach reconstitutes both the materiality and the textuality of the activity of thinking and consequently of philosophy.
Foucault never stops questioning the relation between the text and its multiple contexts, between the subject and the laws governing his discourse, between the author and his sovereignty over the meaning of the text, between knowledge and power.
In the Introduction to the second volume of the History of Sexuality he suggests that:
There is always something ludicrous in philosophical discourse when it tries, from the outside, to dictate to others, to tell them where their truth is and how to find it, or when it works up a case against them in the language of naive positivity. But it is entitled to explore what might be changed, in its own thought, through the practice of a knowledge that is foreign to it. The 'essay' - which should be understood as the assay or the test by which, in the game of truth, one undergoes changes, and not as the simplistic appropriation of others for the purpose of communication - is the living substance of philosophy, at least if we assume that philosophy is still what it was in times past, i.e. an 'ascesis' [askesis], an exercise of oneself in the activity of thought.2
This vision of the philosophical enterprise subtends Foucault's key problem-area: he describes the central preoccupation of his work as being the analysis of the historical forms taken by the modes of constitution of subjectivity.3 By subjectivity Foucault means a process of related effects that connect the production of knowledge with the
formalization of normative rules and link both these steps to the enactment of models. Subjectivity is the process of empowerment of certain discourses, norms and ways of being. It is a technique, or rather a technology of the self, not a new metaphysics.
The French term 'assujettissement', subj edification, captures most effectively the twofold nature of the process of becoming-subject as a move which is both active (subject of) and passive (subjected to). Insofar as this process connects subjectivity to knowledge and normativity, it is an epistemological kind of activity.
Similarly, the notion of 'empowerment' is extremely significant as it covers the dual nature of subjectivity. It refers both to the normative process of institutionalizing certain practices (potestas) but also the positive process of affirming one's own spedfic way of being (potentia). The latter is best understood by reference to Nietzsche's notion of 'force' or intensity.
Foucault himself has underlined three major stages in his project for the critical analysis of the modes of constitution and discursive formalization of the subject. Firstly, the archaeological phase, also called the critique of the human and social sciences; secondly the genealogical analysis of the practices of domination and exclusion; thirdly the technological analysis of the modes of internalization, especially in relation to sexuality. They are not a chronological, but rather a discontinuous series. The driving force of his work - the passionate core that provides the architectonics of his thought - is the interest in the mechanisms of discourse-production. This preoccupation with the technology of subjectivity is conceptually different from a history of ideas and mentalities, a sociology of knowledge, such as Pierre Bourdieu might wish for.4 For Foucault it is not so much a case of relating discursive events to external points of reference, as of uncovering their internal mechanisms.
Foucault defined his method firstly as an 'archaeology' and subsequently as a 'genealogy' or an 'analytic' of power. In the last interview before his death in June 1984, Foucault explained his position:
History of thought means not simply the history of ideas or representation, but also the attempt to reply to the question: how is a body of thought constituted? How can thought, insofar as it relates to truth, also have a history? ... Thought has a history too; thought is a historical fact, even if it has many other dimensions besides ... What I am trying to do is present the history of thought's relations to truth; the history of thought in terms of its having to do with truth.5
The first, archaeological, stage concerns the constitution and legitimation of scientific discourses. On the one hand it takes the form of a critique of the human sciences as modes of objectifying the subject, and
on the other it emphasizes the importance of 'minority', marginal forms of knowledge.
The objects of analysis in this period - which broadly corresponds to The Archaeology of Knowledge, The Order of Things, and Madness and Civilization - are: general grammar, philology, linguistics, political economy, biology and psychiatry; special emphasis is placed on psychoanalysis and ethnology.
The key question concerns the role of the history of ideas. Why does a particular statement appear at a particular moment? What are its specific conditions of existence? What constitutes the singularity of each statement?
Turning his back on any attempt at unifying systematization, Foucault gives the following rules for the archaeology of discourse:
1	Define each discourse in its specificity and not in terms of continuity. It is not a doxology, but a differential analysis of the modalities of discourse.
2	Demystify the sovereign figure of the writer/author/philosopher by giving absolute priority to the thing said, in this case discursive production itself.
What is central to his concerns at this time is the archive, that is, the accumulated existence of discourses, and not the sovereign existence of the speaking subject. This displacement and decentring in relation to the subject has repercussions for the function of the philosopher, whose role is to analyse the modalities of discourse defined as the discontinuous practice of enunciation in its historical multiplicity.6 As Deleuze emphasizes:
Archaeological discourse is both document (set of statements formalized according to criteria which have an epistemological interpretation) and also monument (material inscribed in a non-discursive set). The philosopher is thus both reader and actor-technician of knowledge, and not its plenipotentiary.7
This project finds its point of departure in the critique of the Cartesian unity of the subject; it opposes to the monolithic cogito the vision of a scattered subject, for which Foucault elaborates a suitably diversified and decentralized theory of knowledge. The Foucauldian archaeology does not work on the abstract model of a methodology; it rather has to be taken up as an instrument, a tool of analysis.
One of the most acute readers of Foucault, Gilles Deleuze, comments:
The essential problem in practice lies in determining the cuts [coupures] which limit a discursive formation. There again it is not an axiomatical method that is needed, nor even strictly speaking a structural method.
For the substitution of one formation for another does not necessarily take place on the level of the most general utterances, or the most readily formulated8
These dividing lines coincide both with the criteria that enable the formalization of discourse and with the effects induced by these same discourses upon the constitution of subjectivity. In the Introduction to The Use of Pleasure, he defines philosophy as 'the critical work that thought brings to bear on itself'.9
That philosophy is essentially its history, and that it is impossible to separate reason from history, means for Foucault that what we call reason, ratio, is a historical construct, modified by the process of selection of the material and theoretical tools that will make it operational. The material bases of the production of discourse are such that philosophy can critically examine them as steps in the formulation of truth. It is by struggling incessantly with the question of the status of truth in philosophical discourse and by unveiling the mechanisms of its production, that Foucault has revived the ethical dimension in and of philosophical thought: his philosophy is fundamentally an ethics of discourse. Foucault's work is the genealogy of an ethic for modernity.
The hypothesis which sustains the archaeological project has been clearly explicated by Canguilhem:
A culture is a code, ordering human experience in a triple relationship: linguistic, perceptual, and practical relations; a science or a philosophy is a theory or an interpretation of that order. But the latter two do not apply directly to the former. They presuppose the existence of a network or a configuration which forms the apprehension of the productions of the culture; these already constitute, in relation to that culture, a knowledge beyond sciences and philosophies. This network is invariant and unique to the epoch which is defined, and therefore is articulated with reference to it.10
This general network of codes which serves as the reference system for the thought of an epoch, and acts as the regulatory principle of its scientific rationality (that is, what supports a discourse as being recognized as true), is called the episteme. As the 'raison d'etre' of the discourse of a given epoch, the episteme constitutes the ultimate object of Foucault's archaeological search.11
In this sense, Foucauldian archaeology is the condition of possibility of an other history of ideas, in which discourse is to be understood firstly as an event inscribed in the process or chain of bodies of knowledge, corpus of signs and perceptions of any given epoch.
Whereas traditional history rests on the genesis, continuity, and totalization of knowledge, the Foucauldian analytic consists precisely in abandoning the history of ideas; it becomes an 'attempt to produce a history which is very different to anything men have said'.12
The characteristic of the archaeological method is the definition of each discourse in its specificity. It is a question of stripping philosophy of all the transcendental narcissism linked to the notion of the absolute subject as codifying principle of discourse. As a result, genealogical thought 'could not avoid reviving the theme of the cogito'.
In The Order of Things Foucault analyses the transition from the ontological certainty of the Cartesian subject to the fundamental uncertainty of the moden epistemic context. The Cartesian moment is the act of intellectual self-appropriation par excellence, when the subject -identified with his/her rationality - is represented as transparent and self-present consciousness. The Cartesian cogito is the paradigm of the order of reason and of the soverign role played by the philosopher as operator of a certain reason (ratio). In this sense, the Cartesian cogito functions as the lost horizon of modernity.
Foucault and Derrida: Reason and its Others
i Foucault
In the Classical age, discourse is that translucent necessity through
which representation and beings must pass.13
In Foucault's perspective what has most prominence is the strategic aspect of the cogito: that is, its function as a geometrical model for the conceptualization of mental space. The Cartesian method, the keystone of the complex architechtonics of classical rationalism, constitutes above all a dam against the ever-present possibility of chaos. The cogito is charged with a cartographic mission: it must establish the frontiers of the kingdom of reason by defining its limits. The subject is bound to delimit a space, to enclose it with a wall, inside which his/her system of scientific order might be set up.
Following the guiding principle of his research into power as discourse, in terms of an analytic of the different forms of becoming-subject, Foucault does not hesitate to bring forth a critique of the military logic of the Cartesian project. What is at stake is nothing less than pitched battle: the forces of reason against their manifold enemies. For it is against the alternatives which have been judged inadmissible, and therefore non-philosophical, that the Cartesian subject posits as the key to the order of knowledge the matter-spirit distinction, that is, the distinction between res extensa, raw matter, and res cogitans, thinking substance.
In this dualist schema, the cogito is posited as bearer of the reason it has received from God himself, through metaphysical filiation: it is thus the possessor of the divine principle that is the thinking substance. Foucault's reading of Descartes's theoretical project stresses its pedago-
gical significance: given that reason is the paradigm of the divine in man, it is not only a question of praising clear and distinct ideas, but also of transforming them into a universal method of verification of philosophical and scientific knowledge. Insofar as the individual is the privileged site for the elaboration of the epistemological certainty ultimately guaranteed by the divine principle itself, the passage from 'I think' to 'I am' is immediate and painless, in keeping with the same demand for lucidity and transparency which governs the whole of the Cartesian process.
This strategic reading of the cogito situates the split between reason and its others, embodied by madness, within the method of doubt. Within the framework of this project, doubt is the tactic, or discursive device, which aims to banish and exile all that might threaten the certitude of reason: dreams, errors, the senses, madness, all are inadmissible choices due to the very fact that they are reason's others.
According to Foucault, the choice of reason is a choice for reason: the cogito in fact implies an ethical stand against scientific rationality's other. Reason is affirmed over against unreason, and this moment constitutes the Cartesian subject as a reflective consciousness. The subject thus bears within him/her the very principle of the intelligibility that characterizes the rational order.
Matter on the contrary is at the opposite pole: a blind, dumb and opaque mass, the dense corpor(e)ality of which contrasts with the clarity and transparency of reason. Descartes raises this contrast to the level of ontological difference, which is formalized in the division between mind and body. In his perspective, the latter resembles a collection of sensory organs, each of which has a precise function but, being matter without intelligence, it needs the breath of life from the mind in order to come to life. The body is conceptualized in Cartesian philosophy according to a very precise geometry: it has a volume that occupies a certain amount of space so as to exclude from it all other bodies. In this respect, it is similar to the non-human, the animal.
The soul, situated between the body - raw matter - and thought, defined as the principle of intellection, is the driving force of the will thanks to which man can dominate the powerful sensory perceptions which invade him. Being the sign of animal-like, pre-rational susceptibility, the body, as the site of passions and multiple other perturbations, is the favourite target of the Cartesian method, and thus forms the battleground for the combat between reason and its others. The stake of this combat is the mastery of the territory that is the body.
Foucault rightly underlines the fact that during the Middle Ages, passions were explictly associated with the excess and madness that the human being displays when he strays from the right way. And so, in Les Passions de fame Descartes sets out to code every human emotion which, through its impact upon the body, threatens to throw the mind off the right course: a veritable system of signs, fixed in a measurable, mastered
order, within which the body and the emotions become intelligible.
This is tantamount to saying that the scientific mind, as borne by the cogito, carries out reason's programme with a rigour of method which is in turn regulated by a system of exclusion and domination of all alternatives judged dangerous. The victory of this scientific rationality, obtained by the unstoppable logic of great conquests, opens a long period of interdiction and exclusion of unreason/madness and all its traditional derivatives: the senses, dreams, the passions, the body. The anathema which strikes these misleading alternatives also implicitly legitimates the presence and the work of the founder-hero. In other words, rationalist philosophy is created in and through what it rejects: this exclusion is indispensable to the establishment of the cogito as the operational principle of the mathesis universalis.
This is fraught with consequences, for by affirming the primacy of the thinking subject, Descartes fills the ontological gap between subject and substance. Thus the presentation of the cogito heralds a whole set of corollaries, namely:
-	if I think, you, the madman, do not
-	if I think, God - principle of universal order - is
-	if God guarantees the universalizing validity of reason, scientific method is the absolute truth
-	if there is order, it must triumph in the social and political organization of human affairs: I think, therefore the State is.
The cogito, whose vicissitudes mark the history of modern philosophy, symbolizes the paranoid order of a rationality in search of self-legitimation. Foucault 'treats' the cogito like a bad dream, as the nightmare haunting a consciousness that would be unitary and selfmastering, by governing also the external reality in relation to which it remains transcendent.
Foucault has brought the conceptual rupture with Cartesian rationalism to conclusion by developing its implications: what emerges is the end of philosophy as the discourse that postulates the identity of the subject to the thinking consciousness, the equivalence of thinking and being. The rejection of the teleological structure of the rational subject leads to a polemic against history.
What is at stake in Foucault's polemic against the continuity of the discourse of history is less the status of this discipline than its conceptual complicity with the illusion of the centrality of the knowing subject. The 'crisis of the subject' is a rupture which happens simultaneously in two registers: it concerns the place of rationality in the history of Western philosophy and the role played by consciousness in the theories of subjectivity.
As Canguilhem rightly points out in his remarkable article on Foucault, the stake of Foucault's analytic is the deconstruction of the
cogito as privileged site of verification of a supposedly true discourse. In the Foucauldian perspective the question becomes: what is the 'self' that thinks? And also what modern definition of the subject might replace the cogito?
Note that the Cartesian thinking subject is only one of the historically marked variations on the theme of the will-to-truth, and of telling the truth about oneself. In other words, it represents a (relatively recent) chapter in the history of the formation of discourse. For Foucault, it is imperative to restore the thinking subject to this dimension, to his/her historicity.
As J.-P. Vernant has pointed out, reason fabricates itself, and modifies itself by creating the technical and intellectual tools necessary to establish its primacy.14 Far from being a linear and continuous unfolding, it can only be developed through crises and/or ruptures. The Cartesian cleavage between reason and madness is a key episode in this project of rereading rationalism.
The crucial moment in the Cartesian 'case' is the disqualification of madness through the hypothesis of the evil genius or daemon. In Descartes's thought Foucault recognizes a difference between the status accorded to madness on the one hand, and on the other, error, dreams, and the imagination. 'Dreams and illusions are subordinate in the very structure of truth, but madness is excluded by the doubting subject.'15
The rationalist principle of innate ideas, which are apprehended in a clear and distinct manner by the subject, is thus raised to the status of a cosmic principle: God, the creator, thus becomes the supermathematician who in creating matter also endowed it with specific internal laws; scientific, eternal, and immutable laws.
In relation to this universal order madness can only be expelled: if in the Middle Ages reason and madness were linked (to each other), after Descartes they are separated by a radical split, which marks the coming of a new Reason. Classical rationality depends on the existence of the madman's alien truth, and marks reason's mastery.
Therefore the Cartesian cogito introduces an ethical project into rational thought: the thinking subject is also the ethical subject because by thinking according to the rational method, s/he resists unreason. The act constitutive of the rationality of the sovereign subject establishes it as an ethical, theoretical and juridical norm.
By the same founding gesture of rationalism, God enters the realm of logic. And with the rejection of the evil genius, all the infinite powers of madness are proscribed, for what is really ostracized is the infinite space where unreason could roam freely. The closure of this space allows the consecration of the subject as thinking subject.
Foucault's analysis emphasizes above all that this theoretical disqualification of madness has historically taken the form of the establishment of institutions which confine a new category of people: the mad and the insane.
The Reason-Madness split thus enters the order of modern knowledge and inscribes in it a rationalist will which shakes the foundation of classical culture and remains stable until the nineteenth century. Foucault makes a distinction between two aspects of this 'great internment7. On the one hand there are the limitations placed on subjectivity, for Madness demarcates the individual's regions of irresponsibility. On the other hand there is a material banishment, a gesture of physical exclusion: the madman is excluded from the civil community, he becomes a stranger to the city. Or rather, his role in the order of the city is constructed as that of the stranger, the other.
Thus there is a homology between the category of the madman and the carving out of a discursive and material correctional order: madness becomes the sign of all the deviations, perversions, transgressions of prohibitions. In this strategic split between Reason and its 'others', sexuality occupies a prominent place as the occult source of madness. This was to develop into one of the familiar themes of modern psychiatry.
What is at stake in the debate on madness, or unreason, as Foucault presents it, is the question of the limits of the rationality and therefore the legitimacy of the philosophical enterprise. He stresses the originary rupture between reason and its others as the constitutive moment of the classical order. In the same dividing gesture, thought drives its others, all that is non/pre/un/thought, out of its sight and site.
The exclusion is required to validate the positivity of reason, but insofar as the exclusion is constitutive, it grounds thought in mechanisms of exclusion of the other. The other's silence makes the subject's speech possible and, by allowing for the formulation of discourse, this exclusion also places reason inside the bounds of history.
The dark, unspoken side of discourse; the area of shade around the circle of light; the presence of that which is given as absent, constructed as excluded from discourse, is as important as that which is being stated. It marks a gap or an incompleteness at the very heart of the speaking subject. The dialectical schema is reversed by Foucault. For the logic of contraries he substitutes originary exclusion, the rationalist aggression that legitimates theoretical discourse.
ii Derrida
In Writing and Difference, in 'Cogito and the history of madness', Jacques Derrida takes up Foucault's reading of the cogito and presents a very close critique of it.16 He contests the theme of the exclusion of madness, challenging Foucault's interpretation as follows: Descartes encounters madness alongside dreams and all other forms of sensory error, but he does not accord them all the same treatment: dreams and illusions may be discovered and surmounted, thanks to the Cartesian method, but the
subject who doubts excludes madness. He excludes it a priori, he expels it from the interiority of thought. This internal proscription must be related to the political decree of the great internment, 'the historical (politico-social) structure, of which the Cartesian act is only one sign'.17 Derrida's premise, that all philosophical discourse is a prisoner to the power of Reason, in other words, that Reason and Madness are essentially in a relationship of mutual exclusion, entails two objections to Michel Foucault's work. 8
As regards the exegesis of the Cartesian text, has Foucault really understood what Descartes meant? Does his reading of the First Meditation restore to Descartes's thought the historical structure it deserves? As regards methodology, Foucault wanted to avoid presenting an objectifying discourse on madness, seeing in this a hegemonic act which would repeat the 'originary violence' he condemns.19
I would summarize Derrida's argument against Foucault's reading as follows: Derrida is absolutely opposed to any thesis which tends to define Western Reason in terms of its 'distance' from and exclusion of madness. In other words, he does not agree that the exclusion of unreason — as the index of rationality — can be presented as the prerequisite for the validation of Reason.
In fact according to Derrida, Descartes uses madness as the basis for 'a philosophical and juridical operation'20 and surely what is at stake in Foucault's argument is the question of whether philosophy can be founded by exclusion. Derrida goes on to state his disagreement with the aims and purposes of a project which is supposedly the archaeology of a silence. Given that there is no history other than that of rationality, is it possible to envisage a history which does not endlessly replicate the original violence of the exclusion of madness? He thus questions Foucault's method, for having chosen to abandon a certain type of causality, is he not simply recuperating negativity?
Making the division between madness and reason the very possibility of history poses the following problems:
1	If the banishment of madness is the condition for history, why should the Cartesian episode of this history be singled out for criticism?
2	If the division makes history possible, that is, if it is the a priori condition for historicity, what then is meant by 'producing the history of this division'?21
Opposing Foucault's views, Derrida postulates that disorder is always condemned within order, and that the revolution against Reason can only take place in it, and reads Descrates's Meditations as both a pedagogical and juridical manoeuvre. Descartes excludes madness de facto, not de jure: on the contrary, madness remains, as the zero point which determines the whole history of meaning, as the excess tending towards nothing or infinity, 'that insurance taken from the verges of
madness against the agony of being mad'.22
Therefore, in neither the case of the dream nor that of madness would it be a question of 'surmounting' the possibility of error. Instead of stopping at the case of madness and privileging it, Descartes calls into question every specification, every idea of perceptible origin: madness is only one of the possible ways of upsetting the foundations.
Descartes's systematic doubt is only a strategic manoeuvre which allows the thinker to cut across this internal division between order and reason, that is the hiatus between entitlement and reality, between reason and the socio-political order. In so doing he is able to effect a passage into an other order - that of intelligibility, through which a radical break with error and the senses can be postulated.
Thus in Cartesian discourse there is a passage from the sensory regime to juridical order, that is, to the status attached to the truth of ideas; this is far from the exclusion of madness as analysed by Foucault.
The establishment of the logos as a normative regime requires that Reason escapes from Madness, de jure and de facto. This necessity is of a universal order: it is both the gesture which marks the distance between Madness and Reason, and the act of temporization from which it ensues that the rule of Reason can only assert itself by confinement and contempt for the 'madman' within. The lunatic in us 'can only ever be the lunatic of a logos, such as father, master, and king'.23 The stake of this division between meaning and non-meaning, logos and madness - the condition for the establishment of philosophy - is a structure of differance, which is itself based on an avowal: philosophy is the (avowed) terror of being mad.
Foucault replies to Derrida's critique in an appendix to Madness and Civilization, where he tackles the Cartesian text as a veritable discursive event, produced at a precise time and in a precise space.24 It is both a system that the reader has to penetrate, and an exercise. Thus the reading of the Meditations engenders a process which must affect the reader, 'if in turn he wants to be the enunciating subject'.25 And so Foucault leads us back to the singularity of Descartes's argument. This is less a juridical text, for Foucault, than a pedagogical exercise of legitimation of a certain view of philosophy as the application of reason as the ruling principle. Foucault's reply to the two criticisms made by Derrida runs as follows:
1	Foucault argues that his own reading of the Cartesian text aims at integrating a classical form of textual commentary into his archaeology of normative ideas. In this case, what is at stake is the genesis of psychiatry. More generally, there is no 'just' interpretation, only interpretative moments inscribed in different, not to say divergent philosophical projects.
2	The text is not the one and only site of interpretation, nor is it the crucial place of enunciation of the connection between reason and
violence. The latter is much more clearly expressed and enacted in the whole of the social-economic field.
Unlike Derrida, we should not only view dreams as a universal factor that reveals itself everywhere, to everyone, the sign for all that all is doubtful: the sign of a differance at the origin of being. Foucault refuses to take the example of dreams as a radicalization of madness: he views it as a quite different conceptual category. Foucault reaffirms his understanding of the Meditations as discursive event quite as much as discursive practice, making the Cartesian opposition between dreams and madness proof of the impossibility of formulating a really universal doubt; hence the implausibility of any stance whereby the subject might 'constitute himself as a universally doubting subject'.26 In order to clarify Foucault's position, let us work through his analysis of the terms of this opposition between dream and madness.
Fie notes that the clarity and precision with which Descartes discusses truth are quite as much in evidence when he talks about dreams. But madness, on the other hand, deforms and transports to a domain which is quite other. The distinction Foucault establishes through the choice and use of terms which are on the edge of synonymy, but nonequivalent, is highly significant: on the one hand, demens and amens, and on the other, insani:
When it is a matter of characterizing them by the implausibility of their imagination, madmen are called insani: a word which belongs as much to current vocabulary as to medical terminology ... But when Descartes wants no longer to characterize madness but to affirm that I ought not to follow the example of madmen, he uses the term demens and amens: terms which were initially juridical, before being medical, and which designate a whole category of people incapable of certain religious, civil, and judicial acts ... Insanus is a term which characterizes, whereas amens and demens disqualify.27
This is what marks Foucault's disagreement with Derrida: his insistence that what is at stake in the case of madness in the First Meditation is the juridico-theoretical status of the subject.
On the other hand, the Cartesian analysis of dreams allows the subject to continue the meditation: though the dream may evoke unreason, it does not transport the subject beyond reason. Doubt - and the doubting status of the thinking subject - is, precisely, a pretext for suggesting the infinite power of unreason, but in no way does it imply that the thinking subject might be described as insane.
The two thinkers approach the question of the juridical validation of the subject from completely different angles. Derrida privileges the possibility of undoing the alliance between Reason and History;
Foucault concentrates on the truth-value of the theoretical utterances, with their corollary of normativity and exclusion. In Foucault's interpretation, God signifies, in the Cartesian system, the possibility of the absolute freedom of unreason. This in turn makes unreason a constant in the process of production of meaning. For Derrida, on the other hand, the Cartesian God stands for the absolute of Reason itself; whereas Foucault emphasizes the exclusion of madness, and with it all non-rational excess, as being at the origin of the subject, Derrida posits the illusory but nevertheless phallologocentric belief in a full presence. This is why Foucault's main methodological concern is to analyse the mechanisms of exclusion, whereas Derrida works on the hypothesis of a form of thought that would respect the possibility of the not-one, non-presence.
Foucault envisages history as a sequence of discursive and sociopolitical events linked in a discontinuous series, and thereby dismisses the question of origin. To the quest for the origin and foundation of philosophical knowledge, he juxtaposes the analytic of the power formations at work within knowledge. The necessary and sufficient condition to account for the historical appearance of certain ideas is the analysis of the movements of transformation in the discursive order, which constitute new layers of our theoretical genealogy. Viewed from this angle, the history of madness amounts to no less than the history of the possibility of history, insofar as this rests on the decision to reject and obliterate unreason and dementia - states or instances which have to do with the 'absence of work', and therefore with the absence of history.28
Madmen, savages, the excluded and insane: such are the corollaries of Reason and History. For if History is the chronicle of human work, madness is the potential sphere of non-existence of work, of its lack, thus the domain of non-meaning. Speaking of the structuralist elements in Foucault's thought, Deleuze observes that in his work the notion of time is conceptualized as moving from discursive, that is, material and symbolic, structures to their actualizations, and that it is in the process of actualization itself that he locates the principle of a genesis of History.29
An utterance, a theoretical event, is fixed in time, but its meaning and significance lie all in the actualization, in the process of formulation. The will-to-truth, for instance, is one of the non-empirical determining factors that produces meaning and thereby shapes history. Its impact, however, does not precede in time the act of allowing certain forms of discourse to emerge: they are one and the same thing. If it is true that the empty space - absence, exclusion as the zero degree of the process of subjection - is the place from which History becomes possible, it is equally true that it is constantly displaced. It does not therefore have the value of one originary violence, but rather the force of a process that is reactivated in each and every 'here and now' of enunciation. The
displacement is the property which fundamentally allows the structures of the subject to be determined.
As Deleuze emphasizes, the empty space, the infinite possibility of non-meaning, signifies much more than the terms of a binary exchange or the relationship of mutual exclusion that sustains them. It rather sets up a conceptual scheme which allows for the variations of different elements. The empty space is not absence but the possibility, always present and always displaced, of non-meaning which, by circulating, allows for the production of meaning. What also surfaces in this ceaseless movement of different elements is ultimately the unthought at the heart of thought, the unconscious of the structures of knowledge. Not so much the subject's unconscious, but rather the unconscious of that which becomes visible and utterable as discourse.
As for Derrida, he locates the problematic on another level, and denies that the beginning of discourse is a place or non-void. He sets up as terms of the fundamental opposition the universal a priori and empirical instances. This opposition is forever reiterated in every philosophical question, in a circularity which condemns philosophy as a discipline to repetition. In his perspective, a philosophical question has no temporal origin; the conditions of its enunciation lie in an absolute origin. Derrida defines it as non-dialectical, non-contradictory difference: a purely positive difference, full presence, without a circumscribing void.
This original difference explains the delay between the possibility of philosophy in general and the particular instance of philosophical enquiries in particular. For Derrida the origin is not identifiable, but for reasons almost antinomic to those of Foucault: reason rests on a primary gesture of differentiation, of differance. It is in the in-between space between the totality of Being and one being that the origin has to be located and named. The act of naming, which is subsequently reiterated with each new philosophical question, is the founding act of history. In other words, the origin of history is indiscernible insofar as it is repeated in every new philosophical gesture. For Derrida philosophy is the activity that corresponds to the will to uncover the implicit alliance of reason with history, and both of them with the language of theory. It follows that philosophy cannot question its own roots - logocentrism -and that this task is the prerogative of 'literature' insofar as the language of fiction allows for the expression of the traces of that original gesture of separation.
For Derrida it is futile and pointless to talk against Reason, or to want to write the history of 'the other', for the discourse of reason par excellence, philosophy, is the expression of 'the One', the same logocentric subject and of his triumph over the other. I shall explain shortly how Luce Irigaray has used this conception to produce a radical feminist analysis of the dominant role of rationality. Derrida does not locate difference in the dividing line between (the) inside and (the)
outside of Reason or of History, but within the Same, inside Reason itself.
In other words, for Derrida the infernal circle of Reason firstly rests on a fundamental injustice, which he also denounces as a form of violence. If violence is within discourse, it follows that war is part of the philosophical logos, that it is even one of its fundamental conditions. The longing for peace, and for what might allow the discourse of the non-thought, of silence, is nonetheless the vocation of a philosophical language that is irrevocably present to itself. The search for modes of expressing this vocation is at the heart of the philosophical solution Derrida proposes: that is, the ruses or stratagems which effect the deconstruction of discourse and allow a thought of the non-present.
Shoshana Felman puts the differences which separate Foucault and Derrida into play in an interesting way.30 Felman characterizes the Foucauldian argument as T who think, cannot be mad', and Derrida's as 'Whether or not I am mad, I think therefore I am.'31 The first suggests a philosophical account of madness, the second emphasizes the madness of philosophy. Felman relates this opposition to the ways in which each thinker connects logos and pathos or philosophy and fiction.
For Foucault, argues Felman, madness is only the metaphor for the radically metaphorical nature of discourse; what interests him are the vicissitudes in language of the concept of madness. He challenges all philosophical projects by telling the history of the dividing line or gap between madness and pathos on the one hand, and on the other, reason and logos, a gap which corresponds to the distinction between philosophy and literature.
Derrida on the other hand, according to Felman, acknowledges an inevitable relationship of exclusion between theoretical language and madness. Madness is silence; it cannot be expressed, but finds refuge in literature. Through the bias of fiction the philosopher can catch a glimpse of madness, but no more. Felman concludes that the blind spot in Foucault's work is the role of fiction in relation to philosophy: is it inside or outside?
I find Felman's reading interesting, though I regret that she went no further than to point out the dissymmetry of Foucault and Derrida's respective positions on philosophy and literature, logos and pathos. This goes a long way, but not yet far enough.
For one thing, Foucault has talked about his relation to fiction:
I am well aware that I have never written anything but fictions. I do not mean to say, however, that truth is therefore absent. It seems to me that the possibility exists for fiction to function in truth, for a fictional discourse to induce effects of truth, and for bringing it about that a true discourse engenders or 'manufactures' something that does not as yet exist, that is, 'fictions' it. One 'fictions' history on the basis of
a political reality that makes it true; one 'fictions' a politics not yet in
existence on the basis of a historical truth.32
As the passage shows, the truth-value of theoretical utterances is not qualitatively different from that of fictions. What distinguishes them is the fact of being linked to precise material realities. With the exception of this materiality, the discourse of truth just as much as that of fiction is a grand narrative which helps us situate ourselves at a precise historical moment. If Foucault does not submit fiction to specific analysis, it is because of a conscious choice, not because of the blind spot Felman condemns. In Foucault's view, to maintain strict distinctions between the literary and the philosophical institutions is to be fundamentally mistaken about how power functions.
In his own comments Foucault has argued that Derrida could never agree to the argument for the exclusion of madness by the thinking subject; to accept this would seem to him too dangerous 'no longer for the disqualification with which it threatens the philosophizing subject, but for the qualification with which it would mark philosophical discourse'.33
In other words, if for Foucault philosophy only exists through the exclusion of its other - madness - this elimination is inadmissible for Derrida. Felman's study neglects what seems to me the fundamental difference between the two, namely, the status and function they grant to philosophy as discourse, to the actual philosophical text and to the subject of philosophical enunciation. Foucault stresses that the ultimate relevance of the Cartesian model is the fact that it no longer is applicable to the age of modernity: it is the difference between Descartes and us that matters. If for Descartes the certitude of the cogito is based on the exclusion of error, dreams, madness, and all the ways in which the non-thought is experienced, the modern cogito has completely different grounds: 'In the modern cogito ... we are concerned to grant the highest value, the greatest dimension, to the distance that both separates and links thought-conscious-of-itself and whatever, within thought, is rooted in non-thought.'34
It is precisely this movement that prevents the modern cogito from presenting itself as 'I am', despite phenomenology's efforts to contain it within the ontological question. This is why it seems to me that Foucault, far from wanting to avoid the question of language and of the text, simply formulates a different conceptualization of the discursive field of philosophy. Felman has overlooked an element in Foucault's analysis of the cogito which is essential, is, indeed, the focal point: namely, the historical and theoretical relation set up between the affirmation of the cogito as truth and the 1657 Decree ordering the great confinement of the insane. Flere it is less a matter of a causal sequence between theory and socio-political reality than of their coex-tensivity, corresponding to the simultaneous transformation of the fields of knowledge and power.
The theoretical event that is the utterance and the recognition of the cogito as the desirable, that is, scientifically valid, mode of subjectivity corresponds historically to the confinement of madness, the constitution of a police order, and the confiscation of the sexual ethic for the benefit of the morality of the family. The force of Foucault's reasoning lies in its recognition that this new social order implies 'the prior constitution of an ethical experience of unreason'.35 The exclusion of madness in the classical age builds the new rationalist certainty by attributing a new status to unreason.
This argument emphasizes the central notion of the Foucauldian analytic of power: that the discursive order is a field of correlative effects or events. For Foucault, philosophy has to do with politics, as a form of critical action; in making this claim he clearly distances himself from Derrida's position, for Derrida privileges the discursive order as textual practice above all. Foucault challenges this both in terms of Derrida's methodology, which he views as 'the reduction of discursive practices to textual traces',36 and in terms of practice.
His ultimate criticism is that the Derridean deconstruction overemphasizes the text in order to avoid the uncomfortable question of the speaking subject's implication in the same power relations that allow the theoretical text to function. This refusal to take into account the material structure of the text, the role they play in the network of power, is the major point of disagreement.
At this point Foucault is also condemning a pedagogy which attributes great hermeneutical powers to the figure of the master, situating the meaning in the text and its interstices, its hidden voices, and so on. This results in an exegetical practice that is the privilege of specialists. As a counter-example, Foucault emphasizes the 'discursive' event as the necessary link between the textual and the material, theory and reality. This rests in turn on other points made by Foucault: firstly, exclusion defined as an important strategic element, opposed to the tactic of the deconstruction of texts; this has several implications for the role of philosophy and the status of the philosopher in the present order of knowledge. Secondly, it also concerns the understanding of the unconscious and therefore the status of psychoanalytic discourse, viewed as a dominant theory of sexuality, which has produced suitable reading strategies besides.
Foucault's position situates the process of verification of the discourse of the human sciences beyond the text, in the whole socio-political sphere; as such it demonstrates the implicit connections which make the order of discourse a party to the network of socio-political relations. The discussion of the marked differences in Foucault's and Derrida's commentaries on Cartesian subjectivity can be related to conflicting visions of the status of the subject in enunciation. In opposing the privileged role of textual analysis, and the pedagogical relation which sustains it, Foucault also illustrates his idea that discursive practices coincide with the mechanisms of power.
On the one hand, then, we have a vision of philosophy as a game of interaction between the textual and the material, the theoretical and the practical (Foucault) and, on the other, that of philosophy as the displacement of the process of signification (Derrida).
Here we see an important distinction:
-	on the one hand, Derrida's position, which considers philosophy as a discipline of thought based on the reading of an historically established corpus of knowledge; hence the notion that philosophy, as the only real school of democracy, constitutes a threat to the bureaucratic public order.
-	on the other, the idea of opening philosophy up to the contemporary world, exposing it to the challenge of the present; the implication of this Foucauldian notion is the critique of the power upheld by disciplines and by institutions such as the university, which claim to embody them.
As Donzelot remarks:
In that game, one knows what one loses: hope in the text alone, unique, the text which would have no other intention than to tell the truth, no effect other than to achieve fraternity and to finish the story. One knows too what one wins: the possibility of escaping once and for all the derisory hope that the story, somewhere, has been written.37
For Derrida the history of philosophical ideas is in itself already a text, strictly speaking the sole text proper to philosophy. Philosophy acts as the distancing of 'reason's others', the rejection of the non-rational, of all that differs from the rational norm; as such it must reiterate this gesture in each and every one of its discursive instances. According to Foucault, what characterizes the philosophical text is the set of particular strategic and power relations within a system where knowledge is the process of definition of new norms: a discontinuous series of variations on the theme of normativity and rationality.
Accordingly, the two philosophers differ considerably in their assessment of psychoanalysis: whereas Derrida claims to both recognize and radically transform the ways in which the unconscious is to be taken into account by philosophy, as we shall see in a later chapter, Foucault discusses less the structure of the unconscious than the institution of psychoanalysis as a social and theoretical practice. Foucault is especially critical of the role that Lacan assigned to psychoanalysis as the revealer of the limitations of theoretical reason, as I argued in chapter 2.
What emerges from the problematic of exclusion and negativity raised by Foucault and Derrida is the strategic function of the cogito as a geometric model of subjectivity. In order to impose the primacy of reason on the senses, matter, and physis, Descartes presents his vision of
the cogito in terms that make reason look like a military discipline, aiming at the conquest of and the triumph over its many 'enemies' or 'others'. As G. Lloyd argues, rationality, masculinity, and war go hand in hand.38
If Derrida situates war in discourse - where violence is defined as the fundamental presence of an unspeakable silence at the very heart of enunciation - Foucault gives another explanation of the connection between reason and war:
I believe one's point of reference should not be to the great model of language (langue) and signs, but to that of war and battle. The history which bears and determines us has the form of a war rather than that of a language; relations of power, not relations of meaning. History has no 'meaning', though this is not to say that it is absurd or incoherent. On the contrary, it is intelligible and should be susceptible of analysis down to the smallest detail - but this in accordance with the intelligibility of struggles, of strategies and tactics.39
For Foucault the links between discourse and war pass through the body which, as we have seen, is completely immersed in the political sphere. From start to finish, human life is taken in hand by normalizing society. 'It is no longer a matter of bringing death into play in the field of sovereignty, but of distributing the living in a domain of value and utility.
Bio-politics: it is on life - every life-form - that the mechanisms of control exercise their power. Foucault draws a parallel between the end of the master-narrative that had welded together consciousness and rationality, the sacred text, of the figure of the great writer, and the evolution of the functions of the physicist or biologist as instruments of mastery used by the State. In this situation what is at stake in philosophy can no longer be that battle for truth, but the battle about the status of truth.
What results is that the political function of the intellectual and/or philosopher must be critical: he aims to be the deconstructor of the powers of philosophy in the current discursive formation. The philosophical field thus defined becomes a theoretical-active practice.
The possibility of contact and of establishing relations between philosophy and its 'others' is radicalized by Foucault. While acknowledging the proximity of the philosophizing function and the most extreme forms of madness, Foucault makes this similarity one of the defining criteria of philosophical modernity.
Nietzsche's last cry, proclaiming himself both Christ and Dionysus, is not on the border of reason and unreason, in the perspective of the work of art ... It is the very annihilation of the work of art, the point where it becomes impossible and must fall silent; the hammer has just
fallen from the philosopher's hands ... Nietzsche's madness, that is, the dissolution of his thought, is that through which his thought opens out onto the modern world.41
Deleuze
But does not critique, understood as critique of knowledge itself, express new forces capable of giving thought another sense? A thought that would go to the limit of what life can do, a thought that would lead life to the limit of what it can do. A thought which would affirm life, instead of a knowledge that is opposed to life. Life would be the active force of thought, but thought would be the affirmative power of life. Both would go in the same direction, carrying each other along, smashing restrictions, matching each other step for step, in a burst of unparalleled creativity. Thinking would then mean discovering, inventing new possibilities of life.42
No account of this early, archaeological phase of Foucault's work can be complete without reference to the thinker who, more than any other, accompanied and in many ways pursued the Foucauldian project well beyond the aims intended by its initiator: Gilles Deleuze.
With the transition from Foucault's writing to Deleuze's, the reader moves from a subversive but nonetheless reassuring view of philosophy to a universe of desiring machines and flux of incessant variations, peopled by nomads and vagabonds. In the transition, the guiding lines become entangled and are lost in the centrifugal movement of Deleuze's thought, which even displaces the reader him/her self. To guard against complete disorientation we have to be very precise about the direction from which we enter Deleuze's ever-expanding space.
Like Foucault, Deleuze occupies an important place in the anti-Cartesian climate characteristic of modern philosophy; there are close links between them, a reciprocity that Dayan describes as follows: 'We may say that in the French philosophical scene, Deleuze and Foucault have involuntarily shared the work of dethroning the psychoanalytic icon, with its aura of subversive potential, that Lacan had installed.'43
In their work Foucault and Deleuze respectively recognize the points where their projects intersect; a bond of mutual recognition exists between them that is made manifest by the reciprocal writing of prefaces, reviews, and cross-references in each other's texts. Foucault's assertion that, one day, our century will be Deleuzian is echoed by Deleuze's emphatic statement that his work would have been unthinkable without Foucault. Nothing exemplifies this link of filiation better
than Deleuze's book on Foucault, which is in my opinion the most thorough rereading of the philosophical impact of Foucault to date and a strong defence of the importance of Foucault's work for the philosophy of subjectivity, as opposed to the increasing tendency to classify Foucault as a sociologist of knowledge. It is also an active interpretation of the fundamental epistemological shifts operated by Foucault. Although I will not be discussing this book further here, I want to emphasize that Deleuze, author of the Anti-Oedipus^ has been able to produce a textual account of his friend and master where no Oedipal rivalry is allowed to interfere with the working of philosophy. With the Foucault-Deleuze connection philosophy becomes creative, affirmative, critical work.
Deleuze's vast and varied production can be divided into three series of intersecting works: the first covers his commentaries on the texts of the history of philosophy; it stretches from the early works on Lucretius and empiricism to the books on Foucault and Chatelet. The aim of these texts is to set up his genealogical reference points. The idea of 'genealogy', following Foucault, is to be taken as a form of counter-memory, that is, it relates to the great tradition of 'master-narrative' at a point in history when this tradition has lost its leading role of standard-setting. For Deleuze philosophy has not died: it has simply become culturally marginal, relatively unimportant. Whereas in some forms of institutional power this is experienced as loss, for Deleuze marginality becomes the precondition for a thorough renewal of the function of this discipline.
Deleuze shares with Foucault and many others, especially Chatelet, the quarrel against the history of philosophy, that is to say the idea that classical philosophy has served to inflate not only the transcendental narcissism of the rational subject, but also certain forms of institutional power by providing it with the forms of knowledge it needed. This complicity with power is constitutional of philosophy, which in the course of history has become an enormous machine designed to prevent people from thinking, 'a formidable school of intimidation which manufactures specialists in thought - but which also makes those who stay outside conform all the more to this specialism they disparage'.45
In the classical theory of subjectivity as illustrated by the Cartesian cogito, the production of meaning is regulated by the relations between those bodies that are defined as capable of action and those which are acted upon. The active-reactive distinction allows for the two ontological categories of Being and non-Being, that is, of the same-as and the different-from, whose dialectical relationship upholds a single meaning and system of representation. Deleuze, on the contrary, claims that the relation between meaning and non-meaning, positive and negative, active and reactive cannot be reduced to dialectical exclusion. He prefers
to play Spinoza against Descartes, and thus speak of free circulation or communication between different affects or elements. He thus relates to Foucault's polemic against the dialectic which limits difference to being a system of dualistic antagonisms. Deleuze criticizes the way in which being is determined by the law of the negative, and where difference serves only to reinforce the primacy of the one the normative model. For Deleuze the 'one' refers to a specific system of representation, based on the four 'illusions' of representation: identity/opposition - analogy/ resemblance.
If, as Foucault has shown so well, there is a classical world of representation, it is defined by the four dimensions which measure and coordinate it. They are the four roots of the principle of reason: the identity of the concept which is reflected in the ratio cognoscendi; the opposition of the predicate, as developed in a ratio fiendi', the analogy of judgement distributed in a ratio essendi; and the resemblance of perception which determines a ratio agendi. Any other difference, any difference not rooted in this way, will be deemed disproportionate, uncoordinated, inorganic, too great or too small, not only to be thought, but even to be. When it ceases to be thought, difference vanishes into non-being. We conclude from this that difference in itself is accursed, and must be expiated, or else recuperated in the forms of reason which make it livable and thinkable, which make of it the object of organic representation.46
In other words, the classical notion of the 'knowing subject treats difference as a sub-set of the concept of identity. This is the foundation of the ontological proposition of the univocity of being: not that there is a single being, but rather that, in its many qualifications and attributes, being is always represented in the same, single sense.
For Deleuze philosophy implies a certain image of what thinking is and this normative image of thought in turn supports the set of values socially recognized as desirable: it is an inherently moral image of thought. The crisis of modernity throws this vision open to new challenges and, according to Deleuze, the threshold of modernity in philosophy is precisely the failure of this system of signification, and of the notions of identity and difference (defined by the negative) that it prescribes. Philosophy must from now on concentrate on liberating all thinking from its subjection to a univocal image of thought and meaning.
By extension and, again, pursuing further one of Foucault's insights, Deleuze criticizes the appropriation of the unconscious by psychoanalytic theory. In his reading, the unconscious has been theorized by psychoanalysis in the direction of a new metaphysical entity, with 'desire' and the 'libidinal drives' replacing former concepts such as
'consciousness' and 'reason' but nevertheless still accomplishing a normative function. Deleuze prefers to consider the psychoanalytic unconscious no longer as a place of opposing drives and conflicts, but as a space of displacement and production. Instead of trying to 'apply' the unconscious to the humanities and to philosophy, like the early Freudians, or of proposing it as a replacement for former views of consciousness, following Lacan, Deleuze suggests that the adequate transposition of the notion of the unconscious into philosophy is effected by the rehabilitation of the notion of difference. This becomes the sign for the positivity of multiple differences, as opposed to the one-way system of meaning in the classical vision of subjectivity. The unconscious stands as the guarantee that the subject will be represented as split, that is, as not-one, as a multiplicity in which consciousness will never coincide fully with the subject. There is no alternative system of 'representation' of the unconscious: rather, it makes it possible to think anew, that is to say to think of the subject as an active, desiring agent without reference to some constitutive lack or originary loss.
Deleuze's decoding of the language of classical metaphysics and his re-coding of it in the sense of pure difference, disengaged from all negative definitions, rests on a specific view not only of the historical role played by philosophy but also of the use to be made of the philosophical text:
In no sense do I present myself as a textual commentator. A text, for me, is only a small cog within an extra-textual practice. It is not a question of commenting (on) the text in terms of textual practice, nor of any other methods, but of seeing its use in the extra-textual practice into which it extends.47
Reading a text does not return us to what lies within our subjectivity in a mirror-game between the textual and the psycho-sexual dimension, which will be the key of Derrida-style deconstruction. On the contrary, the act of reading consists in making outwards connections, by putting what is written in touch with what lies beyond it:
If a book is treated as a small a-signifying machine, the only question is: does it function, and if so, how? This other (kind of) reading is an intensive reading; something does or does not happen. There is nothing to explain, understand, or interpret. Plug in reading and turn it on.48
Like Foucault, Deleuze insists on the need to shift the focus away from the primacy of the subject of the enunciation and from writing as a signifying system. As we have already seen, this implies the need to give
up the idea that history somewhere is written, and that the unconscious can be deciphered like a written language. Deleuze looks upon the activity of writing as an institution, linked with the formation of the great despotic empires, thus making writing in effect the indispensable instrument of despotism:
Philosophical discourse has always been in a necessary relation to the law, the institution, and the contract which constitute the problem of the Sovereign and which traverse sedentary history, from despotic formations to democracies. The 'signifier' is truly the last philosophical avatar of the despot.49
In a radical adaptation of the Foucauldian archaeology, Deleuze emphasizes the role that the epistemological and ontological certainty of the Cartesian cogito - archetype of the classical system of representation - has played in determining the epistemological structure of the exact sciences (in particular, geometry and optics). The thinking subject, as the fixed point of all reflection, can affirm the validity of scientific discourse on the basis of the clear and distinct perception of ideas. This deductive intuition rests on the structural identity that Descartes poses a priori through the method of doubt; it is both the criterion by which human consciousness is legitimated and the organizing principle of the scientific and moral order. For Descartes, the use of Reason — individuating principle of the human subject - is the subject's mode of apprenticeship in the recognition of eternal and universal truths. Classical reason is the divine, the voice of God in man; on this basis, Descartes establishes not only the association between Reason and being, but also the equation between the intellectual and the moral order: 'The I is not only the higher form of individuation, but also the principle of recognition and identification for all judgement of individuality with a bearing on things.'50
For Deleuze the problematic of the cogito is the (sempiternal) problem of the Reason's reason for being, which poses the question of the beginning of thought as attribute of the human subject. Indeed Descartes's chief concern in the Meditations is to chase away any element which might be considered to lie beyond the function of Reason; to cast out objective presuppositions, in order to bring to conclusion the enterprise of the individuation of the subject. The aim of establishing objectively the equation between subjectivity and reason is also the basis of the Cartesian pedagogical method, tending towards the articulation of a self-sufficient reason which legitimates the theoretical enterprise. In his quest for objectivity, Descartes condemns any presupposition whose source is outside the subject, the better to gather the clear and distinct intuitions of his rational soul.
Deleuze points out that inevitably the Cartesian stance depends on
two unexplicated, subjective presuppositions: the recognition of a human essence, and a certain concept of time. In other words, the Cartesian method implicitly assumes that everyone knows the meaning of self, thinking, and being. Behind the affirmation of the validity of the 'I think' there hides a very banal presupposition: everyone thinks. Descartes, adds Deleuze, starts from a simple syllogism:
-	everyone thinks
-	everyone knows what it is to think
-	therefore thought is the distinctive feature of the human being.
The I of the cogito, subject of the enunciation, simply confers a philosophical validity on a received idea: the faculty of human understanding. The celebrated Cartesian comparison of the peasant and the philosopher (for Deleuze, the opposition between the idiot and the pedant) serves to underline the universality of common sense, the indispensable prop for the theoretical articulation of the thinking subject. Consequently, far from having eliminated all possibility of error, the Cartesian cogito makes the veracity of being as thinking substance depend on a pre-philosophical presupposition: a dogmatic moral cliche which presents the faculty of understanding as what is most widely shared in the human community. This is the moral image of thought on which philosophy will build its theoretical foundations.
Deleuze denounces this pre-philosophical belief in the reasonable nature of the subject as a common-sense belief which serves as guide for the Cartesian defence of the objectivity of reason. Deleuze's analysis also underlines the fact that, as psychoanalysis had pointed out, all philosophical thought comes from somewhere other than philosophy, and thinking from somewhere else than reason.
His main objection to this view of subjectivity is, precisely, that it implicitly recognizes a link between a common-sense belief and the enunciation of scientific truths. It is on this non-said that the function of representation in classical philosophy rests. The pre-philosophical moment of the whole operation, however, remains unspoken and unanalysed: the theoretical foundations of objectivity are not objective at all.
By making human essence a thinking substance, the cogito defines subjectivity as a fixed interior space, which receives its stimuli from the external world, but is distinguished above all by its capacity to correct these stimuli according to the rules of Reason. This in turn fuels the controversy over the status of Reason's 'others', beginning with madness. In this respect Deleuze emphasizes that for the Cartesian subject there is no possible 'beyond'. The cogito, a self-sufficient substance, the existence of which is attested by divine reason, intervenes at a decisive moment in Descartes's argument between the infinite possibility of error
and the assurance of the subject. Deleuze suggests that the possibility of the void as non-being is the foundation for the assurance of the Cartesian cogito: it unfolds and resonates behind the closed quarters of an empty internal space. In Deleuze's analysis, however, this internal space is related structurally to the passing of time. Time does not exist for the cogito, which escapes time's action by presenting itself as the sole fixed point of reference. The Cartesian subject's mode of being is an eternal present, scanned by the actions of the body defined as res extensa, that is, matter in transformation according to the rules of causality. The cogito acts as a guarantee of the principle of individuation of the subject through the temporal continuity of being; internal space is thus void, a black hole, beyond time and beyond danger of change.
In Deleuze's reading, the true void is no longer established around the subject, but within the subject himself. The cogito, as a receptacle which receives from an omnipresent God the responsibility for necessary self-legitimation, marks for Deleuze the void of the soul which might claim to be the point of gravity of a universal consciousness.
Thus the cogito is a non-sense, for it cannot but conceal the very transition it was supposed to reveal, from the statement 'I think' to the certainty of the 'I am'. Deleuze argues instead that this transition can only be situated in a physical or material (as opposed to mental) and therefore temporal perspective. Not only is subjectivity embodied, but also this determination is linked to time, the element which introduces the possibility of difference into thought.
This reading of the cogito by Deleuze seems to me necessary for understanding the theoretical basis of his critique of subjectivity. In contrast to the Cartesian universe, the plenitude of which testifies to a veritable horror of the void, Deleuze's universe does not recognize the distinction between internal and external space, or inside and outside reason; in this universe the self loses its privileged perspective on creation. Deleuze makes this loss the founding argument of his questioning of subjectivity. This essential condition of the process of enunciation is a black hole. Putting to good effect Nietzsche's teaching, he condemns the classical view of subjectivity by reducing it to an effect of resentment and nihilism:
We are always pinned to the wall of dominant significations, we are always sunk in the black hole of our subjectivity, the black hole of our Ego which is always dearer to us than anything else. On this wall are inscribed all the objective determinations which fix us, control us, identify us, and make us recognizable; in this black hole we reside, with our consciousness, our feelings, our passions, our little, far from secret secrets, our desire to tell them.51
The problematic mode marks the triumph of the event and of
becoming over being and thought; in his genealogical reconstruction of the history of philosophy, Deleuze develops fully his vision of the problematic mode as a new philosophical style. This leads Deleuze to rehabilitate, for instance, the Stoic stance, founded on paradox. Paradox, Deleuze adds, in order to complete its accepted etymology, is anything that prevents (good) sense being accepted not only as unique sense, but also as source of fixed identities. Hence his preference, in the history of philosophy, for the 'naturalist' philosophers - Lucretius, Hume, Nietzsche - to the detriment of the geometric systems of Plato, Kant, or Hegel: 'for me there is a secret link between Lucretius, Hume, Spinoza and Nietzsche, consisting of the critique of the negative, the cult of joy, hatred of inferiority, the exteriority of forces and relations, the denuncia-tion of power .
Deleuze credits empiricism with having set in train the critique of the notion of the representation of the subject. Hume substitutes a psychology of the passions and affects of the soul for a psychology of the spirit, thereby disturbing the essentialist subject whose authorization depends on the identification of consciousness with rationality. Similarly, the critique of the concept of 'human nature' helps to translate the classical philosophical stance into the problematic mode.
Furthermore, Hume puts forward an idea that is fundamental for Deleuze: that the subject is an instance who, under the influence of a principle of utility defined collectively by society pursues his/her own goal using all the means available for realizing it. These means make up the different modalities of the human being, and form the principle of social association. For Hume, the subject is a relational form. It is in the social context to which he is subjected that the subject is constituted; for personal tendencies can only be satisfied through social institutions. The process of the formation of the subject is, therefore, normative.
What Deleuze retains mostly from Spinoza's thought is that there is only one substance, and that it is corporeal. His reading of Spinoza is centred on the body and its affects, and defines consciousness as the region of the self which is affected by the external world. All its attributes, even, indeed especially, those of the soul, are referred to the body. The body, which might be described as a multitude of attributes or forces or particles, possesses both the ability to be affected, and the power to affect. Which is to say that there is a common level of immanence of things, a profound unity of being.
We are made of all its depths and distances, of these intensive souls which are developed and re-envelop themselves. What we call individuating factors is the set of these enveloping and enveloped intensities, of these individuating and individual differences which endlessly penetrate each other, moving over the fields of individuation. Indi-
viduality is not the character of the self; on the contrary, it forms and nourishes the system of the dissolved self.53
The common level of immanence establishes an energetic or intensive connection which develops relations of speed and rest between beings, affects which, translated into pathos, determine the mode of relations between bodies. Spinoza, as Deleuze emphasizes, is critical of the Cartesian notion of representation: the value of the affects to explain the state of the body in relation to surrounding bodies denies the representative value accorded to ideas. All production depends here on the contact and intermixing of different bodies.
Deleuze takes up the idea of energetic or intensive connections again in his study on Nietzsche. The notion of will-to-power thus signifies that the meaning of an event is to be seen as the result of forces which take control of a body at a given moment. Force is always ability and will to affect; consequently there is no dialectical relation between words and things, but rather, positive forces, which express difference in terms of positivity. The positive value of difference is underlined by the distinction between the active forces - which affect another force - and the reactive forces, which, on the contrary, limit affirmative power: reactive force transforms all force into negation and resentment. By affirming the positivity of forces, Nietzsche was able to elaborate a typology which he could use as a method of interpretation of human consciousness: The world is neither true nor real, but living. And the living world is will to
/ S4
power.
If on the one hand 'pure' and definitive thought no longer exists, on the other, all thought is considered to be the expression of the vital power of being. Consequently, any attempt to alienate thought from the creative force which dwells in it constitutes a mutilation of the human spirit.
Deleuze sets his eminently Spinozan message against the phantoms of negation: thought must be put to the service of creation. In this perspective, thought is anything that expresses and enriches the positivity of the human intellect, defined not in terms of opposition to and negation of matter (physis, the material body, place of passions and of irrationality), but as event, circulation, and transition. For Deleuze the body is a surface where forces play. They are not the expression of in-depth interiority or the enactment of transcendental models; there is nothing essentialistic or primordial about Deleuzian bodies. They are the play of different forces, and as such they are pure simulacra. The bodily surface is to be thought as repetition or the eternal return of these forces, without, however, a model or a single pattern that gets repeated; it is an intensive discontinuity in which the subject disintegrates.
This definition of the multiplicity and the dispersion of the subject opens up the question of the void. Given that, in the tradition of
Western metaphysics, thinking always means thinking about something, how are we to understand the new intransitive status reached by contemporary theories of subjectivity such as Deleuze's? How do we think that which is beyond, beneath, before the One? How do we define it: as the void? Nothingness? Non-being? If thinking and being are indeed one and the same entity, and thought is ruled by the norms of rationality, where does the domain of reason begin and that of unreason, pre-reason or non-reason end?
Bodies, Texts and Powers
Discourse is not just that which translates struggles for domination and its systems, but that by which one struggles, the power one seeks to possess. Foucault1
In the previous chapter I outlined and developed the most prominent features of Foucault's archaeological phase, the first in a threefold series around which he developed his work. In this chapter I will look more closely at the second and third phases, covering respectively his analysis of the practices of exclusion, domination and interiorization of the norms.
This phase started as early as Madness and Civilization and The Birth of the Clinic; it is developed in Discipline and Punish, and culminates in the History of Sexuality. What is at stake is the analysis of the discursive and institutional practices of exclusion, separation and domination of the subject. Foucault develops the hypothesis that the techniques of subjec-tification [assujettissement] can only be understood in the frame of normative practices. He concentrates on the normalizing repercussions of certain forms of knowledge, even those that might appear as minor in relation to the dominant disciplinary grids of our culture, for instance, the discourse on madness and mental illness, and the prison regime. Foucault focuses less on the major instances of the juridical system, than on the set of constant, minute regulations that govern our existence.
It is perfectly legitimate to see this recentring of Foucault's thought as a response to the events of May 68, which gave a renewed sense of urgency to our reflections on networks of power, the extreme example of which are the totalitarian systems. It is significant that in the preface to the American edition of the Anti-Oedipus by Deleuze and Guattari, Foucault emphasizes the importance of the critique of the totalitarian system. We might also invoke the change caused by Foucault's election to the chair of History of Systems of Thought at the College de France in 1970. This position sanctioned him as a leading master-thinker in his own right and therefore made it all the more urgent for him to be
consistent in his critiques of power by applying them to his own place of enunciation. He then started concentrating more and more on the analysis of the power-formations within discourse.
In his inaugural lecture at the College de France, published as The Discourse on Language', Foucault explains his position:
I suppose that in any society the production of discourse is simultaneously controlled, selected, organized and redistributed by a certain number of procedures, the role of which is to ward off the powers and dangers of discourse, master its chance events, evade its weighty, fearsome materiality.2
Thus the analysis of power emerges as the new target of his research, to such an extent that he says: 'When I think back now, I ask myself what else it was that I was talking about, in Madness and Civilization or The Birth of the Clinic, but power?'3
Since the guideline of Foucault's thought is the double problematic of the reasonable nature of power and the normative character of reason, the polemic against the primacy of rationalist consciousness leads him to a new analysis of power. The commitment to unmasking the complicity between discourse and normativity leads Foucault to pinpoint one of the most fertile contradictions of Western culture, namely that, because of its logocentric structure and the consequent value it attributes to scientific knowledge, it has actually become logophobic in that it fears spontaneous production of knowledge and is intent upon monitoring the extent and the kind of discourses that are allowed to circulate.
Having demonstrated that madness could only have been so named and acknowledged once it had been inscribed in a specific regime of truth, Foucault traced a logical path between the 'history' of madness as reason's other, and the analysis of the mechanisms and techniques of power. The keystone in his reflections is how power affects the body, its pleasures, its prohibitions.
What I want to show is how power relations can materially penetrate the body in depth, without depending even on the mediation of the subject's own representation. If power takes hold on the body, this isn't through its having first to be interiorized in people's consciousness. There is a network or circuit of bio-power, of somato-power.4
The body is thus understood as the product of normative effects that situate it directly in the field of politics; as such it is not the body as studied from the point of view of historical, biological or demographic sciences, but rather, the body defined as a political field. In other words, Foucault looks at the institutions, both material (families, schools, prisons, etc.) and discursive (the disciplines and other formalized
knowledges in the human and social sciences; the penal discourse of the law and so on) that shape the body, the situated, embodied structure of subjectivity. The process of getting to know and of getting to control the embodied self being one and the same thing, Foucault strikes a double blow: on the one hand he redefines subjectivity in terms of bodily materialism, on the other hand he redefines power. The focus of his work is to show that the 'truth-effects' produced about the embodied subject are both correctional, normative, and positive, that is, productive of knowledge.
Power is no longer an objectified property, the prerogative of the happy few; instead, it is a microphysics of the most detailed techniques of knowledge and control.
It is in Discipline and Punish - a reading of the carceral system and the prison institution - that Foucault outlines this reading of the body as object and target of power: a 'body that is manipulated, shaped, trained, which obeys, responds, becomes skilful, and increases its forces'.5
He presents a programme for a political economy of the body as a strategic object as follows: 'What the apparatuses and institution operate is, in a sense, a microphysics of power, whose field of validity is situated in a sense between these great functionings and the bodies themselves with their materiality and their forces.'6
Even more than in the earlier phase of his work, Foucault now takes an anti-semiological turn, less concerned by the issues of textuality and more interested in the materiality of the corporeal subject, meant as a site of control but also of strategies of resistance. This method traces the emergence of the 'object' of enquiry that is characteristic of modernity: 'man', or the 'human subject' as he appears in the discourse of the penal and juridical texts. He looks at the way in which the specific techniques of control and discipline led to the creation of this new 'object' of power and knowledge.
The constitution of an object with scientific status implies a certain strategic organization of the institutional and discursive supports that Foucault calls the 'will-to-truth'. In other words, the object of enquiry -be it the 'knowing subject' or anything else - does not, according to Foucault's microphysical approach, pre-exist the process of knowledge-production in the sense of a normative practice that aims at controlling the very site that it brings to the fore: the embodiment of the subject.
This forms the framework of what is to be a new way of analysing discursive events: a bio-politics, that is, power over life and over all living matter. Foucault traces the genesis of modern power in terms of the evolution of methods of punishment (Discipline and Punish), and of the devices established to study and explain sexuality (The History of Sexuality). The term 'devices' indicates both the single mechanism and the overall technology of control; as such, it refers to the institutional networks which diffuse the production of discourse, quite as much as to
a form of specific mastery, linked to the political economy of the body.
A 'device' of power and knowledge functions by channelling and thereby strategically orienting the focus of discourse. It is in this way that a society emphasizes this, that or the other specific institution -prison, sexuality, and so on. This process makes certain sites both visible and apt to being formalized. The truth-effects thus brought about occur simultaneously on the material and the discursive level: concrete places are created in which types of knowledge, languages, and new codifications of truth are elaborated. A previously' empty' space, for instance the leper-houses left vacant by the disappearance of the disease, get refilled and theoretically redefined as houses of confinement for a new category of socially undesirable individuals: madmen or madwomen. This marks a strategic shift that projects madness into the scale of the positive values, thus establishing a connection between knowledge and confinement. Theory is only a point in this larger process of normativity, but this does not reduce it to a purely functional role: it remains a significant political event.
Opposing the tradition in economics and philosophy that contrasts knowledge to power, Foucault insists not only on the interdependence of the two, but also on the positive nature of their interconnection. Power is another name for the concentration of normative knowledge around a selected space. Consequently, the knowing subject is not the producer of knowledge but rather one of its effects: the central role is played by the process or technology that Foucault now describes as the microphysics of bio-power.
Foucault's study of the prison system traces the transition from a punitive economy that implied a representation of the body as an object to be corrected and punished, to a regime of reasoned manipulation of the embodied individual. What makes Foucault's work relevant as philosophy is that he stresses the simultaneous appearance on the one hand of the notion of the body as the target of punitive power and on the other of new categories and disciplines of thought that allow us to comprehend and manipulate this embodied individual. The idea of discipline thus acquires both a very concrete and an abstract sense.
'Discipline' may be identified neither with an institution nor with an apparatus; it is a type of power, a modality for its exercise, comprising a whole set of instruments, techniques, procedures, levels of application, targets; it is a 'physics' or an 'anatomy' of power, a technology.7
Foucault defines power as 'the name that one attributes to a complex strategic situation in a particular society'.8 This is a non-dichotomized vision of power that Foucault turns into an epistemological operation. The result of the complex interplay of forces is the production of discourse.
The typical discourse of modernity, that of the human and social sciences which stemmed from the crisis of metaphysics, is defined as
/bio-power'. It can be analysed on two levels:
-	in the procedures designed to subjugate the population, for example the educational, medical and juridical systems.
-	in the institutions and scientific discourses that ensure control, sanctions and exclusion.
This leads to the analysis of institutionalization as the regulatory principle in the elaboration of what Foucault calls 'the political economy of truth'.9
Foucault analyses how the 'subject of modernity' is a discursive site that gives rise simultaneously to the notion of embodiment - as opposed to the emphasis placed on the mind or the mental in the metaphysical tradition - and also to the new disciplines and institutions that monitor the forms of subjectivity. One of the main effects of the dislocation of subjectivity through the organization of technologies of normative control is the emergence of a new, totally 'modern' notion: that of the 'individual'. This individual, which bourgeois liberalism will endow with a series of entitlements - property, freedom, the protection by law and the benefits of morality - is born out of the collapse of the classical notion of subjectivity. Considering the implicitly normative structure of this vision of the subject as 'individual', the question then becomes: what margin of political resistance is available to the 'individual' meant as the fragmented subject of the historical era of bio-power?
The individual is no doubt the fictitious atom of an 'ideological' representation of society; but he is also a reality fabricated by this specific technology of power that I have called discipline. We must cease once and for all to describe the effects of power in negative terms: it 'excludes', it 'represses', it 'censors', it 'abstracts', it 'masks', it 'conceals'. In fact, power produces; it produces reality; it produces domains of objects and rituals of truth. The individual and the knowledge that may be gained of him belong to this production.10
In approaching the question of political agency Foucault returns to his early idea of the genealogy and the notion of interpretation as a process which cannot be interrupted, rather, must carry on incessantly, and suggests that the criterion by which to determine political action is the analysis of the interaction networks of power and knowledge. It is a question of drawing connections, maps or cartographies of these networks, so as to identify possible points of resistance. The aim of Foucault's discourse-analysis is to produce strategies of resistance. He introduces the idea of diagram or strategic map of power in order to define his tactic and his politics. In this sense, the philosophical analysis of power as knowledge is the very prototype of political activity. The theoretical act of decoding the power formations amounts
to drawing an adequate descriptive analysis of the process of power and knowledge in the present. It is not a matter of analysing the coherence of a text, its hidden structures or unconscious folds or its position in the history of ideas; it rather requires an insistence on identifying the relations of joint production of knowledge and exercise of power.
In comparison to classical exegesis, this method allows for neither interpretation nor commentary, both of which are regulatory hermeneutic procedures. This is necessary above all because it makes the connection between the process of power and that of interpretation. Knowing that the mark of power is that it is always disciplinary and juridical and less concerned to establish a definitive truth than to mulitiply the effects of the means of power, the possibility of political agency is situated more in the dissolution of the mechanisms of power than in the imposition of a new liberating model. This is how Foucault introduces his notion of resistance.
By trying to identify these resistances, rather than producing or adhering to a general theory of revolution, he relativises existing revolutionary concepts in order to restore to political agency its multiple and plural character. And in effect, the traditional dialectical opposition between power and resistance proves unacceptable, for the forms of resistance are strategies, albeit minute, individualized, autonomous, which cut horizontally across the vertical structures that would tend to separate the political from the non-political domain. What this amounts to is that rather than settle (on) revolutionary strategies aiming to replace existing structures, it is much more effective to stress the political structure of epistemological structures, to ponder rationality itself and the global norms which run the regime of acceptability of discourse.
Hence the need to reconsider in depth the role of the intellectual, who, too often, still sets himself up as theorist of liberation or revolution, rather than simple provider of services, tools of analysis for those who are already engaged in resistance to power. In his dialogue with Deleuze (1972)11 Foucault comments on the historical shifts in the role of the intellectual. He stresses especially the transition from the Hegelian image of the universal philosopher-king - heir to the hegemonic function of philosophy - to the 'organic' or committed intellectual, symbolized by Sartre: the fellow-traveller of revolutionary political action. Foucault finally proposes his own option: the 'specific' function for the intellectual, as the analyst of the specific conditions governing the circulation of power and knowledge in society.
On the level of discourse the implication of this change in the role of the intellectual is the death of the absolute subject of knowledge, and therefore the end of the figure of the great writer and the sacred text. Authorship is not, for Foucault, an individual matter: all texts are collectively produced.
Sexuality
In the course of his critique of the domains of hospitals, prisons and other institutions in which the proliferation of discourse is most marked in the modern era, Foucault was inevitably confronted by the discursive and material institution of sexuality. Sexuality plays a dominant role in the process of subjedification of individuals. Here Foucault applies the same methodological scheme he used to trace the dividing lines between reason and madness, intellectual and ethical order and disorder, and sees in the discourse on sexuality produced by our society one of the most powerful means to control and discipline the embodied subject.
His focus is the analysis of the discursive changes that, from the nineteenth century, have affected the interaction of rational norms with the private behaviour of individuals. Foucault's genealogical analysis of sexuality as a web of power and knowledge leads him to a critique of the institution of psychoanalysis as the prototype of the normative nature of contemporary bio-power. In taking sexuality as the strategic target, Foucault's work is directed towards the analysis of the internal devices of the constitution of subjectivity, which affect the representations the subject makes of him/herself. The fundamental argument, which he develops in The History of Sexuality, is that the elaboration of a discursive territory specific to psychoanalysis implies the shifting of the boundary that had separated madness from reason. Foucault develops the central theme of sexuality as the vehicle of power, a power which is omnipresent not because it is all-engulfing, but because it comes from everywhere. 'The question I would like to pose is not, Why are we repressed?, but rather, Why do we say with so much passion and so much resentment against out most recent past, against our present, and against ourselves, that we are repressed?'12
Foucault is less concerned to reveal some fundamental truth about human sexual behaviour than critically to unveil the instances of production of sexuality as a very specific discourse, that is to say, as a technology of power and knowledge. He argues that modernity has been less effective in repressing sexuality than in widely disseminating it. The historical roots of this go very far: Foucault tracks them back to the practice of avowal, of which the Christian practice of 'spiritual direction of conscience' and the Catholic institution of the confession are clear manifestations.
The specific technology of control of the subject via sexuality has resulted in some clear discursive productions: it has produced demography as the scientific means of achieving population control. It has also, however produced the discourse of the 'sexual sciences': psychology, sexology, psychoanalysis: these are all discourses that locate some
fundamental truth about the individual in his/her sexual behaviour.
The hermeneutic value thus attributed to sexuality corresponds to an essentially juridical model of knowledge: it is a question of law. Sexuality and the discourses which have proliferated around it are therefore caught in a system of codification which is based on avowal. The truth-value of this discourse, in other words, requires that the subject speak of his sexuality: the telling part is essential to the whole.
This tendency has become particularly strong now that sexuality has been associated with individual 'liberation' and this in turn has become an element in a revolutionary ethics that stresses the subversive force of a 'liberated' sexuality. Foucault is extremely critical of the hypothesis of the 'liberation' of sexuality, simply because he refutes the notion that sexuality was ever 'repressed'. The body being, for Foucault, a juridico-discursive surface where power-effects interact, he argues that sexuality is one of the main poles of power. Therefore he concludes that the law is constitutive of desire and desire resides within the system of power; as a consequence it is nonsensical to make any claim for sexual liberation, meant as the overthrowing of something called 'repression'.
Foucault destroys the pretence to purity of any knowledge by revealing the social processes which control its production. Sexuality being described as a specific regime of power, Foucault's aim is to locate possible points of resistance within it. This is where he turns towards psychoanalysis as a form of institutionalizing sexuality. The psychological sciences are the typical discourses of our era: they constitute an attempt to heal the narcissistic wound inflicted on the 'knowing subject' by the loss of metaphysical certainty in the age of modernity.
Tracing the genesis of these psychosexual discourses, he is able to demonstrate that they are only the most recent variation on the theme of medico-psychological intervention. Clinical psychiatry paved the way for psychoanalysis; if it is true that in comparison with the former psychoanalysis may appear liberating, it must nonetheless be stressed that it stems from the great effort of normalization and control of the population established in the nineteenth century. What is controversial in psychoanalysis, in this context, is precisely its implicit alliance with a juridical model of knowledge, which allows it to function in the schema of avowal, confession and interiorization.
Foucault's critique of psychoanalysis focuses less on its theorization of the unconscious than on the position it holds as a discourse on the body and the subject. If, as a theory of the unconscious, it may have liberated the 'individual', it paradoxically achieves this by subjecting him/her even further to the technology of knowledge and power.
As Castel emphasizes, as a mechanism of control of the body, psychoanalysis constitutes a dominant discourse - a form of capitalization of the affects which run through the subject; it therefore constitutes a normative, juridical model.13
In an interview with Deleuze, Foucault suggests:
It is no longer a question of freeing truth from all systems of power, which would be chimerical as truth itself is power, but rather of detaching power from the truth of the forms of social, economic, and cultural hegemony within which, for the moment, it functions.14
As I said in chapter 2, I find this approach rather reassuring because it seems to me important to underline the irreducibility of philosophical and psychoanalytic discourse to each other. The interface between psychoanalysis and philosophy cannot result in a substitutive operation. The discourse of the unconscious is deeply troubling for the philosophical preference for consciousness; but this does not mean that it can be substituted for it.
By developing a political analysis of the processes of subjection of the subject through sexuality. Foucault distances himself from psychoanalytic theory. At the same time, he takes advantage of the psychoanalytic critique of humanism - since he establishes that the subject can no longer be considered 'master' in the house of knowledge. Philosophy for Foucault remains foreign to psychoanalytic theory but at the same time nonetheless finds it impossible to restore the subject to its sovereign functions. The problem of how to make philosophy coexist with psychoanalysis is symptomatic of the modern discursive order. Felman sums it up by saying that psychoanalysis attempts to present in a logical fashion the discontinuous functioning of the unconscious, whereas philosophy is duty-bound to express the radical nature of the discontinuity.15 The two positions are, in principle, antinomic, but coincide in their respective rejection of absolute knowledge. As Dayan concludes: 'The enigma of a subject born in and borne away by the unconscious, or the enigma of an unconscious which cannot, in turn, be subject, come down to the same.'16 So psychoanalysis and philosophy displace each other, in the sloping zone of subjectivity, but keep on very different routes.
In Foucault's case the critique of the power and knowledge of psychoanalysis leads him to release sexuality from the psychoanalytic theory of the unconscious. Foucault prefers to speak of the body and its pleasures, rather than of sexuality; but if this allows him to bypass the problem of the unconscious, he can in no way solve it. For this reason this historico-political stance does not constitute an answer to psychoanalysis; it is above all a radically different fashion of formulating the questions of the sexuation of the subject.
No-one can deny that these two currents of thought practise a mutual seduction on each other: they have a certain number of elements in common, and numerous fertile points of contact. But in other respects the profound differences in political orientation which separate Laca-nian psychoanalysis from Foucault's technologies of the self provoke
mutual mistrust. Since any possibility of reconciliation is ruled out, a priori, Foucault's philosophy and Lacan's psychoanalysis rub shoulders in a state of reciprocal incapacity to coexist and of an even greater incapacity to ignore each other.
In an extremely interesting interview with Lacanian psychoanalysts, the divergences as well as the profound complicity between the two discourses are brought out with great finesse and much good humour. Foucault clarifies his position in relation to psychoanalysis's context of enunciation: 'The mere fact that I've adopted this course undoubtedly excludes for me the possibility of Freud figuring as the radical break, on the basis of which everything else has to be re-thought.'17
There is no lack of voices, especially on the side of psychoanalysis, to argue its relative incompatibility with philosophy. There are those who have reached the stage of constructing an absolute antimony. Elisabeth Roudinesco, for example:
The Lacanian position needs to be situated in a domain which is radically alien to Foucault's archaeological field of fundamentally historiographical reflection, with its bearing on the conditions in which different types of discourse come into being. Thus reason is not, for Lacan, the condition of 'madness', and, likewise, no 'other' side has any place, no norm any deviation, except that located in the discourse of the 'other' side. The place of the discovery of the unconscious is the pivotal point of Lacanian reflection, as is the subversion introduced into the question of language by the workings of the unconscious and by its incidence in the relations between truth, knowledge and the subject (a problematic alien to Foucault's position).18
However, what Roudinesco presents is an empirical translation of Foucault's thought, which she characterizes as 'historiographical'. I myself prefer to concentrate on the aim of his approach, based on the notion of the technology of the subject and on discursive practices. I find equally inadequate Roudinesco's suggestion that, for Foucault, Reason is the condition of Madness, its necessary underside. Roudinesco plays this against the subversion of language operated by Lacan's analysis of the subject, based on the priority given to the unconscious. To put it plainly, this is a reductive interpretation that overlooks the political force of Foucault's thought. As we saw earlier, Foucault presents Madness as Reason's other to the extent that it is a simultaneous genealogical event, using the same technologies of confinement and control. The certainty acquired by the Cartesian subject has allowed a new juridical and theoretical category, namely madness, to be defined by being confined, and other forms of irregular or criminal conduct have been assimilated to it, creating an overall normative effect.
In my view, the persisting tension between Foucault's thought and
psychoanalytic theory reveals a radical difference in their respective definitions of the 'political'. Maud Mannoni makes a distinction between on the one hand the political position of militants such as Foucault and Basaglia (who aim to disrupt the administrative structures and to alert us to the ways in which society uses them to preserve the status quo), and, on the other, that of Lacan, who wants to tear analysis away from the ideology of the self-obsessed subject of civilization, and to turn it into a means of undoing bourgeois liberal visions of subjectivity.19
Although the stakes are clearly outlined, this assessment retains only one element of Foucault's thought and it underestimates his theory of power as well as the politics and the role of intellectuals. If Foucault does not offer a direct critique of power, according to the classical theme which opposes dominant and dominated, it is because he has left behind the vision of power in both the liberal bourgeois and the Marxist-revolutionary sense. Power being neither linear nor 'molar' (Deleuze) but rather a network of mechanisms subjacent to a system of knowledge, there is therefore a perfect correspondence between? the forms of subjection and the schemas of knowledge. Hence it becomes quite illusory to want to differentiate between reality and its representations; by the same token the notion of ideology becomes outmoded.
Foucault proposes a new epistemological category: the technology of the subject, according to which power produces the real through the processes of normalization that it adopts and the regions of truth it institutes. Foucault therefore chooses to base his political analysis on the critique of the political status of truth.
Foucault and the Other
In the frame of more general reflections on sexuality and power, Foucault, almost inevitably, comes to speak about women. The ineluctable character of this encounter is also due to the social and political importance of feminism as an event in terms of both theory and practice. However, nowhere is this taken into consideration by the philosopher. At best, he writes in a matter-of-fact tone about the role of feminism in a more global revolutionary movement.
It is significant that Foucault manages to confine his references to feminism to a bare minimum, although he has focused his entire work on the analysis of power, the body and sexuality. Within these broad themes, in the actual choice of topics and subject-areas, he also failed to raise the issues most closely linked to women and to female sexuality: pregnancy and birth-control, but also lesbianism and feminist critiques of the family. It is ironic to think that all such issues get far less attention in his work than the campaign against little boys' masturbation.
More generally, also in the earlier phases of Foucault's work on
madness and reason, as well as in the critique of psychoanalysis, Foucault never locates woman's body as the site of one of the most operational internal divisions in our society, and consequently also of the most persistent forms of exclusion. Sexual difference simply does not play a role in the Foucauldian universe, where the technology of subjectivity refers to a desexualized and general 'human' subject.
Women, prisoners, drafted soldiers, the hospitalized sick, and homosexuals, have now entered into a specific struggle against the particular forms of power, constraint and control which are held over them. Such struggles are currently part of the revolutionary movement, providing that they are radical, and allow neither compromise nor reformism, and make no attempt to convert that same power, with at most a change of entitlement.20
As the terms of this statement clearly prove, what becomes evident in the opposition of all the minorities cited here is a new aspect of the revolutionary movement, a spreading-out of the forms of challenge to power which corresponds exactly to Foucault's notion of multiple and heterogeneous conflict. In this context, his interest in women is at once abstract and over-restrictive, for it underlines less the sex-specific character of womens' struggles than their inscription in a more general movement of revolt. He seems to say that what gives feminism a certain revolutionary value is the set of effects it operates in the field of knowledge, starting from the revendications of the political subjects known as women, who grant the movement its specificity. Foucault falls in with a common idea, to which I shall return later, when he says that the political and theoretical importance of feminism is located in its contribution to culture as a whole, its support for a project for the radical transformation of the order of knowledge in our society, in short, in a veritable conceptual transformation. Of the actual sex-specific nature of feminism, that is to say, the fact that it actually has to do with the status of women, he has this to add:
Regarding everything that is currently being said about the liberation of sexuality, what I want to make apparent is precisely that the object 'sexuality' is in reality an instrument formed a long while ago, and one which has constituted a centuries-long apparatus of subjection. The real strength of the women's liberation movements is not that of having laid claim to the specificity of their sexuality and the rights pertaining to it, but that they have actually departed from the discourse conducted within the apparatuses of sexuality.21
According to Foucault, feminism has therefore brought to light one of the main points in the modern system of subjection: sexuality. Because women have demonstrated that the knowledge which has been con-
structed around us is a belligerent knowledge, they constitute one of the most important loci of discourse. Foucault explains his position as follows:
People have been trying for a long time to pin women to their sexuality: they have been told for centuries, 'You are nothing but your sex'. And this sex, so the doctors added, is fragile, almost always ill and always a source of disease. 'You are the disease of man.' And this very ancient movement speeded up just before the eighteenth century, resulting in a pathologization of woman: the woman's body becomes the medical object par excellence ... Now, the feminist movements have taken up the challenge. The sex we are by nature? Well then, let us be it, but in its singularity, its irreducible specificity. Let's draw our conclusions from it, and let's reinvent our own type of political, economic, and cultural existence ... Always the same movement: to leave this sexuality in which people try to colonize them, and traverse it so as to move towards other affirmations.22
What then is the relevance of Foucault's thought for the debate currently under way among women about the ethical dimension and the political issues at stake in feminist struggles?
On the level of actual historiography, Foucault's stand has led to the discovery of certain archival practices and documents which are extremely significant for women. The research he has carried out on the family, and on prisons, in collaboration with feminist scholars such as Arlette Farge and Michelle Perrot, is evidence enough.23 Nevertheless, Foucault's ignorance of, or lack of reference to feminist scholarship is undeniable.
A collection of feminist essays edited by I. Diamond and L. Quinby attempts to assess the points of convergence between Foucault and feminism.24 Four main areas of intersection are brought out. Firstly, the body as site of power, a play of forces aiming both at discipline and resistance in the production of subjectivity. Of particular interest for feminists is the attention Foucault draws to the discourse of the law, medicine and education as being major normative forms whose role has been infamous in the history of women's bodies. That he should, however, take so little notice of the feminist agenda on these issues is a problematic point.
Secondly, the emphasis on the specific and local mode of operation of power: Foucault draws attention to the 'microphysics' of power, and though he does connect them to macro-instances, he constantly breaks down the over-emphasis that traditional liberal political theory, and also contemporary Marxist theory, had placed on 'power' as a substantive notion, which also resulted in over-stressing the importance of the 'state'.
Thirdly, the crucial role of discourse in producing both knowledge and power: discourse is the bridge between the material and the
theoretical; it also provides the basis for Foucault's critique of the distinction between science and ideology.
Fourthly, the critique of humanism, through the emphasis placed on the embodied, specific nature of the subject, as well as his/her relative unimportance in a process of knowledge production where, following the post-structuralist insight, the code precedes and is independent of the message.
While agreeing with these four general intersections, I would like to add that there is also a conceptual charge in Foucault's work, which can be extremely useful for feminism. It rests on two main pillars: the ethics of philosophy in terms of the quest for resistance to totalizing discourses, and the need to redefine materialism in such a way as to include the bodily materiality of the subject.
Foucault displaces and expands the notion of materialism, by inscribing it in the corpor(e)ality of the subject. In so doing he reveals and denounces a double trap which threatens feminism, like other social and political movements: on the one hand a sociologizing reductivism which, on the binary model of class struggle, sets the female individual in opposition to the male patriarchal system; on the other, the utopian model which makes 'women' an entity (on the) outside, foreign to the dominant system and not contaminated by it.
On the one hand, therefore, a separatist opposition to patriarchy, based on the politics of emancipation and the ethics of female solidarity against a common oppressor. On the other, the utopian dream of radical exteriority from the material and symbolic system. In Foucault's perspective, both these schemas of thought are shown to be unsatisfactory for they rest on a misapprehension as to the structure and the functioning of power, subjectivity and the process of discourse-production. Foucault proposes a precise reading of the technology of the body in our culture; he restores it to a complexity well beyond the boundaries set by either Marxism or psychoanalysis, 'the two fundamental bureaucracies of our culture'.25 By redefining the embodied structure of subjectivity Foucault deconstructs both utopianism and biological or social essen-tialism.
What emerges instead is the polymorphous network of discursive production in which every thinking subject is caught. There is no possible 'outside' in a system of this sort, for it invests the subject's corporeal field itself.
Rejecting the Marxist-Freudian notion of repression, Foucault also shows the illusory nature of theories of 'liberation' insofar as they seem to imply the existence of an authentic or real sexuality that would somehow be uncontaminated or 'outside' the ruling codes of our culture. This illusion is, for Foucault, not only theoretically misleading, but also politically dangerous. What becomes politically desirable is the new ethics of critical theory, that is to say the task of critical resistance to the modalities of power which structure discourse. The political func-
tion of the philosopher (as the typical intellectual) no longer consists of being the spokesperson for a group, or a representative consciousness:
The role of the intellectual is no longer to assume a place 'slightly in advance or to the side', in order to express everyone's silent truth; it is rather to struggle against the forms of power where it is both object and instrument: in the order of 'knowledge', 'truth', 'consciousness' and 'discourse'.26
What is thus refuted is the indignity of speaking for others, as well as the fundamental contemptibility of the belief in any global and univocal theory, indeed any royal road towards revolution, or the ultimate freedom: the last of the 'just' wars.
The main point of convergence between feminism and Foucault, therefore, is the importance granted to the sexuation of the subject and of his/her discursive practices. The evolution of Foucault's thought, from the archive to the analysis of the desiring subject, traces the stages in the sexuation of the discursive practices of philosophy. As he increasingly concentrates on this, Foucault comes to confront the masculine nature of the subject of philosophy. For instance, in relation to the morality of the ancient world he writes:
It was an ethics for men: an ethics thought, written, and taught by men, and addressed to men - to free men, obviously. A male ethics, consequently, in which women figured only as objects or, at most, as partners that one had at best to train, educate, and watch over when one had them under one's power, but stay away from when they were under the power of someone else (father, husband, tutor).27
The recognition of a centuries-old complicity between moral and theoretical authority and a masculine elite, however, does not lead Foucault to a critique of the masculine bias of philosophical discourse. It seems to me, rather, that he takes this phallocratic structure as one of the factors revealed by the crisis and the decline of the classical mode of philosophical enunciation. For Foucault, as for many other poststructuralists, this crisis is part of our historicity and our task is to try and move beyond it in an affirmative, not a nostalgic way. In my reading, Foucault's understanding of the masculine bias of theoretical discourse leads him first to emphasize the sexuation of this practice, which he opposes to the alleged universalism of phallogocentric thinking. In a second move, however, Foucault tries to go beyond sexuation and to propose the de-sexualization of discursive practices. In this respect, he works towards the redefinition of the other - of alterity as a whole - and consequently argues for a new ethics that would not be sexually biased.
Foucault's tactic - in trying to elaborate a new ethics - is to isolate the
modalities of control that the subject exerts on himself (the genderiza-tion is always one-way for Foucault: in the masculine), in his vital and impassable relation to the other. What is at stake for Foucault here is a new vision of alterity not according to the juridical model (intrinsically linked to the system of legitimation of the Law), but rather in terms of a dependence which is positive, because constitutive of self-consciousness.
By giving philosophy this dimension of askesis or of transformation of the self, of a progressive elaboration of the practices of the self, and above all, by posing the key question 'What is this "self" we must concern ourselves with?', Foucault advances the historical analysis of the forms of subjectification by the practices of desire of and in discourse. It is an analysis deeply opposed to the psychoanalytic premises which stress the priority of the relation of transference.
And yet, this putting into discourse of the self as a whole necessitates the presence of an other - the other as director of conscience, philosopher, friend, lover, and so on. The relation between subject, truth, and power leads in Foucault's work to the realization of the importance of the relational link for any ethics: that T cannot do without the other, that T only happen in the modalities of exchange with an other. In this sense, what Foucault offers is a genealogy for a new type of relation to others. The other, the addressee of a discourse that is an implicit quest and demand for truth, is also one of the elements that govern and administer its production.
Two points are worth noting here: firstly that, in order to legitimate this relational ethics he uses the example of classical male homosexuality in the pre-Christian era. The male homosexual bond thus acquires for him not only the status of a paradigm, but also functions as a lost horizon that got displaced in the coming of the new technologies of the self in Christianity. This is certainly not the case for female homosexuality, but more on this later.
The second point is that Foucault moves backwards in time, well before the crisis of modernity, in order to find an effective countermodel for a new type of subjectivity. As the Lacanian analysts, especially J. A. Miller, never cease to point out, this is a form of avoidance of the fundamental conceptual challenge of modernity: the notion of the split subject. It is as if Foucault wanted to bypass the challenge that psychoanalysis throws to modernity: that the subject is not one, but split, not universal, but sexed, gender-specific. The long dispute between Foucault and Lacan thus reaches the last act: Foucault is in line with the psychoanalytic critique of the philosophical position as being profoundly neurotic, dominated by the desire for mastery and totalizing synthesis. For Foucault, contemporary philosophy has the historically necessary but conceptually thankless task of having to face up to its incompletness, partiality, and lacunae. Theoretical reason must learn to give up its hegemonic role; it must return to its sources, to the relational
major political questions raised by feminism, leads to antagonism here. In keeping with the logic of his political theory, Foucault maintains that rape is reprehensible not because it is a sex-specific crime, an offence that one sex exercises over the other, but simply because it is a social offence. He takes a stand against the 'pan-sexualist' tendency of feminism, pushing to the extreme his critique of the notion that sexuality is repressed, and questions the need to penalize rape as a sexual crime.
Even within feminist theory, the debate on the nature of rape as a crime has always been rather polemical, especially since S. Brownmil-ler's influential work and some of the radical stances taken by feminists such as A. Dworkin and C. Mackinnon who see rape as paradigmatic of male sexuality and push for its penalization as a sexual crime. For Monique Plaza what is at stake in this discussion of rape is its sources: the concept of sexuality dominant in our society, embodied in a legal system, and the way in which the feminine is linked to it. Plaza argues that Foucault disregards the difference between the sexes; worse, having adopted an abstract position with regard to liberation struggles, he finds himself caught in a flagrant contradiction: on the one hand, he claims that there is nothing natural about sexuality, that it is a cultural product stemming from the modalities of power; on the other, he asks that rape as a social practice not be assimilated to a modality of legal and therefore, equally, social power. Monique Plaza concludes that this contradiction on the subject of rape reveals the existence of two opposing poles of interest: raped and rapists. Foucault's reflections on this theme fall short because he forgets the essential difference of the sexes, and its theoretical and political repercussions. In so doing, he tacitly aligns himself with the social system which oppresses women:
It is men's interests which need further scrutiny. For when they say that they find it problematic that a practice (which we find altogether repressive) be repressed (forbidden and sanctioned if it occurs), what are they saying if not that they want to defend the liberty that men currently have to repress us by rape? What are they saying if not that what they call their liberty is the repression of our bodies?®3
This for me is a fundamental question, one to which no reply is possible unless one accepts the terms in which it is posed. Foucault's contradictory conclusion concerning women seems to me to raise fairly serious problems for his own theory. In fact, as we have just seen, he is opposed to penalizing rape as such, saying that what must be punished in rape is not its sexual element, but the fact that it is criminal. In other words, the rapist can be judged because by raping a woman, he outrages the human person, or in other words, attacks the sovereignty of the individual. Which for me raises the following questions:
-	Where does Foucault locate the boundaries between the sexual and the human, that is, between what has to do with desire and the domain of the law, morality and its norms?
-	In what sense can one say that sexual specificity and the corollary distinction between two sexes no longer allows one to refer to a common notion of human being?
It is not crudely 'pansexual' to insist that Foucault's position is profoundly ambivalent in this respect: as if the notion of human being which he uses, without ever defining it, is neutralized when it comes to sexual difference. As if the concept of the body he is working with, a body fully immersed in a field of effects of power, miraculously escaped from the most widespread effect of the processes of subjectification of the individual: sexual difference. As if the Foucauldian body were immunized against this radical and fundamental differentiation.
As Maeghan Morris observes, Foucault is a profoundly androcentric thinker; analysis of the use of the noun 'man' in his texts will bear this out.31 Consequently, his reflections on the 'human being' are far from being sexually neutral or unbiased. I would go so far as to say that they establish an essentially masculine model: when Foucault speaks of the body, he is (almost always) speaking about the man's body. The masculine is thus kept to the level of the general, following centuries of patriarchal mental habits. This is how Foucault forgets, following tradition, the factor of sexual difference.
It therefore follows that the position Foucault takes on rape reveals a whole set of silences and omissions on the subject of women and the feminine throughout his work. The fact that the notion of power which Foucault develops rests on a masculine view of the body (and its power-effects), constitutes not so much a temporary amnesia as a flaw in his articulation of politics with the materiality of the body. In fact we have the right to ask what really can be the political use and theoretical value of a definition of sexual liberation based on the desexualization of conflicts, which could however in no circumstances be used with reference to the sex-specific struggles of women (or homosexuals, although this is a different question).
As N. Schor points out: 'What is it to say that the discourse of sexual indifference/pure difference is not the last or, (less triumphantly) the latest ruse of phallocentrism?'32
Within his chosen conceptual framework, that of the analysis of the modalities of the relation between the subject, truth, and knowledge, Foucault remains faithful to his initial project, the deconstruction of philosophical subjectivity. Thus if the translation from the technologies of subjection to practices of the self constitutes an enlightenment, the zones of shadow are not for all that reduced. One of the dark spots is the place, discourse, and practices of subjectification and truth of and about
women. As I argued earlier, male sexuality in general, and homosexuality in particular in its real and symbolic forms, may have acquired established status in philosophy, but female homosexuality will never find a place there.
This is an extremely problematic point insofar as the discussion on homosexuality plays a crucial role in all radical theories of subjectivity. By enthroning male homosexuality as the lost paradigm, Foucault is diametrically opposed to the feminist analysis that situates the social contract in a male homosocial bond of sublimated male homosexuality requiring the circulation of women as objects of exhange among men. Feminist scholars as different from each other as Rubin and Irigaray have stressed this point, also signalling that female homosexuality is one of the dark continents of patriarchy. It seems to me that on this point the dialogue between Foucault and feminism simply breaks down. After 1977-8 Foucault's project consisted in thinking Western philosophy of the subject beyond the Law. He focused less on the juridical side of Greco-Roman philosophy (as linked to the legitimation of the city) than on the ethical, connected with interpersonal relations.
Women are doubly excluded: they are neither civil subjects nor desiring ones. In this sense Foucault's thinking, with all its omissions regarding the specific modes of enunciation and political practices of women, is revealing of those univocal gender-blind and therefore partisan conceptual habits, which make most theoretical discourses sexist.
The silence concerning the place of women is not simply unacceptable from a political point of view - although this is a sufficient reason for opposing it: in effect it constitutes a scientific error, an unsatisfactory, inaccurate theory.
Therefore feminists' analyses must be taken not as accidental but rather as a critical assessment of the very foundations of theories. For once the 'blind spot' or 'dark continent' has been denounced as the scientific and political lacuna that it is, it is sufficient and necessary proof of the invalidity of a given theory.
For this reason, to show that Foucault omits sexual difference amounts to showing that the theoretical schema which he suggests as the explanatory model of power and the processes of subjectification is both very broad and too reductive. Broad enough to include among the effects of power a great many situations, but reductive in the obstinate silence it maintains with regard to the feminine. This raises two types of questions:
1	With reference to Foucault's thought itself: what exactly is he talking
about when he talks of the human body and its effects of power?
Which body? In what field of power? And who benefits from this
strategic analysis?
2	On the level of a feminist critical stance: in what terms is it possible to
formulate a radical critique of the numerous omissions of the (male) philosophers concerning the body and its power-effects?
But before condemning Foucault's aporias outright, let us consider, for comparative purposes, another example of ambient discourse on the feminine: that offered us by Jacques Derrida. The hypothesis I am suggesting is that if on the one hand it is not enough to denounce the silences and omissions of philosophers concerning the specificity of the feminine dimension, on the other hand it is still less acceptable to justify the silence or the foreclosure of woman as the effect of an ancient metaphorization.
The Becoming-Woman of Philosophy
Derrida
Question: In the light of your text, would it not be possible to find a way of doing philosophy which is feminine?
J. Derrida: I said 'the woman (of) Nietzsche', the 'woman Nietzsche'-at the point where he affirms, at the moment he is and loves 'woman' as affirmative, he writes, as it were, with 'woman's hands'. Were you
asking me a personal question? I would love to write like (a) woman I am trying..
The most striking contemporary example of metaphorization of the feminme with a view better to assimilate it to a falsely neutral mode of inking is the Derridean idea of the 'becoming-woman' of philosophy, everal feminist scholars have expressed reservations about this, and nevertheless the deconstructive mode has seduced vast numbers of otherwise critical feminist theorists.2 As we have already seen, Derrida's treatment of the 'other' of the philosophical ratio is linked to his analysis ot the language governing the 'scene' of philosophy.
Defining philosophy as a 'metaphysical illusion', that is, a barrier against the open-ended possibility of madness, Derrida posits the originary deferral of the philosophical subject in relation to the process of signification, of meaning-production. This non-coincidence of the subject with the historical process of meaning is marked by the term differance, as both deferral of (temporal lapse) and differing from (spatial interval) a single-ended meaning, in an intersecting game of spatio-temporal disconnection8. Neither a noun nor a verb, the notion of differance is a tactic, a way of bracketing off within the text the power of the logocentric voice.	r
The Derridean operation consists in bringing into play this differance within the dominant texts of philosophy, especially in the phenomeno-
logical tradition. The philosophical text is in fact governed by the codes of 'onto-theological' language, which gives Western thought its distinct character: the illusion of presence, of a fixed point, of a synthesizing whole which takes the place of the subject. This logocentric discourse plays a normative function in philosophy. The solution Derrida proposes to this endemic disease of philosophy is the eventual possibility of 'unveiling', within the texts, the traces of their adherence to and therefore complicity with this onto-theological mode, that is the signifying code of philosophy par excellence. Not with a view to direct confrontation, in a belligerent style, but rather in the hope of managing to confound its effects and shake its foundations.
The strategy consists of undoing the text's intended meaning by pursuing that text well beyond the meaning it intends to purport, to its limits, margins, to the secrets and silences which govern the production of meaning. There is more to the text, in fact, than its stated intentions, there is more to it than what it self-consciously intends to state. As a textual artifact philosophy does not escape from the common rule: it is made of language, and as such it is locked in the prison-house of linguistic enunciation. The superiority of literature over philosophy consists in its proximity to pathos, rather than logos (as we saw in the previous chapter), that is to say in a lack of illusion about the power of conscious thought. It is a question of erasing the single-minded system of meaning erected by the logocentric economy, so as to clear a space in which to reassert the originary structure of the subject as being between presence and absence. As a speaking being, made of flesh and language, the subject does not coincide with his/her consciousness but is in constant process between the two. Taking seriously the insight of de Saussure's semiology, Derrida insists on the fact that the 'sign' replaces something (object or idea) which is not there to begin with, something whose being can only be evoked as being-absent.
According to Derrida, the illusion of philosophy rests on a profound misunderstanding of the linguistic sign; it is in this respect that Derrida and Foucault disagree over the question of absence in the infinite variety of its nuances: exclusion, disqualification, oppression, negation, symbolic murder, and so on. Where they diverge is on the location of the site of alterity and of the 'radically other'. According to Derrida, the dominant idea of philosophy perpetuates the illusion of the coincidence of words and things, thus erasing the traces of the originary absence, the 'generative void' and the game of non-identity which alone is productive of meaning.
Derrida's positioning in relation to the philosophical text is most significant: he is both party to the codified discourse of philosophy and marginal in relation to it. As a thinker of modernity and therefore of the end of the Cartesian plenitude in which subject and rational consciousness are all one, Derrida attempts to salvage the philosophical corpus, without, however, being completely taken in by it. His denunciation of
the domination exercised by the notion of Being - the ultimate metaphysical illusion - as keystone of the system of rationality, takes the form of setting up textual effects of a quite different order. At different stages of his work these textual strategies are called: dijferance, margins, grammatology, dissemination, becoming-woman, and so on. Variations on a central theme, these different notions produce texts that can be seen as performative, that is as performing the deconstructive game Derrida theorizes.
Taking his bearings above all from Nietzsche and Freud - quarrelling with Lacan along the way - Derrida suggests the hypothesis of a fundamental coextensivity between the economy of logocentrism and the logic of the unconscious. Just as the discourse of psychoanalysis shakes up the unitary consciousness of the subject, so Derrida's deconstructive operation denies the synthetic unity of philosophical sense, in the name of an-other economy of discursive forces, a sort of textual unconscious.
On the grounds of the isomorphism between the human psyche and the philosophical system of signification, the sexual and the textual, Derrida places the 'meaning' of the text in a position of radical alterity in relation to the metaphysical illusion of presence. This notion of the text as 'other' implies that the illusion of 'mastery' is shattered, first and foremost that of philosophy itself; it must part once and for all from the illusion of ominipotent manipulation of meanings, to come back to the never-ending play of signs.
It is at this point in his reflections that Derrida sexualizes the practice of philosophy, by associating the illusion of the unitary presence of the subject with a masculine phantasy: logocentrism is a phallic posture (not that this prevents some who are empirically female from adopting it). The hypothesis of the existence of a textual unconscious implies that the subject is sexed; not unlike Lacan, Derrida calls 'woman' that which evades and is in excess of the phallologocentric structure of subjectivity.
The debate between Derrida and Lacan on the place and function of woman and the feminine sums up many other differences between the two thinkers in terms of their view of subjectivity and the structure of the unconscious. The texts of this debate, Lacan's seminar 'La lettre volee'3 and Derrida's response 'Le Facteur de la verite',4 have been the object of extensive analyses which need not be repeated here.5 It may be important, however, to clarify the points of disagreement between Lacan and Derrida, following the latter's explanations in Positions. Derrida's central criticism of Lacan is that he attempts to put together the question of Being with that of psychoanalysis, turning the 'talking cure' into a new metaphysical system, a new philosophy of subjectivity. According to Derrida, however, psychoanalysis does not have the conceptual means of dealing with the ontological question; as a therapy, psychoanalysis is fundamentally a practice and any attempt to formalize it theoretically can only result, argues Derrida, in a normative scheme of
thought. Lacan's definition of the Phallus as the signifier of desire is a
normative model.	.	,
Further, Derrida argues that Lacan over-masculinizes the sigmher and as such he is misogynistic, in that he accepts it as structurally necessary to the constitution of subjectivity that there should be no symbolic representation of the woman, insofar as she is in excess of the symbolic system of which the phallus is the main signifier. For Derrida, on the other hand, the symbolic absence of the feminine is the source of its strength as a counter-strategy by which to destabilize the symbolic. Derrida's emphasis on the 'becoming-woman and on dissemination is an attempt to answer Lacan on the question of whether the symbolic is an unchangeable structural necessity, or whether it can be challenged.
This results in a major difference as to the structure of the unconscious; for Derrida it is an empty space, not a structured language. Turning Saussure to his advantage, Derrida stresses the play of presence and absence implicit in the very structure of the sign and emphasizes the importance of returning language to this fundamental truth. The strategy of 'writing' as grammatology is Derrida's answer to this problem. For Lacan, the structure of language is indivisible: no matter how much you may split open the language, the words, the syntax, the symbolic law remains operational even in the smallest linguistic utterances. For Derrida, on the other hand, the sign can be split, it can be operated upon; the phonemic envelope can be burst open so as to display the dualistic game of presence and absence which makes language function. By taking to extremes the structure of the sign Derrida undoes the metaphysical discourse of being, whereas in his reading, Lacan reduces it to the discourse of the unconscious.
This has powerful repercussions for the question of the feminine, for Lacan the structural absence of woman from the symbolic is necessary in order to sustain the common human drive or aspiration towards ontological security, towards a stable point which assures mastery. Woman is therefore for Lacan the site of truth in that she unveils the fundamental ontological structure of being, she embodies the Law. For Derrida, however, the term woman signifies the metaphysical illusion par excellence. Instead of being assimilated to the question of being, and of representing the truth of this being, it is rather synonymous with the illusory nature of being, it is the sign of the false necessity that allows the symbolic order to function along phallologocentric lines. Woman is the name for the precondition for thinking, it is differance insofar as it refers to an originary space beyond dualistic dichotomies, or before them.
Within the frame of the project of the deconstruction of phallologo-centrism as leitmotif of Western philosophical speculation, Derrida has posited the importance of the feminine as a position, a place of enunciation. The feminine as indeterminacy, oscillation, play of veils and simulacra, is given as a no-where, the creative void at the heart of
the will-to-know, the drive to theorize. Non-truth of the truth, woman is sign, and therefore text, space of writing (ecriture); she is the mark of an excess, of a surplus-value through which the truth of the split subject can be heard. This is why when philosophy undertakes a genealogical deconstruction of its own premises, it cannot avoid the question of the feminine; this is the inevitable horizon for the philosophy of modernity.
Faithful to the project of defending philosophy as the school of democracy, free-thinking and freedom, in a world that is becoming more and more conformist,6 Derrida turns the discipline back in on itself. The philosophical space is presented as both pedagogical activity and essentially textual practice. The philosophical text is Derrida's point of reference; it is also the basis for his politics, which rests on the defence of the text itself.
If his attention lights on the feminine it is because the text of texts, the place of writing is THE woman, the feminine. Derrida places great value on writing as the activity that unveils the structures both of the sign itself (a phonemic structure) and of philosophy as logocentrism. This also has repercussions for the notion of the feminine, to which the process of writing is indissociably linked.
In line with psychoanalytic theory, Derrida situates the feminine in remoteness, distance, the non-said:
There is no such thing as the essence of woman because woman averts, she is averted of herself. Out of the depths, endless and unfathomable, she engulfs and distorts all vestige of essentiality, of identity, of property. And the philosophical discourse, blinded, founders on these shoals and is hurled down these depthless depths to its ruin. There is no such thing as the truth of woman, but it is because that non-truth is 'truth'. Woman is but one name for the non-truth of truth.7
The metaphorical value accorded to woman comes from the fact that in the production of discourse, according to Derrida, the feminine has a floating value, it is a perennial empty case. As such, the feminine is the simulacrum of the non-coincidence of the subject with him/herself, of non-identity, and therefore of distanciation from logocentrism. The Derridean stance, with its definition of truth as a phenomenon related to seduction, to the indefinable which escapes the univocity of reason, makes it possible to refer to the equivalence between this uncertain truth and woman, or, more precisely, what is feminine in woman: 'That which will not be pinned down by truth is, in truth - feminine.'8 Hence the assimilation of writing to the feminine, the homology between the feminine and what, in writing, escapes meaning. Beneath this logical organization lies the feminine, omnipresent image, never defined except in terms of lack, void, black hole: 'She is woman precisely because she herself does not believe in truth itself, because she does not believe in
what she is, in what she is believed to be, and what she thus is not/9
The zero value of the feminine in the system of representation is confirmed; but in this instance, the feminine is used by the (male) thinker so as to avoid confronting the problem of the reality of women and their relation to truth, both of which have been declared fluid and indefinable. What is more, this inexpressibility is raised to the status of absolute truth: not only is woman indefinable, but she becomes besides the sign of unrepresentability itself; definitively other than the system of truth. Derrida can therefore make the enunciation of truth a typically masculine 'habit': it is man who believes in woman as in truth. This formulation might in other respects seem banal, but constitutes a fundamental moment in Derridean thinking, on the basis of which a hypothesis concerning the historical evolution of truth has been suggested.
In the earliest days of philosophical discourse, argues Derrida, truth was Platonic and woman was, obviously, excluded from it. But when truth had become dissociated from philosophy, in the moment of crisis known as modernity, the connection between woman and truth became manifest and the feminine appeared as a philosophical issue, as the 'double' of a system where rationality and masculinity had functioned together. It was then that the idea of the 'becoming woman of the idea as the presence or presentation of truth' evolved.10 Historically, therefore, truth has become woman at the moment when philosophy can only survive in the becoming woman of the idea, that is, in the affirmation of the non-truth of truth, in the acceptance of its lack: 'Its veils float in the distance, the dream of death begins, it is woman.'11
The inscription of the feminine on the interface of the subject's relationship with truth in its representations, that is, in the place of the simulacrum, locates woman in the empty heart of the Derridean system of deconstruction. Woman as emblem of the non-truth of truth returns us to the problematic of the exhaustion of the normative and legislative role of philosophical discourse as a discourse of mastery. In the Derridean perspective, the feminine is, precisely, the sign of the impossibility for the subject of modernity to present him/herself as self-conscious, in the transparency dreamed of by Descartes.
The hiatus between the totality and what can be known of it, between the whole and the utterable or the intelligible, is the place of an originary violence, or rather of a separation which takes the place of origin. In the beginning is already the replay, the repetition of the quest for an impossible unity,12 the traces of which will continue to make themselves heard. The founding texts of philosophy, the Platonic dialogues, are but repetition and re-counting of something which has always already taken place: the Socratic teaching. Truth is always already something that is insofar as it has-been.
Derrida's position on the question of the receding origin and the sexuation of the subject can be broadly divided into two main periods.
According to Spivak13 there is an early phase in which the metaphoriza-tion of women as 'other-than' is presented as the necessary precondition of logocentric thought. Both the sexuation of the subject and the importance of sexual difference are thus recognized, leading to an intense dialogue with psychoanalysis. In the second phase, however, Derrida, under the more direct influence of Heidegger, posits the originary moment, and therefore the status of the subject in terms of
'ontological difference'.	,
What characterizes this phase of Derrida's thought is the fact that he considers the place or moment of origin of the subject as beyond sexual difference, outside sexuality altogether.14 For neither Derrida nor Heidegger is ontological difference sexual difference. In his commentary on Heidegger Derrida is very clear about this: he asserts that the subject is of neither one sex nor the other. In the beginning is the not-one, neither one nor two and certainly not zero: a neutrality which comes from the fact that Being is beyond sexuality.
Furthermore Derrida argues that sexual difference introduces the very prototype of dualism: it establishes dichotomies, classing subjects in categories sexed one way or the other: masculine or feminine. Sexual difference will henceforth be the sign of this originary loss or scission, a mark of infamy. With the sexuation of the subject we return to the eroded terrain of difference understood as opposition, that is, war, rivalry, death.
It follows logically - and on this point Derrida is faithful to the Heideggerian formulation of the problem — that sexual difference is a derived given, and is not constitutive of the subject. It also follows that it bears at its centre the sign of a belligerent and murderous dichotomy, the logic of dialectical opposition, which also goes by the name of the 'war of the sexes'.
In the course of the elaboration of his thought, Derrida thus arrives at a spectacular reversal of the poles of sexuation: he asserts that, being the very paradigm of the logic of dialectical opposition, sexual difference is an obstacle which it would be better to overcome in the attempt to redefine subjectivity. To overcome the sexuation of the subject, and move beyond sexual difference is an enterprise which requires the valorization of everything in a discourse of difference that privileges relationship rather than opposition, gift rather than challenge, the offer of love rather than the declaration of war. The feminine is the bearer of a number of relational values. By contrast, the so-called phallic position rests on the defence of the law as normative power, and of dialectical opposition as mode of relation. For Derrida, feminism is the type of phallic, normative, normalizing and hateful discourse.
These two different phases in Derrida's thought have direct repercussions for his views of the feminine and of Woman. The earlier one, resting on the sexuation of the subject, leads him to the relative valorization of the feminine as difference or counter-strategy. The
second one, resting on the desexualization of the subject, results not only in the celebration of the feminine but also in a vehement attack on the feminist position. The subject of feminism comes into being in Derrida's thought as the new form of the phallic logocentric stance. In other words: in the early phase Derrida attacks male phallologocentr-ism, whereas in the more recent work he appoints the feminists to the place of phallocracy, thus freeing the philosopher, which he is, to a creative and phallus-free position, a 'becoming-woman' of philosophy. The opposition between women and feminists thus finds a new version in Derrida's work: the feminine position as synonym of deconstruction of logocentrism is the new philosophical stance, whereas the phallolo-gocentric brutality is reserved for the 'butch'-like theoreticians of feminism.
Derrida's anti-feminism is so well expressed and so explicitly admitted that it does not warrant long discussion; he has explained his position at length in several interventions, particularly in the United States. In some of his most recent public interventions on, or rather against women's studies, Derrida attempts to 'apply' his idea of becoming-woman to feminism itself.15 By saying that women's organized struggles demand equality with men in terms of castration and lack, he argues that the feminist woman is a man manque, and that homologation is her fate. So feminists are supposedly seeking nothing other than a new phallic order centred on the primacy of the woman-subject, a new law, a new proto-totalitarian order. An-other phallic referent that leaves the system untouched.
In short, by not recognizing that the true force of the feminine rests on its being the sign of silence, the non-said, absence, and therefore on the fact that women do not speak as subjects, Derrida concludes that what feminism wants is the castration of women as well as men.
We shall see shortly how, in Cixous's rereading, Derridean thought is turned into a tool by which distinctions are made among women in terms of their relation to a feminine whose corporeality is explored in textual games of fascination, glorification and emulation. The Derridean argument concerning the becoming woman of truth rests on the image of woman as guardian angel of a very specific imaginary order attributed to the female subject: the seduction and the 'dream of death' are the feminine precious balms which ensure the survival of a masculine discourse of truth.
These disconcerting conclusions emanate from a misunderstanding and downright ignorance of feminist texts, of the history of women's struggles, and from a carelessness as regards the theoretical aspects of feminism, coupled with the determination to denigrate them. The phallic nature he attributes to the feminist position, as opposed to the place of truth to which Derrida assigns the feminine, forms a symmetry that allows him to put forward the line of argument he holds so dear, namely the distinction between ontological difference in Heidegger's
thought and sexual difference. In the course of his discourse on the feminine, Derrida plays (out) the remains of his relationship with his spiritual 'father', whose legacy weighs heavily on his shoulders.
Safeguarding some supposed 'neutrality' of the subject, isolating the moment of sexuation from that of subjectification, postulating a 'neither masculine nor feminine' as a space which can be thought and envisaged: these are just so many manoeuvres destined to occult a fundamental omission or absence in the founding thought: Heidegger's. What remains is the question of the place: metaphorization or omission of the feminine within this scheme of thought. Is the feminine, raised to the level of simulacrum of truth, in a displacement that has been so lucidly analysed by Spivak,16 something other than the images and representations of woman? How does the feminine as the 'dark side' of Western theoretical discourse relate to the speech, the intelligence and the discursivity of real-life women? And if it does not relate to it at all: what is its value for feminism? Is the fact that Derrida actually praises and valorizes the feminine stance a sufficient condition to alter the rules of discursive appropriation of woman as the other, which feminists have singled out as the persistent trend in Western theoretical discourse? How is one to assess the fact that the glorification of the feminine results in such a violent dismissal of feminism? How does Derrida's position in this respect differ from more traditional forms of misogyny?
As if a thousand-year long exclusion could be redeemed by a sudden glorification, women's ancestral absence from theory - which is nothing other than the history of an oppression - becomes the guarantee of an assured future ... for the philosopher, that is, for man. My belief that feminists need to develop a genealogical study of the relationship between knowledge and truth, that is to say of the process of subjectification, leads me to question Derrida's conclusion. The 'becoming-woman' as a mark of sexual indeterminacy in the text, promoted as the condition of the future of philosophy, is only one more hyperbolic affirmation of which I am deeply suspicious and whose content and implications need careful scrutiny.
As soon as it is applied as a theoretical tool, this deconstructive emphasis on the feminine as philosophy's 'becoming-woman' is revealed as the imposture it is. At its best, it gives rise to a French version of positive action: a general affirmation of good will with respect to the role of women in the renewal of the philosophical enterprise. This attitude was evident within the discourse for the defence of philosophy inspired by Derrida and his group GREPH.17 Here is an example of the terms in which the question of women as teachers of philosophy has been posed within this framework:
And as the struggle for philosophy is also a struggle for freedoms and
democracy, I think that philosophy must rethink the forms of aliena-
tion and oppression quite as much as those of freedom, by reflecting on this new and irreversible historical fact: the women's liberation movement. And since, throughout its history, philosophy has often been a party to the battle for freedom, in the face of state strangulation of all critical thought, the 'women philosophers' (students, teachers, and every woman), can give this combat a new dimension which concerns society as a whole.18
Women's struggles for the freedom of society as a whole: feminism may therefore serve to deepen philosophical reflection and to transform its practices. The 'happy coincidence' of the emergence of women's struggles and the crisis of the philosophical subject is never analysed as such, but rather greeted as an incontestable gain in a wilful effort that I find somewhat suspect. We shall see in a later chapter how the feminist philosopher M. Le Doeuff, who was also a member of the GREPH, developed this point into an original critique of the philosophical order.
'Alone at last' - could women and philosophers join forces to save what remains of the philosophical discipline? It is by reflecting on women and about their movement that philosophy can be renewed, it seems.
The Derridean attitude can however have still worse results. Take Sarah Kofman's book Aberrations for instance.19 On the basis of the Derridean theorem which makes of woman the missing link in the signifying chain, and therefore the key to the process of writing, Kofman analyses Comte's thought and infers that positivism, in its content as much as in its objective and rational style, can be explained as a compensation for a profoundly repressed feminity. His arguments are seen in terms of a repressed sexuality, this primary psychologism provides the guideline of the philosophical interpretation. Since intellectual conception is comparable to maternal conception, there is no difference between engendering a new philosophy and giving birth to a child. This parallel serves as analytic grid to Sarah Kofman: Comte, unconsciously dominated by the desire for a womb, is a failed mother; this denies him any conscious lucidity and objectivity.
So what constitutes the becoming-woman of Auguste Comte? Firstly a perverse relationship to writing, which has allowed him to compensate (for) his deep desire to be a mother but which has given birth only to a badly written, and therefore unloved, theoretical product; secondly, his scant subsequent self-esteem, which led him to near-decline, as illustrated by his marriage to a prostitute.
At the end of the work, I admit that I have still not understood how the becoming-woman can help us to understand Comte's thought. What is the point of using the term 'becoming-woman' in the analysis of masculine texts when it is clear that the study bears on the vicissitudes and the internal evolution of a system closed - and foreclosed - to
women, that is, philosophy? Moreover, this inception of the term 'feminine' is full of the worst prejudices of the patriarchal system and perpetuates some of its most ancient and pernicious theoretical habits.
It should be added in all fairness to Sarah Kofman that in her later works she comes back to this issue and analyses more critically Derrida's methodology. In Nietzsche et la scene philosophique, especially in the chapter 'Baubo', Kofman makes sharper distinctions between the figurations of Woman in Nietzsche and Derrida, focusing her attention more and more on the affirmative power of the feminine.20 The affirmation still concerns the unveiling of the non-centred nature of truth, and still remains related to the non-truth of truth, but Kofman's appraisal of it becomes more positive for women. Her criticism of Derrida comes into focus in 'Qsl cloche'.21 Finally, Kofman's own contribution to feminist philosophy should be mentioned, especially Le respect des femmes.22
Deleuze and the Becoming-Minority of Women
The third example of current theorizations of women I have chosen to examine is Deleuze's thought. The following passage offers a clear introduction:
We have to distinguish between the majority, as a homogeneous and constant system, and the minority, as on the one hand sub-systems, and on the other, the becoming-minority as process, both existent and potential, a creative possibility. The problem is never in gaining the majority, or even in putting in place a new constant. There is no becoming majority, majority is not a becoming. Women, regardless of their number, are a minority, definable as a state or a sub-set; but they only create by rendering possible a becoming, which is not their property, which they still have to enter, including those who are not women.23
Deleuze presents the becoming-woman, the 'becoming-minority, as a way of moving beyond the dialectical antagonism between majority and minority, so as to arrive at a redefinition of human consciousness; for, he says, women constitute a minority cultural group, a sub-set of the patriarchal system. His thesis rests, like the others, on a certain desexualization, insofar as belonging to a minority is assumed to involve a creative and liberating determination (as opposed to the immobility of the monolithic majority) which is not a prerogative of women but the basis of a new subjectivity to be discovered by all those - men and women alike - who recognize that they are in a minority. Deleuze proposes a new scheme of human subjectivity, a new way of thinking
the human being, beyond the Hegelian opposition between being and non-being, as being in process, in becoming. The goal of the process of liberation thus described is not to transform the powerless into the powerful or the slaves into the masters; it aims to surmount the dialectical system in order to arrive at a non-hegemonic form of consciousness. Women have a special and privileged role to play in the development of this revolutionary awareness, but they are not the only active subjects.
The nature of this development will be clearer if it is placed in the context of Deleuze's work as a whole. Deleuze reconceptualizes the whole scene of philosophy in a manner that is very different from Derridean deconstruction, but also quite comparable to it. Like Derrida, Deleuze concentrates on the 'other', on difference as a structural necessity of logocentrism. Unlike Derrida, however, and following the Foucauldian approach to philosophy, Deleuze does not grant any methodological priority either to the text or to the structure of the sign. His focus is rather, as I argued in the previous chapter, the image of thought, that is, the way in which in the metaphysical tradition, the process of thinking implies the application of specific principles of identity and resemblance between the possibility of representation and the actuality of that which is represented. This normative image of thought has dominated Western philosophy, fixing it in the conviction that being is one, that it coincides with language, and speaks the language of reason. To this monolithic vision of being, Deleuze opposes his notion of becoming.
In other words, the process of subversion that Deleuze advocates does not aim at a mere reversal of the balance of power, but rather at overcoming the dialectic of identity/otherness which governs classical philosophical thought. Women have a special role to play in this process, insofar as they have been the referents for a certain vision of the 'feminine' as simulacrum, or structural 'other' of the classical system of representation. Although women are not the only minority concerned by and involved in criticizing dialectical dualism, they are nonetheless crucial. Thus, Deleuze recognizes that the feminine is one of the constant elements of this system, not as a necessary symbolic absence (Lacan) or as an alternative strategy (Derrida); rather, it acts as one of the preconditions for conceptuality. It is worth keeping in mind that for Deleuze, conceptual thought, like all thinking, is a state of intensity and a process of transformation. It is not a cerebral activity determined by a mathematical model of reasoning.
According to Deleuze, to read a text is to enter a process of letting go, of passing beyond: this 'beyond' the text, underlying all codification, is a field of intensities, that is to say of affirmative forces, fluxes and affects which Deleuze presents as movements and speed, annulling all distance between inside and outside. This process designs a space of pure
identity and of difference without negation; the subject that enters this process is a transformer of energy, an assembly of unlimited, unmediated libidinal drives in a pure state. Similarly, he defines thought itself as speed, velocity travelling across different layers of experience, but whose displacement depends neither on the laws of causality, nor on the coding of the signifier. Thinking is a process of nomadic displacing of a receptive self. This is why Deleuze suggests that philosophical thought is produced not in philosophy as institution and critical tradition, but elsewhere. Philosophy, he concludes, is everything that in art, literature, science, and so forth, undoes the classical, normative image of thinking, displaces the frontiers of thought, enabling it to become more and more open to the multiple and the heterogeneous. Deleuze rejects the notion of the sacred text, and tries to grasp what, precisely, evades the code of meaning, what summons the 'escape lines', or Tines of transgression' and calls into question the actual production of meaning.
He distinguishes between the lines which articulate meaning by stratifying it, and those which undo its stratification. He then sets against the vertical immobility of the classical metaphor of the tree of knowledge, the symbol for truth, the mobile horizontality of the rhizome:
In contrast to centred (even pluricentred) systems, with their hierarchized communication and their pre-established connections, the rhizome is an a-centred, non-hierarchical and non-signifying system.
It has no general rule, no organizing Memory or central automaton, and is defined uniquely by a circulation of states.24
This notion of the circulation of states in a non-hierarchical system serves as the basis for Deleuze's analysis of classical philosophy, and represents the hypothesis from which a new definition of this discipline may emerge. Like most modern thinkers, Deleuze's starting point is the death of the subject, defined in terms of the dissolution of the identity principle; these are the terms in which his critique of representation is articulated. Adequatio rei et intellectui: the reciprocity this phrase establishes between the thinking subject and the moral (rational) order of the universe affirms the primacy of Reason. Throughout his critique of the subject, Deleuze suggests an idea of reason which would decode the model of knowledge, and puts forward a materialist view of human consciousness.
Translated into epistemological terms, this stance is associated with belief in the collective nature of utterances; in other words, the speaking subject is not one but always already a plurality. In pedagogical terms it results in the rejection of the hierarchical order of knowledge, and therefore of any possessor of knowledge. But it is in terms of methodology that the repercussions are the most important.
For philosophy does not provide an answer; the formulation of questions must take the place of the search for solutions.
Thus we must break with a long-standing habit of thought, which makes us consider the problematic as a subjective category of our knowledge, an empirical moment which probably only marks the imperfection of our procedure, the sad necessity in which we find ourselves of not knowing in advance, and which will disappear with the acquisition of knowledge.25
Deleuze emphasizes that since Hegel philosophy has been trying to express difference without negation, by using the Nietzschean term 'transmutation' to indicate the moment when the negative (or the reactive) is converted into the affirmative, in this way marking the triumph of positive forces and joy over the reactive forces of resentment. He argues that the affirmation of difference as pure positivity inevitably entails the abolition of the dialectic of negation, in favour of multiple, nomadic thought. 'Multiple' does not mean the dispersal of forces in a given field, but rather, a redefinition of the embodied subject in terms of desire and affectivity, situated in the element of speed, that is to say, time. The multiple is whatever is not attached to any principle of identity and unity, anything that knows how to put into play the differences that constitute the affirmative powers of the bodily subject and, through a game of differences, produces meaning. The multiple is what expresses difference in its eternal becoming, in its multiplicity of meaning.
This view of multiplicity influences the notion of 'nomadic thought' which is in fact, literally, an inversion of Leibnitz's 'monadology'. For Leibnitz, in effect, the monad is both subject and term of representation. The differences between monads depend on their respective degrees of perception, and on the clarity of their vision of the universe as a whole. But what makes monadology a system is that, despite its apparent singularity, each part of the whole is traversed by a common principle which links it to the other elements, so that the whole is greater than the sum of its parts. Like puppets manipulated by their master, in Leibnitz's thought, each 'window' open onto the unlimited universe of being is circumscribed by its own position in this universe.
Deleuze subverts this vision of one, steady central point of reference, a normative principle of rationality as the privileged viewpoint, seeing without being seen, as in Foucault's notion of the Panopticon. He severs the thread which links the puppets to the master and lets them circulate freely in space, that is to say no longer activated by a central power but through the multiple effects of attraction and repulsion of spatial entities, bodies intersecting with each other. Deleuze gives up the quest for ideas which are just, which would conform to the dominant system of signification, and prefers 'just ideas', temporary coalitions of expressive forces, of intellectual desires. The activity of thinking thus acquires
an astonishing freedom, which brings it closer to artistic creation than to a geometrical or mathematical model of thought.
An idea, however, 'just an idea', is neither so common nor so easy. Deleuze's philosophy undertakes to free thought from its subjection to the great intellectual bureaucracies: it aims at proving and enacting the affirmative power of thought. Every idea is multiple in itself, constituted by differential elements and modes of perception. In accordance with this multiplicity, which is the sign of the positive and non-individual value of every utterance, Deleuze proposes a new role for subjectivity. He formulates it as a new form of impersonality, a new materialism: 'We believe in a world in which individuations are impersonal and singularities pre-individual: in 'one' in all its splendour.'26
The thinking subject must be dissolved into the elements which compose him/her; these elements are affective, not rational, pathos, not logos, reason itself being only one possible way of affecting the body. In adopting this stance, Deleuze emphasizes the notion of 'intensity', by setting it in opposition to representation, because it expresses the degree of affirmative power of a body, and is therefore capable of demonstrating difference: 'The individual in intensity recovers his psychic image neither in the organization of the Ego nor in the specificity of the I; on the contrary, he recovers it in the cracked I and the dissolved Ego, and in the correlation between them.'27
Deleuze suggests moving beyond the dialectical philosophical schema which makes the Ego the object of the subject I, to envisage affective or energetic relations as the basis for the production of meaning. He introduces his impersonal view of subjectivity, elaborating it in the course of his critique of psychoanalysis. The latter is, for Deleuze, yet another variation or method of application of the classical principle of representation.
Psychoanalysis's great discovery was desiring production, productions of the unconscious. But with Oedipus, this discovery was hastily concealed by a new idealism: the unconscious as factory has been replaced by a classical theatre; the unities of production of the unconscious have been replaced by representation.28
Deleuze and Guattari put the case for 'schizo-analysis', which the latter will develop more fully into a new form of therapy. Rejecting psychoanalysis as another dominant system of representation implies the critique of the key principles of this practice: the Phallus as transcendental signifier; the Oedipal relationship in the transference that links the patient to the analysts in a therapeutic contract; desire as lack, with the related notions of phantasy and the dialectics of identification.
The thesis of schizo-analysis is simple: desire is a machine, a synthesis
of machines, a mechanized arrangement, desiring machines. Desire is the order of production, all production is at once desiring and social. What we have against psychoanalysis is that it has crushed this order of production and poured it back into the mould of representation.29
Schizo-analysis, which connotes both the collective system of enunciation and a mechanized view of consciousness, makes it possible to refute the claim that representation is a prerogative of the subject. By including psychoanalysis among the models of thought whose founding principle is representation, Deleuze reads the psychoanalytic unconscious as a straight dialectical reversal, a counter-consciousness, the negative pole of consciousness.
Since the Freudian unconscious refers precisely to an internal referent, it is indissociable from the subject. Whence this political critique of psychoanalysis: by maintaining the distinction between inside and outside, law and desire, the private and public, it prevents the production of desire as pure, recurrent positivity, as energy flowing, bent on self-perpetuation through a series of transformations: a principle of meta-morphosis, not of meta-physics.
Deleuze and Guattari stress the implicit connection between the field of desire and the social field:
The truth of the matter is that social production is purely and simply desiring production itself under determinate conditions. We maintain that the social field is immediately invested by desire, that it is the historically determined product of desire, and that libido has no need of any mediation or sublimation, any psychic operation, in order to invade and invest the productive forces and the relations of production.30
Every being, as a material or embodied entity, is a mixture of bodies: distance is no more possible between man and nature than it is between desire and the social. It is all a question of production, and production depends on the transformation of energy, as in the image of the machines that produce and distribute energy. The image of desiring machines is less a metaphor than a diagram, illustrating the process of formation of the subject. The subject is the field of intersection, that is to say of communication and recurrence of different forces: there is machine as soon as there is contact. Desire is the main dynamic force, a continuous flux, a 'disjunctive energy' which creates lines of connection between material subjectivities. Deleuze's bodies conceal no secret sign of representation, they are rather outward-looking and mobile, multifunctional and not coded by one transcendental signifier. These are the 'bodies without organs', the an-organic body that is a material surface in constant transcendence and not a depth of resounding normativity. Deleuze's definition of the body is that of a material surface where the
codes of language interact: it is the pure product of cultural and social modes of interaction, there is nothing 'natural' about them. As opposed to the psychoanalytic mapping of the erogenous zones of the body, which turns anatomy into the support of metaphysical abstractions like the Phallus, Deleuze turns the body into a 'duty-free' area, where the quest for pleasure and the realization of desire prevail over more normative principles of organization, and where all organs are equal in the symbolic charge they carry. The idea of 'bodies without organs' expresses this new vision of the body-machine, and it emphasizes the positivity of desire and the non-centrality of phallocentrism in the constitution of subjectivity. 'The body without organs is not the proof of an original nothingness, nor is it what remains of a lost totality. Above all, it is not a projection; it has nothing whatsoever to do with the body itself, or with an image of the body. It is the body without an image.'31
In Deleuze's terminology, a smooth and imageless body is a-signifying, the contrary of the psychoanalysed body (or that defined by classical philosophy as the other of a divinely-ordained mind); it is not registered in the social order by the Oedipal code but rather by an intensive system of inscriptions, of coding. Deleuze argues that psychoanalysis, following classical metaphysics, has made the body into a synonym for the symptom and the symbolic lack, the sign of that which cannot be represented within representation. The body-machines or the desiring machines of Deleuze's universe, on the other hand, have nothing to conceal: they can be seen, for they de-monstrate and re-present nothing other than the flux of desire which passes through them. Society as a whole is a set of technical and social machines, of desiring machines:
Technical social machines are nothing but conglomerations of desiring machines in historically determined molar conditions; desiring machines are social and technical machines returned to their determinant molecular conditions.32
The conceptual difference that Deleuze wants to express through the desiring machines has to do with the libidinal link between the unconscious and the political economy. Between the single individual and society there is a relationship of machination, of dynamic interaction, of reciprocal production. It is in this sense that Deleuze takes up and develops Foucault's idea of the positivity and productivity of power.
Deleuze puts forward the hypothesis that within the libidinally defined social field there are several organizing lines. The most significant are, on the one hand, the molar, sedentary, or majority, and on the other, the molecular, nomadic or minority:
The majority does not designate a larger quantity, but in the first place, a standard in relation to which the other quantities, whatever they are, will be said to be smaller. For instance, women and children, Blacks and Indians, and so on, will be minorities in comparison to the standard constituted by any American or European white-Christian-male-adult-city-dweller of today (Ulysses).33
These lines are diagrams of thought, Nietzschean typologies of ideas as intensive states; they mark the boundaries of an activity called thinking: the molar ones fix the utterances into logocentric statements, erecting discursive monuments in the sedentary mode. The minority line undoes these territories, unfixes and unfastens the fortresses of subjectivity and truth, thereby opening the way for revolutionary potentialities, the affirmation of positive differences. These are known as 'escape lines' or Tines of transgression'. They accompany Deleuze's Spinozan view of human consciousness: the subject is for him a molecular model, an infinity of particles, attributes and modes of being. It is opposed to the molar substance composed of essential attributes as grasped by the Cartesian cogito.
Deleuze draws on his idea of minority consciousness as opposed to molar rationality, the 'standard' of all judgement, to substitute for classical rationality a view of the subject as libidinally variable, that is to say as a mass of energy in constant transformation. Multiplicity does not reproduce one single model - as in the Platonic notion of the simulacrum that reflects the one true idea - rather, it creates and multiplies differences, not unlike different musical variations. Similarly, the rigidly fixed molar subjectivity must become unstuck through a series of successive becomings that will turn it into a minority or nomadic consciousness.
By rethinking the social field in these terms, Deleuze situates himself in the domain of political philosophy and works on the eternal question: 'Why do the oppressed not revolt? How can they not only accept but moreover desire their oppression?' As Foucault points out in the preface to the American edition of the Anti-Oedipus Deleuze's philosophy is not only a critique of totalitarian thought, but also of liberal theories of the social contract.
Contractual theory stipulates that the formation of society, and the process of socialization which accompanies it and makes it possible, enables the break with a pre-social state known as the 'state of nature', when consciousness as everyone's becoming has a universal form, and it is this becoming which is creation. By envisaging the form of a universal minority consciousness, we are addressing powers of becoming which belong to a domain other than that of the Law and of Domination. This may yet be philosophy's task, in contrast to its earlier abstract majority claims. This would be philosophy as traversed by all
these becomings, it would recognize its links with them. Its discourse would be free indirect speech.34
Today philosophy can exist in terms of its articulation of a 'universal minority consciousness'. Deleuze replaces the notion of the limits or margins of thought with that of its periphery, affirming that nothing happens at the centre, that everything is already just passing through, and he compares the becoming minority to a crossing or a trajectory.
Insofar as Man is the main pole of reference in a centuries-old binary opposition that has turned woman into the other, there is no possible 'becoming man' in Deleuze's system. The escape lines or lines of deterritorialization rather point to the becoming-woman as a path of liberation. The 'woman' in question here, however, does not refer to empirical females, but rather to a position and a mode of relation to the activity of thinking: woman is the nomadic mode.
Minority indicates, in the first place, a state of events, that is, the situation of a group which, no matter how large, is excluded from the majority, or else included, but as a fraction subordinated to a standard of measurement which makes the law and fixes the majority. In this sense, it may be said that women, children, the southern hemisphere, the Third World, and so on, are minorities, regardless of their number.
But let's take this first sense at its 'word'. Immediately there's a second sense: minority no longer indicates a state of event, but a becoming in which we are engaged. Becoming-minority is an aim and an aim which involves everyone, since everyone enters into this aim and this becoming, insofar as each person constructs their own variation around the despotic unity of measurement and one way or another escapes from the system of power which made it a majority game. In terms of the second sense, it is evident that the minority is much more numerous than the majority. For instance, in the first sense, women are a minority, but according to the second sense, there is the becoming-woman which has to do with everyone, which is like the potential of everyone, and women no less than men themselves have to move towards the becoming-woman. A universal becoming-minority. Minority here connotes the strength of a becoming, whilst majority connotes the power or powerlessness of a state or situation.35
And so the becoming-woman is not to be confused with women and their struggles, but connotes 'that which involves everyone', the strength of a development which will lead to a radical transformation of our conception of the human being. Of course this definition conditions Deleuze's thinking about feminism: although he does recognize it as one of the new revolutionary possibilities, for him the Women's Liberation Movement is mistaken in its assertion of a specifically feminine sexuality: women should rather draw on the multisexual structure of the human being and claim all the sexes of which they have been deprived in order to become socialized (as) women.
In this sense isn't the supreme goal of the Women's Liberation Movement, by mechanized and revolutionary means, the construction of the non-Oedipal woman, in place of the disordering exaltation of mothering and castration?36
Women would be truly revolutionary if, through the transformation of the very field of desire, both in its subjective and social fields of distribution and organization of libidinal energies, their struggles contributed to the emergence of the 'non-Oedipal' woman. If they became desiring machines, women would be subversive, for these machines, although as yet undefined, nonetheless already open up the possibility of a new humanity which would function according to the model of free, positive desire.
Putting desire into relation with a libidinal world of connections and breaks, flux and scissions which constitute the non-human element of sex, and in which each thing is consonant with the 'driving-desire' and a 'libidinous machinery' ... undoing each time the derisory faces of Oedipus, pushing ever further a process of deterritorialization.37
The demand for a sexed feminine specificity in politics or in discourse therefore has nothing profoundly subversive about it.
A minority never exists ready-made, it is only formed along lines of flight which are also its way of advancing and attacking. There is a becoming-woman in writing. It is not a question of writing 'as' a woman ... Even women do not always succeed when they try to write like women, as a function of a future of women. 'Woman' is not necessarily the writer, but the becoming-minority of her writing, whether it be man or woman. Virginia Woolf forbade herself to speak 'like a woman': she was able to harness all the more the becoming-woman of writing. Lawrence and Miller are considered to be great sexists: writing, however, drew them into an irresistable becoming-woman.38
If I follow the sequence of Deleuze's ideas closely, I arrive at the (by now familiar) conclusion, that women are agents of revolution, but only potentially so. What they still need, to be truly revolutionary subjects, is a consciousness which is not specifically feminine. The nomadic nature of women's thinking is the only key to their becoming-minority. Endeavouring to free new forms of rationality which could be put to the service of resistance rather than power, Deleuze finds in women exactly what he is looking for: a possibility of general renewal.
However, the comparison between this becoming of women and that proposed by a certain number of psychoanalysts or by Derridean critics reveals the obvious advantages of Deleuze's stance.
By not granting women exclusive revolutionary status Deleuze does not pour out extravagant eulogies to their creativity. Deleuze's universe
is in fact an anti-humanist domain pushed to the extreme, which affects men and women alike; this is why it harbours no mystification as concerns femininity or the feminine. Also, it is extremely interesting that Deleuze views the text as being linked to an outside. In effect, by attaching writing to extra-textual phenomena, Deleuze affirms that the social field and its transformations are an integral part of the 'text' on which the philosopher must work; in this respect he agrees with Foucault's definition which presents modern historicity as having to do with war rather than language.
They both denounce the machine of war that is the modern cogito, and compare the classical model of reason to the battlefield, the 'chessboard of war'.39 Despite their differences, it seems to me that both deal with the mutation affecting the totality of the social field and with the forms of thought specific to it. Foucault by his identification of local resistances, Deleuze with his articulation of molecular revolutions. With these two, we pass from the macro-model of sovereign reason to the micro-model of scattered rationalities: from war (la guerre) to guerilla warfare (la guerilla).
This is an important shift, for it makes human reason the stake at issue in a real struggle, not mediated by the relation to the text or to writing. It indicates that far from being the precursor of the existing social order and its rationality, the state of war constitutes the very heart of sociality, and consequently it abolishes the difference constantly proposed between the (pre-social) state of nature and the state of culture. Behind the codes which rule the process of subjection, Deleuze stresses the formidable exercise of power which upholds the process: bio-power, that is power of life and death over the bodies of human beings; the Panopticon - the power which is self-reflexively present without being seen (Lacan's dark God). The intellectual's task is to decipher the networks of power such as they are displayed in the production of knowledge, in order to locate its effects and indicate where they are hiding; in other words, to unmask Power and limit its effects.
Another striking point of comparison between Derrida and Deleuze's respective ideas about the 'becoming-woman' as a form of deconstruction of philosophy is their analysis of rational violence and of war. As we saw in the previous chapter, there is a considerable difference in the location and assessment of violence as the aggressive rationality of the logos between, on the one hand, Derrida's rationalization of semiology and, on the other, the bodily materialism of Foucault and Deleuze. Derrida emphasizes the neutralization of the more pathological aspects of logocentric discourse. Deleuze activates the transformative power of non-logocentric modes of thinking. The former aims at pacificism as a form of non-retaliation to logocentrist aggression, the latter aims at the critical assault on the rational violence of a system that uses 'order' as a form of domination.
In other respects, however, Deleuze's version of the becoming-minority of women raises serious questions. In effect, by dissolving the classical self in a materialist view of consciousness as a flux of desire without negativity, the desexualization he advocates annihilates sexual difference, attributing the same destiny to men and women alike. I might recognize this if our social and discursive conditions were based on the equality between the sexes. This not being, as yet, the case, Deleuze's argument overlooks a number of points that are crucial for feminist theory, notably the fact the women's movement came into being on a consensus about women's right to control their own bodies, their sexuality. The demand for autonomy in the social and sexual sphere is the starting point for feminist consciousness.
According to feminist analysis, women have borne both materially and symbolically the costs of the masculine sex's exclusive privilege of autonomous self-definition of their sexuality. Women have literally been dispossessed of their bodies - and this is why one of the first aims of feminism is to enable women to repossess and express their sexuality. With the notion of the becoming-minority of women, Deleuze presents a new and, I think, quite remarkable concept of human consciousness as moving beyond gender-dichotomies. But I wonder whether the theory of positive and multiple desire does not finally result in women's disappearance from the scene of history, their fading-out as agents of history. I wonder whether women rediscover their bodies and their jouissance in Deleuze's mechanized vision of desire. Deleuze has defended his position several times in the face of such suspicions:
But the problem of the desiring machine, given its essentially erotic character, is not one of knowing whether a machine will ever give 'the perfect illusion of woman'. On the contrary, the question is, into what machine will woman put herself in order to become the non-Oedipal object of desire, that is, non-human sex? In all the desiring machines sexuality does not consist of an imaginary couple of woman and machine as substitute for Oedipus, but in the couple of machine and desire as production-desire, as real production of a daughter born without a mother, of a non-Oedipal woman.40
And yet if we relate this to feminist ideas we notice that for feminists, woman's becoming consists precisely of expressing the feminine through a non-dualistic redefinition of alterity. The mother-daughter relation, as we shall see later in more detail, constitutes an essential stage in the process of this becoming: the possibility of an 'other' form of relation between women, and therefore of an 'other' relation to filiation. Now none of these elements, which have to do with women's lived corpor(e)ality, is taken into account by the theory of the desiring machines that Deleuze substitutes for sexual difference. As Luce Irigar-ay puts it:
And doesn't the 'desiring machine' still partly take the place of woman or the feminine? Isn't it a sort of metaphor for her/it, that men can use? Especially in terms of their relation to the techno-cratic? ... that jouissance which perhaps constitutes a discovery for man, a supplement to enjoyment, in a phantasmatic 'becoming-woman', but which has long been familiar to women. For them isn't the organless body a historical condition? And don't we run the risk once more of taking back from woman those as yet unterritorialized spaces where her desire might come into being? Since women have long been assigned to the task of preserving 'body-matter' and the 'organless', doesn't the 'organless body' come to occupy the place of their own schism? Of the evacuation of woman's desire in woman's body? Of what remains endlessly 'virginal' in woman's desire?41
In this sort of context, what becomes of sexual difference? According to Dworkin:
The great scientific researchers and the philosophers of sexuality such as Kinsey, Havelock Ellis, Wilhelm Reich and Freud support this vision of our function and destiny. We are represented by the great male writers, in language full of beauty, in fragments; once fragmented, they gradually 'dissolve' us, one way or another ... And, throughout the course of history as men have lived it, we have been 'dissolved', one way or another. The shreds of our skin and the rattling of our bones form both the sources of energy of art and science as defined by men, and also the principal content of pornography.42
Deleuze's desiring machines amalgamate men and women into a new, supposedly gender-free sexuality; I shall want to argue, however, that this drive towards a post-gender subjectivity, this urge to transcend sexual difference to reach a state of mutliple differentiation is not fully convincing. Although I see the consistency in Deleuze's argument -from his global rejection of binary opposition to the rejection of the man/woman dichotomy in favour of the continuum of interacting embodied subjectivities - I am puzzled by the consequences that this may have for women. Can feminists, at this point in their history of collective struggles aimed at redefining female subjectivity, actually afford to let go of their sex-specific forms of political agency? Is the bypassing of gender in favour of a dispersed polysexuality not a very masculine move? Its masculinity derives from the point that Deleuze explained so clearly: he argued that there is no 'becoming-man', that insofar as he is the empirical referent of a system of domination, man is doomed to the stasis of self-preservation, then indeed the only alternative left is the 'becoming-woman'. But when this 'becoming-woman' is disembodied to the extent that it bears no connection to the struggles,
the experience, the discursivity of real-life women, what good is it for feminist practice? Deleuze's multiple sexuality assumes that women conform to a masculine model which claims to get rid of sexual difference. What results is the dissolution of the claim to specificity voiced by women. The gender-blindness of this notion of 'becoming-woman' as a form of 'becoming-minority' conceals the historical and traditional experience of women: namely of being deprived of the means of controlling and defining their own social and political and economic status, their sexual specificity, their desire and jouissance. A 'multiplicity' or polysexuality that does not take into account the fundamental asymmetry between the sexes is but a subtler form of discrimination. It reiterates and reinforces women's subordinate position. It also hides another more troubling problem, as Irigaray emphasizes: 'To turn the "organless body" into a "cause" of jouissance, isn't it necessary to have had a relation to language and to sex - to the organs - that women have never had?'43
In other words, only a man would idealize sexual neutrality, for he has by right - belonging as he does to the masculine gender - the prerogative of expressing his sexuality, the syntax of his desire; he has his own place of enunciation as the subject This fundamental opportunity has always been refused woman, who are still at the stage of trying to assert themselves as subjects of enunciation, sexed bodies, and still trying to assert their entitlement to the position of subjects.
I argued earlier that Lacan confined Woman to symbolic nonexistence because she is the necessary 'other' sustaining the fantasy of one steady centre or signifier. This centre is perceived socially as being a masculine position and it enforces the structures of patriarchy. I also pointed out how Derrida displaced the problem, attacking the illusory nature of the masculine pole of the sexual dichotomy. Derrida's de-phallic strategy leads to the valorization of the becoming-woman as the new philosophical position. I think that Deleuze goes even further in that he declares the whole binary scheme of sexuality as conceptually empty: it is a mere game of images that reflect and convey a form of social organization, in which the distinction between to have and to have not (the penis, the Phallus, money, children, status, and so on) is raised to the level of a qualitative differential.
By introducing the variable of power into this scheme Deleuze radicalizes the Foucauldian work on power by providing it with a conceptual frame: power is a form of organization of desire. The latter is to be understood as an ontological drive, following Spinoza, not as a sexual one. It refers to the empowerment of subjective potentialities (power in the sense of potentia), against the sedimentation of dominant forms of subjectivity (power as potestas). In this respect, Deleuze does come close to feminism in that he argues that woman, as the traditional 'other' of classical dualism, must repossess her otherness by developing
forms of subjectivity and modes of desire at the furthest remove from the Phallic model. But at no point in his thought does he take into account the specific history of women's own attempts to redefine their subjectivity. By failing to take into account what feminists have said, written, theorized, Deleuze becomes normative by omission, as Derrida is normative by anti-feminist assertion.
Though Deleuze may praise the fragmentation of the subject, the flux of all identities based on the Phallus, the truth of the matter is, as I have argued elsewhere: one cannot deconstruct a subjectivity one has never been fully granted; one cannot diffuse a sexuality which has hsitorically been defined as dark and mysterious.44 In order to announce the death of the subject one must first have gained the right to speak as one; in order to demystify meta-discourse one must first gain access to a place of enunciation. Fragmentation of the self being woman's basic historical condition, as Irigaray pointed out, we are left with the option of theorizing a general 'becoming-woman' for both sexes, or else of flatly stating that women have been post-structuralist since the beginning of time.
One must be identified with a masculine position in order not to see that a form of sexual neutrality which does not allow for the fundamental lack of symmetry between the sexes will only damage women and the specificity claimed by feminists. This desire for a new neutrality and multiplicity is certainly not gratuitous: at the precise historical moment when women start to speak in their own name, and to articulate their particular relation to discourse and theoretical production, it is no accident that male thinkers appropriate their language and begin to women-speak, to speak 'as' women themselves. This is the 'Tootsie syndrome' that Showalter criticizes so brilliantly 46 Instead of accepting women's right to speak in their own name, to risk repeating or even miming the master's voice; and instead of accepting that there are more and more women who assert the everyday reality of their lives as the affirmation of sexual difference, the advocates of the 'becoming-woman' seem to me to try to cover up their voices by speaking louder and faster. Once again, women's discourses and practices, and their specific relation to the symbolic run the risk of being occulted, before they have even been completely expressed. This risk is all the more striking in an age of advanced post-industrialism where the social manifestations of differences between the sexes are displaced by new forms of androgyny or uni-sex; while the reproductive technologies have provided the means of realizing mankind's ancient dream of giving birth to children extra uterum, it seems to me that the blurring of gender differences has to be the object of careful negotiations, not to become the item of a massive sell-out.
This can be exemplified clearly through the 'gender-bender' syndrome, illustrated by popular culture figures such as Boy George, Annie Lennox and many others. J. Baudrillard, an acute observer of contem-
porary ideas, has pointed out in a provocative paper called 'We are all trans-sexuals'47 that the phenomenon of gender-bending is symptomatic of our era. The trans-sexual represents the overcoming or blurring of gender-identities and the collapse of the classical notion of identity as a whole. As such, it symbolizes the postmodern condition which Baudril-lard defines as beyond any possible propositional meaning. A perfect representative of the nihilistic trend in French postmodernism, as opposed to the affirmative trend represented by Deleuze and Lyotard, Baudrillard sees the trans-sexual condition as the end of binary differences, sexual difference among them, through sheer exhaustion and implosion.
I would want to compare Baudrillard's paradigmatic notion of transsexualism to the positive reading of the trans-gressing of sexual boundaries proposed by Felix Guattari in his work alongside Deleuze on the 'becoming-woman'.48 He states that the collapse of gender dichotomies takes the form of a generalized 'becoming-woman', that is a becoming radically other, which resists all new norms of sameness.
The stake is clear: can there be a 'multiple sexuality' without sexual difference? What is the point of multiplicity if women are absorbed into a new neutral model that grants them no specificity? The fundamental issue in women's demand for sexual difference is the need for everyone, woman or man, to express a non-phallocratic sexuality. In this sense, Deleuze is right to interpret feminism as a movement against the primacy of the phallus; however, he overlooks the premise that women have a profoundly different relation to their bodies than do men: a bio-cultural difference, or a socio-symbolic one, which has yet to be assessed positively. The corollary of this is that the proper task of men who intend to deconstruct phallic premises should be to speak as singular men, not as representatives of Mankind, and develop a new way of thinking masculinity.
It seems that instead of taking on this critique, most contemporary theorists divert and colonize women's speech and women's representations. Perhaps in order to preserve some vestiges of their former privileges and gains, and so that the death of the subject may not result in an apocalyptic downfall? The 'becoming-woman of ...' is a force which appropriates women's bodies, an exchange among the master-thinkers of the feminine body: it perpetuates an ancestral habit of domination as the trait of the masculine discourse on women. It is still a misogynist mode of thought.
The Feminine between Scylla and Charybdis
I have come back to the conclusions of the preceding section, where the discussion of Derrida's position revealed that through a method and a language which claim to be positive towards the feminine, a pattern has
been set up, a pattern of capturing, interpreting and redirecting the theoretical focus of those who are working on the feminine or the position of women, first and foremost women themselves. In the case of the molecular revolution, or the 'becoming-minority' or women, the specificity of women's struggles is recognized only insofar as they work towards overcoming gender-differences. I shall come back to this point in the next section.
What I would like to add here is that, without retracting any of the criticism outlined earlier, I do think that the theoretical programmes suggested by Foucault and Deleuze respectively are, in contemporary philosophy, the least harmful to women. For one thing, both these philosophers are declared allies of feminist struggles, as opposed to Derrida's stated anti-feminism. Then I would like to suggest that their reconceptualization of the aims of theoretical discourse, with the redistribution of the critical tasks that it entails, is an interesting notion for feminist theory. Caught between the Scylla of a textual position which assimilates their bodies to the field of writing, or the receptacle of the unconscious, and the Charybdis of a generalized 'becoming-minority' that dissolves gender-identities and the signifier 'woman' with them, women may have less trouble dealing with the pure and simple disappearance of their sexual determination as operated by Deleuze's desiring machines, than seeing through the glorification of the 'feminine' advocated by Derrida's complex textual manoeuvres.
Deleuze's stance underlines by negation the danger implicit in most uses and applications of psychoanalytic 'methods' in the domains of the human sciences: they result in identifying women with a type of discourse on feminine sexuality. With an impressive sleight of hand, woman is assimilated to the feminine, enabling feminism to be reduced to the level of a neurosis - that is, an identity problem connected with the refusal of the feminine, a phallic identification. In the face of this imposture in the discourse of the feminine Deleuze's proposition is more attractive: for the actual mystification of women and celebration of the feminine is kept to a bare minimum.
The process of the reduction of woman is, on the other hand, pushed to a grand maximum, as Deleuze's analysis of the character of Lewis Carroll's Alice confirms.49 The image of the girl becomes the sign of a subversive force operating within the system of meaning which leads her to the loss of personal identity, of the proper name. That Alice is a little girl, although she is engendered by a masculine imagination, is of no interest to Deleuze,50 who insists on making little girls' mode of reasoning a paradigm of his nomadic thought: the sign of a subversion of the signifier, escape-lines, becoming-minority, the event, and deterri-torialization. For Deleuze the question: 'what is a little girl?' becomes the ideal form of sabotage of the economy of meaning in discourse. The little girl stands for pre-oedipal, non-genital sexuality.
It may seem paradoxical to defend a position that actually reduces
women to an energetic model of sexual organization. My defence of this position rests partly, however, on its being the lesser of two evils; what is also particularly precious in Deleuze's thought is that, having defined the unconscious as nomadic, devoid of all representation - thereby completing the dislocation of the ego - Deleuze releases the freedom of thinking, the passionate sub-structures of thought. Theoretical intelligence, thus liberated from the signifying network in which it was circulating, becomes an active body, a libidinal flux traversing any structure and displacing it.
An idea is an active state of very high intensity, which opens up hitherto unsuspected possibilities of life and action; for Deleuze, ideas are bodies, lines which point human rationality towards new ways; anything that creates possible tracks for desire, or carries the affirmative power of life to a higher level is an idea. The advantage of this notion is that it finally puts a stop to the traditional search for ideas or lines which are 'just' (in theory and politics alike). For if ideas are projectiles launched into time they can be neither 'just' nor 'false'. This redefinition of ideas as trajectories or projectiles seems to me very useful for the feminist stance, in that it can apply to the search for multiplicity which is at the heart of the new collective political singularity of women's struggles. The elaboration of feminist ideas and theoretical discourse in general could never become the articulation of an-other revolutionary gospel, an untouchable and sacred dogma, a norm handing out blame or praise, the foundation stone of a new bureaucracy of thought. Deleuze's notion of ideas and thought offers us a basic theoretical defence for rejecting all mental and theoretical codification; and it is in this sense that the becoming-minority is of interest to women. It restores to thinking the creative freedom it needs in order to articulate itself with current political conflicts, and thus provides a theoretical and political support for the feminist project.
Above and beyond all the pragmatic value we acknowledge in these thinkers' contributions, I am convinced that their importance resides in the transformations of the notion of the thinking subject him/herself, and of the thinking process as a whole. This is also to say that if Foucault and Deleuze may be useful to women's struggles, it is not because of what they have to say about women; it is not a matter of locating 'content' in their texts which might favour or profit women because, quite simply, what there is of it is quite inadequate. Feminist women have learnt at their own expense that men's knowledge is neither pure nor revolutionary, especially when it concerns them. Having observed the systematic marginalization of the feminine in masculine theoretical texts, the question therefore arises as to how to use those texts.
The evolution of the feminist critical tradition has allowed women to shift from condemnation to analysis: feminist theorists have enough arguments by now to know how to gain access to and divert the (masculine) space of theory. Theory such as that of Foucault and
Deleuze, which aims to be open to multiplicity, and which is offered to the reader as a theoretical toolbox, lends itself very readily to the demands of feminist reflection. I think, for instance, that when Foucault and Deleuze posit the body as (the) field of politics, they are very close to one of the fundamental ideas of modern feminism: the relations between human beings are power relations, the same power being at the basis of the institution of sexuality and of the socio-political division between the sexes. Likewise, their critique of the ideal of the sexual revolution approaches the positions of the feminists who very soon condemned liberation through sexuality as being illusory, purely and simply reinforcing the existing sexual division.
As I will argue in the next chapter, however, feminists have taken the analysis of power implicit in these theories much further; they give it a sexual specification which it had not previously possessed, and distinctive traits which characterize the specific subjection of women: all the power exercised in our societies is monetary, military, masculine, as we shall see later in more detail.
Through these common features, a more profound similarity emerges, becoming apparent in the redefinition of the social field as field of conflict, power and war. One of the great merits of Foucault's work is to have underlined the coextensiveness of the social field and the state of war; a war which develops on all fronts, all the time, and which has for principal target the biological capital represented by the body of the population.
The atomic situation is now at the endpoint of this process: the power to expose a whole population to death is the underside of the power to gurantee an individual's continued existence. The principle underlying the tactics of battle - that one has to be capable of killing in order to go on living - has become the principle that defines the strategy of states. But the existence in question is no longer the juridical existence of sovereignty; at stake is the biological existence of a population.52
Power governs the life and survival of the race: the relations which exist within the social field are relations of force, control, and lawful putting-to-death of some by others. The belligerent procedures of 'raison d'etat' are thus exposed, and along with them, the warlike function of discourse as self-legitimation of power is condemned.
This point is close to the feminist analysis which makes of the war of the sexes - or rather, the idea of the exclusion, disqualification and real or symbolic murder of women - the motive force of history; thus feminist theory can find a way of affirming itself, by condemning the rational nature of violence.
What I find most interesting about Foucault's and Deleuze's work is the way in which they restructure the aims of theoretical reflection and its political function. Their radical epistemologies allow for a radical
questioning of the nature of the human sciences. The modes of constitution and transformation of the subject are the focus of their study of subjectivity. In the classical philosophical view, the subject was defined as a thinking substance, endowed with eternal attributes which formed its 'nature'; the study of the subject was then limited to the analysis of the rules of reason which regulated and defined it. In the discourse of the human and social sciences, the issue of subjectivity cannot arise: according to Foucault's archaeology of modernity, these discourses do not have the conceptual means of analysing their own premises and assumptions. This critical task is the prerogative of philosophy.
With post-structuralist thinkers like Foucault and Deleuze, the aim of the human sciences is redefined in terms of the analysis of the process of constitution of the subject, its production through a process of power relations. For Foucault it is a question of countering the mechanisms of production with the analysis of the specification of the subject in a field of real and discursive forces. Starting from the presupposition that discourse is formed in a network of effects of power, Foucault concentrates on the analysis of the conditions of possibility of discourse as a political instance.
For Deleuze, the notion of the 'human sciences' is a non-sense, given that the human subject is dispersed in a multitude of active libidinal particles. The aim of the mode of thought which has a bearing on this flux is to extend the horizons of theoretical reflection itself, by distancing it further and further from the search for (always normative) definitions, and from the desire to arrive at synthetic conclusions which betray the mutiple - nomad - nature of being. For Deleuze the study of the subject is neither production (as in the currently common conception), nor strategic specification (as in Foucault's version): it is a question rather of the dispersion of the One into the forces which traverse it and which it makes act.
I think this is an important point for feminist theory, in that it rests on a notion of 'interdisciplinarity' which is too often left undefined. It seems to me that Foucault's and Deleuze's respective projects of critique of the human sciences lay the foundations for a radical epistemology where the crossing of disciplinary boundaries is the main methodology. The archaeological or genealogical method is a theory of transdisciph-narity. Furthermore, as I will argue in the following chapter, in the early years of feminism's second wave the notion of equality was central to women's reflection and political demands. Accepting Beauvoir's axiom that one is not born, rather, one becomes a woman, feminists concentrated on showing that woman was constituted and produced by established social norms which made her into man's eternal mirror. Feminity, that huge masquerade, is fabricated by man as he pleases, and has no biological basis. Woman - and femininity - cannot be defined anatomically, or in function of some physical specification: the sole basis
of identification of women, and therefore the only constant enabling them to form a political group is the fact of their oppression by man. The rejection of any biological specification, which is necessary for claims that sexual difference is a social factor rather than 'natural', had led to the rejection of all difference as mark of inferiority and therefore oppression. By identifying the process of subjectification with material subjection - and therefore oppression - this phase of feminism underlined that women's 'difference' is constructed on the basis of the signifying position that man has monopolized. Masculine power presents itself as the norm, and on that basis, classes, measures, and judges women, who are therefore eternally 'different' according to the yardstick of the idea of humanity as incorporated in man. This kind of feminist position, based on the struggle for equality between the sexes, confines the notion of 'difference' to the ranks of an essentialist or deterministic concept, a mark of inferiority for those to whom it is applied.
If women are dominated, it is because they are 'not the same', they are different, delicate, pretty, intuitive, unreasonable, maternal, have no muscle, no organizational temperament, are rather futile, and do not see beyond the end of their noses. All of which stems from the fact that they obviously have smaller brains, slower impulses, dissimilar hormones, which produce irregularities.53
Openly and combatively this position takes up the masculine binary logic which makes women the heir to the 'cultural' order (and therefore to social power). The split between nature and culture is therefore interpreted by feminists in terms of a veritable dichotomy between the social and the biological. Clearly, in this sort of framework, any reference to biology or anatomy, or to the body as a site of differences, cannot be accepted as a political feminist stance. Rather, it is often seen as a regressive return to the embrace of patriarchical binary thought. All 'difference' is thus reduced to negativity, to the negative pole of existing norms; it is the flagrant sign of sexual inequality.
As I will argue in the following chapter, the feminist position that consists in refusing difference has been contested within feminism itself by a whole generation of women who attempted to reappropriate the notion of 'difference' and to redefine it as positivity or affirmation. More on this later. For the moment I would like to focus on the ways in which the post-structuralists' notion of difference both resembles and diverges from the feminist perception of the term.
The refusal of difference rests on a critical analysis of the ideological function that the biological and medical sciences have played in support of the masculine status quo. This critical evaluation of the role that biology, the body and difference have played in setting up and justifying disparities in the social and symbolic representation of the sexes has
led some feminists to the paradoxical reinforcement of the nature-culture dichotomy. By rejecting all that is polarized around 'nature' as an ideological trap, they end up freezing the conflict between the sexes in a sealed world where there is no gap, no possible way out of the infernal circle which makes nature and culture the two faces of the same system, whose kernel is the hatred of women. This leads to a logic of open struggle, direct confrontation, and frontal attacks by women on a supposedly common 'enemy'.54
The categories of masculine and feminine, culture and nature, are used in that instance as fixed categories, given points of reference, as if the frontier between them, and the limits of the domain of reflection they determine were clearly established, once and for all. These traits also characterize the notion of 'oppression' and its mechanisms; in effect, as soon as the categories of the social and the natural are dichotomized, the sexes likewise are polarized in a situation of dialectical confrontation. From then on the minefield stretching between them can no longer be anything but a terrain of open battle, or, more often, of a constant cold war. And so we arrive at a strange balance between the oppressed and the oppressors, and oppression becomes the only possible link connecting them.
I think that this view of the struggle between the sexes rests on a fundamental non-said: the notions of nature and culture can only be formulated inside an already established cultural order. As a result, if one believes that the nature/culture opposition is real, one must be blind to the role of language and enunciation. Rather, I see in it one of the most persistent formulas of our culture and its discourse: nature is a cultural construction, the dream of Western theoretical discourse and its chosen moral code; and I can hardly understand the political interest of this opposition for it offers no possible way out.
This poses a question which other feminists have started to ask: 'How can we, who begin by grouping around one of the poles of the masculine/feminine opposition, formulate a notion of alterity which is not devalued?' In its recent history feminism has moved beyond this dichotomous opposition between nature/female and culture/male. This evolution was made possible, and even necessary, by the real demands of women's political struggles. Particularly significant in determining this shift were the demands of ethnic, especially black women, of women from the developing world and lesbian women. They challenged the global ideas of sisterhood and the notion of one, common, trans-historical and trans-cultural pattern of oppression of women. They thus forced a revision of the classical terminology and concepts in feminist revolutionary rhetoric.
Also in response to the media's rapid vulgarization of feminism, a number of ideas fundamental to feminism, such as 'sexual liberation', 'women's common oppression as a dominated class', and 'sisterhood' have been challenged; this questioning of its premises marks a transition
in feminist reflection, a moment of growth, but also of self-critique.
Faced with a new political reality, some feminist theorists, too often and too hurriedly labelled as 'difference thinkers', have moved towards ideas of multiplicity and difference in order to avoid the trap of ready-made dualism. The category division between the biological and the cultural has to do with the binary logic which opposes woman to man, body to spirit, revolutionary process to the constant reality of oppression, and, all in all, the oppressed to the oppressors. This is a thoroughly 'molar' logic which traces the distinctions in the form of dialectical oppositions, a series of antinomies which follow from the materialist notion of history as: (a) the narrative of the oppressor subject: the white man, the capitalist; and (b) the dynamic of the struggle of oppressed people(s), the minority class.
Experience has often shown that when we look for a single enemy or agent as the motor of history and revolution, we always find it in the end. But this univocity can no longer respond to the desires and needs of women's political struggle. Moreover, this over-preoccupation with one single common oppression, and the equivalent notion of liberation, also sets a potentially catastrophic trap for contemporary feminism: the possibility of setting up a counter-norm, in the shape of a strong, monolithic, phallic view of woman. In other words, the dialectical opposition of the sexes leads to the rejection of 'difference' as a revolutionary variant; it also tends to make woman or the feminist the new master, or patroness, or protector of a new form of normativity. Reversing the existing balance, woman could achieve subjectivity and her power would mark a new regime of truth. This would ultimately result in rationalizing women's counter-knowledge, experience and discourses, but it would basically leave untouched the framework of power within which they operate. The temptation is not only utopian but also, like most utopias, profoundly dangerous in its political implications, for it makes women the only authentically revolutionary class, and represents feminism as the Bible of the Revolution. The illusion of mastery and transparency is, in my opinion, inadequate both theoretically - as a vision of subjectivity - and politically - as a platform for action.
It is in order to avoid this trap that feminist thinkers have insistently returned to ideas of difference and multiplicity, and in so doing have found themselves on the same wavelength as one aspect of modern philosophy, in that extraordinary historical coincidence I have already emphasized. Feminist thought and post-structuralist philosophy have both crossed the frontier which separated 'nature' and 'culture' and so have toppled the notions of subjectivity and knowledge which occupied that frontier territory.
In Foucault's work, for example, women through their struggle will reach a theoretical elaboration of human consciousness, as a bio-cultural entity, on the basis not of a dualism inherent in the human psyche, but
of a redefinition of the corporeal and the biological. Foucault suggests that the modern subject is both supplier of a knowledge about him/ herself and the instrument of production of the population, the mechanism of a bio-politics which inevitably acts on sexuality as a discipline regulating the body and, by the same token, the population. In my feminist perspective this analysis of modernity amounts to saying that the woman-question, and the female or maternal body, are implicit in the field of modernity and coextensive with the questions it opens out for philosophy.
The body is invested by social relations, and as such the dualistic opposition mind-body becomes redundant; the parallel to this is that these relations prevent the relationship between the 'corporeal' and some 'natural' order from being seen, which leads not so much to the disappearance of the category of the 'biological' as to its being identified with, or assimilated to, a social field. It is a question of showing 'how deployments of power are directly connected to the body - to bodies, functions, physiological processes, sensations, and pleasures'.55
This statement implies that the nature/culture opposition serves the interests of the present system; it can therefore in no way offer women in conflict a liberating possibility. This idea is pushed even further by Deleuze, for whom the body is event, affective force endowed with an affirmative power, always displaced. Without returning to any of the critiques voiced in the preceding pages, I think that the notable advantage of this position is that it frees the notion of the subject from its anchoring in binary logic and its oppositions. Instead of fixing the sexes rigidly in the production of a regime in which one sex oppresses the other, and without falling back into the humanist platitude that we are all oppressed by the same system, this stance changes the analysis of subjectivity in terms of a process which produces simultaneously the subject and the forms of knowledge and government of and about him/herself.
This new philosophy of subjectivity implies the unveiling of the conditions that govern the transformation of the subject. In a more Deleuzian vein, history is never the history of an individual subject (since each individual only exists on a libidinal plane common to all). The study of man thus becomes the cartography of the libidinal, political, and discursive forces which traverse him. The concept of the subject as a bio-cultural being implies the dissolution of the frontier between the biological and the social; it also allows for an analysis of the specification of the subject in a chain of signifying effects which traverse the body. A bio-cultural being is one who can be defined on the basis of a process of specification, a will-to-power and the becoming-minority.
This idea is close to the new orientations of feminist thought: feminist women say that woman cannot and must not be taken as the trans-historical subject of a universal oppression. She will not take over from the dying subject of Western philosophy; political women are intent on
being a collective singularity and do not present this identity as a new feminine substance, but rather, as a hypothesis:
1	a theoretical or working hypothesis, as a basis for analysing the process of specification and problematization of women in discourse, the validity of which depends on the light it can shed on the mechanisms of power. An idea, therefore, which may serve as a toolbox for women; and
2	a political hypothesis; as I shall discuss in more detail later, this collective singularity constitutes a provisional platform supporting women's real and multiple struggles.
In both cases - and it is in this respect that Foucault's and Deleuze's theoretical toolbox has a certain interest for feminists - it is a question for women of giving themselves the means to pursue and further their immediate reflection and struggles; but it is never a question of articulating an alternative definition in response to the question 'What is woman?'
There are no more 'ideas which are just'. On this condition, perhaps it will at last be possible to have 'just ideas' and to use them.
Revisiting the Void
I'm sure you know the absurd story of a man who, finding himself in the awkward position of possessing a void, is asked by another man who owns a lorry, whether he couldn't move it somewhere else ... They load the void onto the lorry, and along the way, talk of this and that, until the lorry driver, noticing that the void has fallen off en route, reverses the lorry - an unfortunate manoeuvre which, of course, sends the two men and the lorry hurtling into ... the void. Cornut56
Whatever the dangers, the advantages and disadvantages, I have been arguing so far that the philosophy of the crisis and the decline of classical philosophical notions of the subject have put on the agenda the question of 'women and philosophy', in terms of the feminine of thought. It arises all the more urgently because the wounded, diseased subject of modern knowledge seems unable to cure and take care of himself. Modern philosophy is in mourning, and in the climate of diffuse angst new forms of reflection on women attempt to fill in the form of a void which is synonymous with both nothingness and excess. It is through the paradox of gaps, holes and hyperbole that the process of internal erosion of the discipline of philosophy seems to lead inevitably to the revaluation of the feminine in thought.
On the Derridean side, the feminine, valued as, or in the place of, textual traces in writing (ecriture) is celebrated. In the camp of Foucault
and Deleuze, on the other hand, instead of shutting philosophy up in a textual practice, it is projected beyond the limits of its disciplinary field: the feminine is thus posited as a sign opening up unexplored territories. In both cases, however, the feminine is the symptom of a male disease, of the sickly body of philosophy; it reveals and conveys a reworking of the discursive field of philosophy, a series of transformations which allow for the emergence of new utterances within the same old frame. The 'feminization' of thought is the immediate result; might it not be the case that, quite simply, theoretical discourse is obliged to have recourse to women in order to ensure the future of the conceptual world that is so much under threat?
What is at play in the investigations of the feminine in philosophy is the desire to renew the objectives and functioning of the philosophical discipline itself: it is more a question of the problem of philosophy in relation to the feminine, than the converse. The quest for the feminine, like crossing the desert anew, seems to constitute the royal way towards a new identity, guaranteeing an assured future for the masculine subject.57 Is this a transmutation of values, or simply a reversal of the signs?
Unlike those who state that the forgetting of the feminine is a historical constant,58 I think, rather, that philosophy is in a very close relationship, possibly even complicity, with the 'feminine'. The feminine, as Irigaray argues, is always present by negation, as such it is a constant of theoretical discourse. When we consider the question more closely, then, what can we find that is specifically feminine in the contemporary critiques of rationality that I have studied here? What link can we establish between these images of the feminine and the corporeal social lived experiences of human beings of the female sex? When a whole culture in crisis 'feminizes' itself, its intellectual style and modes of enunciation, what space does it make for women's language? What sort of 'feminine' is this?
The renewal of interest in the feminine is only the pretext for another question, that of the renewal of theoretical discourse itself, and the mystification it perpetuates is not without social and political counterparts. The impact of thirty years of feminist struggles has been such that, in effect, women as a revolutionary political movement have been co-opted and turned into objects of consumption in our society, just like many other cultural goods.
New 'images' of women have emerged: ranging from the super-liberated sexual athlete to the syndrome of the successful businesswoman, they have become part of the inflationary system of circulation of ideas. The images of women thus relayed are the clearest and most troubling index of the success of the cause of women and the dangers surrounding it.59 It is not impossible that the commercialization of certain feminine values may also be a positive sign of the progress of the idea of the liberation of women, and of its impact on society, but this
makes the question of the political radicalness of women a priority.
Today the inflation of discourse on the feminine and 'new' women in Western European culture is such that it is difficult to further women's reflection without falling into the trap of consuming these neo-feminine products. What this phenomenon reveals is, in my view, the resurgence of the process of metaphorization of woman, trivializing feminist arguments along the way. In a very forceful article the Italian feminist, Carla Lonzi, condemns all this:
Some count on women's neophite enthusiasm to resolve the crisis of masculine society; they are allowed to fill the same roles as men, and this manoeuvre is presented as the compensation they are due for their having always been excluded. Truly a victory for the women's movement. Industry has needed a feminine workforce, and the consumer decides to add to that, women's work in the tertiary sector.60
It is certainly no accident that women's entry into the world of work (even though this trend has been reversed by the phenomenon of growing unemployment, of which, as we know, women largely bear the brunt), as into discourse, corresponds to the development of these radically new theoretical and political places that are the women's movements. This fact is hardly ever mentioned among the whirl of ideas moving-around the notions of the 'becoming-woman': of ideas, writing, philosophy, culture as a whole. And through this omission, women's access to the economic and discursive spheres, which might seem positive in many respects, becomes a pretext for a new oppression. The celebration of a femininity reduced to metaphors of the void, lack, non-being, the valorization of woman as textual body, rather than female-sexed body, hides one of the most formidable types of discrimination exercised against women in recent years. What is missing from these 'becomings' are women, not only as a revolutionary political movement, but also as flesh-and-blood human beings, engaged for personal reasons in a collective process of subversion of the images and status of women.
In this historical context in which philosophy, psychoanalysis, deconstruction, acknowledge the coextensivity of women to the text in writing, to the unconscious (of man) in psychoanalysis, to the libidinal revolutionary upsurge in 'molecular' politics, it seems to me to be urgent to deconstruct these discursive formations, to evaluate the 'crisis' from which they arise, in order to free women's voices. It is through an enormous critical effort that the question of 'women and philosophy' will be posed in terms other than those of an alternative ideology, or another mythology.
I think that the first step in this critical assessment of the discourse of the crisis in terms of its repercussions on feminist ideas and conflicts is
the analysis of the context which engendered this discourse.
The context is one of 'crisis' reigning on all levels, one which authorizes a right-wing neo-positivism to make the 'logic of the living organism' its watchword, and in which bio-technology is the ultimate means of mastery of the reproduction of the species. A context in which the economic conjuncture entails massive unemployment of women, and gives rises to a new poverty among working women, also promoting new forms of racism, xenophobia and religious intolerance.
It is a context in which even the most so-called developed countries, such as the USA, witness the resurgence of moral pressure-groups, with a reactionary natalist ideal, introducing the repression of women's sexuality, of their right to abortion and contraception. These elements are vital to a feminist analysis of the 'crisis of contemporary culture'. For it is right in the midst of this crisis that the women's movements were able to develop, and as such they are one of the driving forces behind the crisis.
In a feminist perspective, the junction of the emergence of feminist movements with the discourse of the crisis, a form of metaphorization of the feminine, can also be read as the identity crisis of traditional masculinity. Not only is it the subject that is being challenged, but also the male individual that had been socially constructed for centuries as the empirical referent for subjectivity. In a study of French antifeminism at the turn of the century A. Maugue highlights a complex phenomenon: on the one hand she shows that the historical periods and cultures in which feminism progresses tend to coincide, that is to say be represented as moments of 'crisis'.61 On the other hand Maugue reads this crisis in terms of men's irritation with, fear of and violent reaction against women's emancipation: an identity crisis. Maugue then concludes that men's inability or unwillingness to raise the question of their own identity leads them to metaphorize their crisis and to 'cross-dress it' in the guise of discourses about the feminine. Thus a masculine aporia turns into the vicious circle of a culture of the feminine as symptom for the crisis of culture. Maugue analyses some of the historical representations of this 'feminine' in the literature of the period: from the androgyne to the perverse lesbian, via the monstrous blue-stocking or 'cerveline' (brainy female), she reviews the end-of-century arsenal of figurations of the feminine, which are read as representations of the male anxiety over the increasing freedom gained by women.
From one end of the century to the other, the same masculine unwillingness or inability to be critical of itself results in the tendency to deconstruct femininity instead. It is as if men could not forgive women for having ceased to play the role of passive mirrors aggrandizing the male ego,62 and, incapable of looking critically at themselves, turned their gaze outwards, capturing women in images that are just anxious projections about the future of Man-kind.
In another study, of end-of-the-century European representations of
feminine evil, B. Dijkistra confirms this point, through an exhaustive analysis of the different images and metaphors of the feminine at times of crisis.63 From the femme fatale' to the androgyne he examines the ways in which the feminine is represented as the enemy of civilization, its underside. I can only read such representations as the products of a male imagination inflamed by anxiety over the ongoing emancipation of women.
C. Buci-Glucksmann, in her study of the imaginary of modernity, which I mentioned in the first chapter, comes to a similar, though less radical conclusion.64 Drawing a parallel between Vienna at the end of the last century and Paris today, reading Walter Benjamin with Lacan, she presents an archaeology of the present along Foucault's lines, with special emphasis on the feminization of culture. Buci-Glucksmann reads the feminine as a symptom revealing several interrelated issues that are constitutive of modernity: the decline of the classical subject of knowledge (anti-Cartesianism); the questioning of the boundaries of gender or sexual difference, and the in-depth critique of civilization. In her analysis the feminine is indeed the question of modernity.
I would like to stress, much more than Buci-Glucksmann does, that the problematization of the feminine is animated by the material, historical and political advances in the condition of real-life women, but that the connection between the two is a phantasmatic one: it is the site of projection for masculine fears and desires. The feminine thus put into discourse is but an allegorical figuration for a new aesthetics that aims at dislocating, blurring and making redundant the boundaries between dualistic oppositions, first and foremost sexual difference. Buci-Glucksmann concludes, on this point, that the feminine bears less resemblance to women than it does to Benjamin's image of the angel: an asexual, androgynous model of ambiguity, duplicity, indefiniteness: 'this desexualized feminine, from Medusa to the androgyne Angel, arises as excess, as a movement which deconstructs frontiers, as what can efface the limits between representation and the unrepresentable'.65
On the same point, a much more radical conclusion is drawn in the study that K. Theweleit devotes to cultures of the crisis understood as the background to fascism and mass-murder, in which the work of Walter Benjamin figures prominently.66
Theweleit connects the notion of the crisis to the construction and the peculiarities of masculine sexuality. With the help of Deleuze and Guattari's desiring machines, he analyses the fascist male personality in terms of fear and desire for the radical otherness that is the female body. A series of enlightening associations helps to illustrate his point: fear and desire extend to all women, except mothers and sisters, thereby creating a major dividing line around which the representations of the feminine are organized. On the one hand, the female body stands for lack of differentiation: it is, literally, a mess which symbolizes all that flows, floods, changes, transforms itself: like desire, time and therefore
death. As such it acts as a screen upon which men project their phobias and fears. On the other hand, the positive side of this psychic landscape is that it allows for and even requires as compensation an abstract form of exaltation of, or devotion to, other images of the feminine as pure, emotional, responsive, and so on.
Theweleit is extremely lucid about this psychic arrangement, which he connects to a specific form of social organization: he argues that 'it is oppression through exaltation, through the lifting of boundaries, an "irrealization" and reduction to principle: the principle of flowing, of distance, of vague, endless enticement'.67 It is obvious to any feminist that this process of 'irrealization' or intense metaphorization is the other side of the coin of oppression and exclusion from power. The woman's body as representational surface serves to produce the new kind of merchandise required by modernity: images or representations, whereas the real body of real women, especially from the lower classes, is simple material good for exploitation.
Theweleit concludes his analysis of the identity crisis of masculinity with a vehement critique of the fascist personality in which woman-hating plays the central role, and the 'crisis' of culture is the backdrop.
Fear and desire are terms that Stephen Heath also uses in attempting to describe men's 'impossible' relationship to feminist discourse.** Relying on psychoanalysis he connects the discussion of the feminine to that of male identity, in an age of crisis when certainties about sexed identities are shaken:
The 'feminine' produced within that system is a male malady, fully masculine: he is sick from women, hence his endless attempts to confirm her as illness (the whole nineteenth-century coupling of women and sickness, 'for her own good'). 'Femininity': the woman you want, the woman you fear; 'masculinity': exactly the same.69
Heath's general reaction to the problematic is indicative of the 'patterns of dissonance' I am trying to point out in this study: faced with the crisis, Heath deconstructs the whole institution of sexuality as being one of the dominant forms of discursive control in modern culture.
This point is developed at some length in The Sexual Fix, where he writes:
I've suffered and suffer and I think others must too - it's difficult not to in our society - from 'sexuality', the whole sexual fix. To the point of nausea ... Let's face it, there's a movement of fear here - the fear of not matching the sex, sex life, sexuality you are supposed to be, of not being normal, sexually ok and the rest of it, flips over into the fear now of what's left, where am I when that identity goes, when the version of me is seen as such, a version, a construction, a matter of representations?70
One crisis can surely hide another. I would even go so far as to say that it is the property of a context of crisis to allow a veritable proliferation of modes of enunciation and fields of research. From another perspective, therefore, I think that what is known as 'a context of crisis' proves, on a closer scrutiny, to be extremely rich in possibilities of enunciation. A crisis can also be defined as the junction of simultaneous and parallel lines of questioning: some stemming from the critique of rationality by modern philosophy, others from the feminist critiques of theoretical discourse. The discourse of the crisis need not be apocalyptic, though it has historically tended to be so.
Since the beginning of the feminist second wave, women have insisted on their desire to speak in their own name, as well as on their entitlement to enunciation, their right to find their own forms of expression and representation. For women exist. And this existence which they have claimed politically on the basis of a collective analysis of their social and discursive conditions, has led to a redefinition by women of their lives, their subjectivity and desires, and the political scope of their actions.
What I think a certain number of philosophers today have set up is the dissolution of this reality affirmed by women, via a metaphorized femininity or becoming-woman, whose principal heirs and beneficiaries are the Cartesian orphans. The new rationality organizes a femininity without women; if the 'self' is absent in it, it lacks the 'she' still more. As Fran^oise Collin points out: 'Is the feminist struggle perhaps a condemned race's last reprieve? Won't the abolition of the difference between the sexes occur through the disappearance of the feminine? Yet it is this feminine that we are trying to restore to itself and to bring to life, to reinvent.'71 So, let's beware of certain conceptual slippages which, behind their crude resemblances, hide abyssal differences. Feminists in fact use ideas and theoretical programmes which have nothing to do with those of some 'becoming-woman' of ideas, truth, or philosophy itself.
Marcelle Marini expresses the spirit of feminist reflection very lucidly; she speaks of women's coming to writing as emblematic of women's putting an end to their ancestral exile, their transition from prehistory to history:
She has to invent herself. Give birth to herself. Give herself a name other than her received name, which she pronounces in anger. Which?
It doesn't yet exist. I'd say that it's a question of, at last, associating the T who lives and speaks, with the term 'woman', the definition of the subject of a human history, whose sex is female.72
Marini questions literature as an institution supporting the masculine tradition of writers, the latter almost always serving as a support for masculine projections and self-empowerment. She is equally critical of
the traditional assimilation of the woman to the text - the blank page that is written upon. Marini ties this image in with the symbolic murder of the feminine underlying all social exchange, following the male homosocial bond, that Freud analyses in Totem and Taboo, and Kristeva reassesses in her work on the 'socio-symbolic contract'. Thus she restores the integrity claimed by feminism to the body of the woman Collin echoes her:
To write the feminine in the first person is inseparable from our rediscoveries of our bodies which affirm their value and dignity: in this way we regain possession of our memory, by reconstructing a history which is different from what was prescribed. The discourse of the feminine which women constitute for themselves is not that of an imaginary femininity which would deny the other of the sexes in repeating the ways in which masculine discourse has gone astray: this is simply playing on the swings, a movement in which the parabola of the master and the slave may still be read in men's and women's reciprocal fear. It is a question of entering into the concert with equal voice, so that the pleasure in the difference between the sexes may resound, multiply, inexhaustibly - a richness and plenitude.73
In search of voices which would express their sex as plural, and yet be rooted in their bodily reality, rather than as a floating metaphor or lack, women inscribe themselves with their bodies. It is on the basis of their shared experience as bio-culturally female beings that women have started to speak in their own voice, distancing it from masculine experience.
No-one would deny that the differences between the sexes are cultural, in that they have been constructed into a system of hierarchical domination as a result of thousands of years of exclusion of women from history. It is nevertheless true that this absence, this ancestral exclusion is directly connected to women's bodies, to feminine sexuality, to women's jouissance and reproductive capacity. Just so many elements that man has colonized, in order to impose his norm and meaning on them. Feminism has revealed the fact that our socio-cultural order rests on the exchange and silence of women; it follows that the project to express an other feminine coincides with the invention of an other relation to feminine sexuality. In this perspective, it is impossible, strictly speaking, to talk about the feminine independently of the lived experience of women, of their social, sexual and textual reality.
This is not so much to claim to a sort of feminist monopoly on the feminine as a way of emphasizing what is at stake in the theory and practice of sexual difference. To say, with feminists, that one cannot speak about the feminine without relating it to women's lived experience is to open the debate on the sexuation of the subject.
I shall develop the analysis of this question in more detail later; here I
simply wish to underline that this highly problematic dimension is completely absent from the question of 'women and philosophy' as it has been presented. In this instance, as in all others, it marks a domain in which philosophical discourse can still reproduce itself. I am sure that places in the front row will be made available to this feminine , before the half-deserted stage of the contemporary forum philosophicum. But this show will conceal and neutralize the real existence of women in their multiplicity and specificity: once again in history, a highly figurative view of the feminine triumphs over real women's living thought.
Women's numerous 'becomings' in contemporary thought repeat an idea as old as the West: that a truly socialized and culturally active woman is an aberration and an anomaly: she is either a man, or an androgyne, or a lethal femme fatale. It seems to me that the crisis of the subject - and the suggested ways out - intensify a very ancient habit: the abstracting, setting aside and metaphorization of the feminine as a founding gesture of the order of discourse.
If the theoretical texts on the feminine are set beside feminist studies, the reluctance of the former to accept the two following propositions is noticeable:
-	the void left by the exhaustion of the classical vision of subjectivity is neither an absence nor a death, but, rather, the historical opportunity to assert the incompleteness and partiality of all thought in a positive manner, so as to open up a new set of possibilities;
-	women's discourse stems from a sexed specificity which does not lend itself to generalized translations in the sense of a 'becoming-minority', or a one-way transcendence of gender differences.
In the transition from the ideas of the death of man to the emergence of a feminine problematic in philosophy, fundamental traits of the patriarchal theoretical system become manifest: its chronic inability to recognize a state of flow, fluidity, incompleteness, inconclusiveness, and the relational bond to the other. And so there emerge images of the feminine, or the becoming-woman, to compensate for the void left by the loss of ontological security after the exhaustion of the classical subject.
The problematic of the void, of non-being, also known as the humanization of nothingness, continues to preoccupy modern philosophy. The crisis of legitimation encountered by this discipline makes it particularly vulnerable to metaphors of loss. Thus, in existential thought, the void is erected to the status of an ontological structure of the subject. The Sartrean individual is he (and it is mostly he) who is capable of conceiving his own negation; man, this useless passion, is flawed by his own capacity to think his non-being. Sartre translates this ontological condition into ethical terms, and asks: if being is that
through which nothingness enters the world, how can the subject ever be free? Is the subject condemned to the anguished confrontation with his own gaps, lacks and holes? Only by situating himself in the world as agent can man overcome the anguish inherent in his structure and gain freedom. Thus non-being, the capacity of negation, is the ultimate guarantee of ethical agency and freedom, a freedom which is just another word for having nothing left to lose.
The post-structuralist generation of thinkers that I have been analysing in the last two chapters turns the Hegelian problematic of the existentialists into a psychoanalytically-oriented question about the incompleteness of the self. The void is within, it is an inner space of positive multiplicity, or of lack. Translated into the problem of the "death of man", the question of the void has produced a plethora of concepts and philosophical insights. This "void" seems to me full to overflowing. Instead of falling into the empty rhetoric of loss and death, it seems important to face up positively to the conceptual challenge opened out by the crisis of the subject.
Foucault, Derrida and Deleuze are examples of the non-reactive, non-nihilistic responses to the decline of the fullness of the classical subject and the power of philosophical discourse. They confront the meta-discourse of classical philosophy and spell the end of the universal self-centredness which had provided the groundwork of philosophical power.
Derrida, while accusing classical metaphysics of rationalist violence and imperialism, also states how successful it has been in establishing logocentrism as the norm. Foucault and Deleuze, on the other hand, challenge the equation of philosophy with logocentrism. They argue that there is more to philosophy than the logocentric mode, and that the latter is a mania, a perversion that produces hierarchically organized differences among knowing subjects. Logocentrism is the system of thought that disguises difference as a principle of manipulation and marketing of "others', whose otherness is a sign of inferiority: difference as a sign of depreciation. They oppose Derrida's global idea of temporality, as the timespan of logocentrism, to the notion of historicity, as the set of specific relations that the subjects entertain with time.
The philosophical debate about difference identifies a series of "others' that has been traditionally constructed in a depreciative mode: the body, the senses, affects, dreams, madness, Woman. In classical dualism, Woman is the sign for immanence, matter, that which is amorphous and inanimate. As such, Woman emerges as one of the central themes in the discourse of philosophical modernity. Now that this classical order has collapsed, and the unity of the subject as a rational entity has been shaken, new possibilities are opened for a dialogue between reason and its others. Before we go on to see how the feminists have approached this question of difference in a very specific and much more radical manner, let us stop and ponder once again this extraordinary fact: the
renewal of interest in the feminine in contemporary philosophy. It is important that we trace the origin of this preoccupation, to see where it issued from, for its articulation is clearly not accidental. Rather, it emerged from a context of general crisis: the crisis of metaphysics, of classical rationality, of the power of philosophy as the supplier of theoretical instruments of power, and so on.
It is this crisis that has provoked the polemical surge without which the question of the feminine would not have become theoretically admissable. At this level, the renewal of interest in the feminine, in sexual difference defined as a sign of the corporeal, the affective, the irrational, the multiple etc., is a trap in that it marks the problems of the subject of modernity in quest of renewed legitimation. Over-determined by these concerns, which are vital for the postmodern philosophy of the subject, this 'feminine' plays an instrumental role in the thinking of the Cartesian orphans who make the new attention to the other, or the becoming-woman, into the miraculous cure which will lead Western philosophy out of the unprecedented crisis it is undergoing.
On the other hand, since these images of the feminine are devoid of reference to real women (of whom they take no account), they are the simulacrum of the profound anguish tormenting man. It seems to me that these same thinkers are incapable of admitting or receiving the theoretical and political expression of women's difference. We shall see how these new metaphors of the feminine affect real women, and how they are received in feminism.
What is worse, these thinkers do not know how to resist the temptation, transformed into habit by thousands of years of patriarchy, of speaking in women's place.
To emphasize the masculine incapacity to accept both the incompleteness of all thought and the parallel inability to believe that women not only speak but also have things to say amounts to denouncing 'the death of man' as no more than a funeral mask concealing a new form of oppression of women. It is a case of appropriation, therefore of violence aimed at devaluing women's expressions of the feminine.
Feminist analysts converge on this point, in fact: women's theoretical silence must be put down to man's appropriation and violation of their bodies. The same point about the 'necessary' sacrifice of the feminine is made by psychoanalytic theory, which reveals the link between the image of woman and death, that is to say material and temporal limitations. As if every woman stood for, was a figuration of the mother whose symbolic murder is the condition of entry into the symbolic order (Lacan). The masculine, sign of transcendence and immortality, has projected all the weight of the matter, corporeality, and mortality of the human species on Woman. Just as he aimed to be 'pure spirit', so he has made for her 'pure body', linked to the cycles of life and death.
This appropriation of the feminine is all the more inexcusable because feminist women have often complained that men's texts and theoretical
discourse do not try to express an other, non-phallic masculine sexuality. Women have reiterated that the right to difference is mutual and consequently they asked male thinkers to enunciate their difference. But the lack of response is alarming, as a recent publication aptly entitled Men in Feminism confirms. The poverty of male deconstructions of masculinity, fortunately palliated by recent works by male gay theorists,74 and by stunning exceptions like Klaus Theweleit's work, quoted earlier, seems to confirm the already classic feminist analysis: men cannot express themselves, they do not manage to express their bodily experience, their sexual specificity. Used as they are to representing the universal, the general, the human, they find themselves unable to speak of that which is closest to them: their desire, their singularity. It is certainly easier to fall back on the centuries-old tradition of fantasizing an 'other' upon which their existential anguish can be projected.
Consequently modern thought is indeed in mourning, but the death in question concerns less the subject than his fantasy of universality and immortality. It is therefore understable, according to this logic of domination through metaphorization, that, at the moment when the order of modern knowledge confronts the subject man with his own partiality, gaps and lacks, masculine theoretical discourse should have discovered in a certain feminine the possibilities of life, in the sense of a new transcendence. Like the lorry in the anecdote serving as epigraph to this chapter, woman is always the carrier of man's fantasy, onto which he can unload the burdensome weight of his own void. I see in this 'ruse' the latest version of an ancient power-tactic, which has justified itself by assuming the right of life and death over the body of the 'other':
Masculine thought has ratified the mechanism justifying war, the condottieri, heroism and strife between the generations as necessary. The masculine unconscious is a receptacle for blood and fear. Now that we recognize that the whole world is shot through and through with his fantasies of death, and that we see pity as the role imposed on women in the same logic, we are abandoning man, so that he can fathom the depths of his solitude.75
To abandon the heir to rationalist thought, faced with his solitude, his finality, is not a simple substitutive operation, a reversal which would transform the former slaves into the new mistresses. Nor is it a question of facile triumphalism on the part of women, a merciless retaliation. It is simply the unveiling of the symbolic murder of the feminine that lies at the heart of the socio-symbolic contract, and the intention of making men accountable for this history.
Women's struggle is essentially a living struggle, for life, undertaken by living beings who aim to stay that way. And so they distance themselves from the discourse of the crisis. Women, who are only just emerging from the silence which has bound them for centuries, have
quite a different message to convey about the non-fulfilment of thought and the fracturing of the Cartesian certainty of the subject. This condition of incompleteness is all too familiar to them, for having been their historical lot.
As in Beckett's play Waiting for Godot, what is most difficult to lose is expectation. The real challenge thrown to modern thought, the most difficult to take up, is the recognition of space as infinite movement, of time as discontinuous present, of the void as excess, not as nothingness, of the subject as a multiple collective entity, of women as agents in their own history. I would say that modern philosophy is faced with a task for which it is ill-prepared: it is no longer a question of learning how to die (that perennial philosophical concern!), but of accepting its mortality, its finitude. Foucault demonstrates that the end of metaphysics as primary philosophy results in the quest for an alternative modern ethics. If man -the universal subject - is dead, then anything is possible. This allows the emergence of a thought whose drift is unstoppable, which is unable to conclude (itself). 'Man is turned towards himself,' adds Lonzi, T?ut woman affirms that for her, life on this planet has yet to begin. She sees, where man no longer sees.'76
The acuity of our vision is indispensable now: for the territory of modern thought is, after the example of social and political life in post-industrial society, a minefield for women. That the 'feminine' is re-emerging in the context of this nostalgia for the lost unity of the subject reveals real, immediate dangers for women in the material and discursive framework of postmodern society. Anti-feminism is in fact an integral part of postmodern discourse on the dissolution of sexual identities. Lipovetsky gives a typical example:
Neo-feminism, a generalized se(x)duction, only exacerbates the process of personalization, it constructs a new figure of the feminine, polymorphous and sexed, emancipated from the roles and strict identities of the group, as is consonant with the institution of the open society. As much on the theoretical level as on the militant, neofeminism works to recycle the feminine being by her all-out valorization - psychological, sexual, political, linguistic.77
By reducing feminism to an episode in the process of narcissistic personalization characteristic of postmodern societies, Lipovetsky perpetuates the postmodern generation's misunderstanding of and contempt for women. Not only does he overlook the political significance of the feminist movement, but also he seems not to know that feminism is not primarily a discourse on feminine sexuality. This reduction of feminist discourse to 'something to do with sex' betrays one of the most persistent and offensive patriarchal habits: the projection of sexual specificity onto the woman.
What are even more fundamentally dishonest in postmodern dis-
course are the accusations of moralism, censure, and collaboration with state-run power-politics. These are just so many accusations which pose the question of feminist discourse's status in relation to the sociopolitical institutions of the liberal system.
Instead of appropriating, impersonating or sitting in judgement, men must also learn to hear the new feminist voice, and develop a positive relation to listening to others. As Marguerite Duras says:
Men must cease to be theoretical imbeciles. The solid stand taken all over the world (and brought about by young people) on the minimal human condition (of which women and workers are prime examples) implies that men must renounce their theoretical rattle and accept the silence which is common to all oppressed people. Men must learn to be silent. This is probably very painful for them. To quell their theoretical voice, the exercise of theoretical interpretation. They must watch themselves carefully.78
They may have no alternative, after all: it must be very difficult and uncomfortable to be a male, white, middle-class intellectual at a time in history when so many minority groups are claiming their right to establish forms of knowledge hitherto considered marginal. It must indeed be difficult for men to learn to be silent, or to make themselves accountable for the injustices and oppressions of which philosophy as a discipline is responsible.
Nevertheless, this kind of worry, and the pathos that goes with it, is hardly the most urgent preoccupation for feminist women, for whom the priority is the acquisition of basic socio-political rights. It is the urgency of these struggles that has led to a tactic diametrically opposed to the men's: the sexualization of discourse, so as to expose the false universalism of theoretical statements and their complicity with masculine power.
The emphasis on sexual difference also stresses the limits of the emancipatory and egalitarian position that aims at bringing women into the patriarchal system whose overall structures and habits they denounce. The question is, how and where to establish the limits of libertarian discourse: the 'progressivism' men have conceded to women - or rather, which women have seized from them in a political struggle -has not resulted in legal or economic conditions of equality. An over-emphasis on equality may lead one to forget a number of other, in my opinion, more pertinent questions. First and foremost among them: where does our ethics, the ethics of feminist sisterhood, stand in all of this? What price are we ready to pay to be part of this system? Where is the point beyond which 'homologation' becomes an irreversible process? The assertion of sexual difference, intended as the fundamental lack of symmetry between the sexes, leads to a politics of subjectivity,
the search for a new status for women's existence and discourse. I shall explore this point in the next chapters.
It only remains for women to accept this fundamental dissonance between the discourse produced by feminists and the discourse which a certain philosophy of crisis can produce on the feminine. What we seem to be witnessing is the emergence of dissonance as a mode of contemporary reflection. This amounts to posing the difference between the sexes as the basic problem, and along with it, the constitutive polysexuality of human beings, which dislocates the respective positions of the 'masculine' and the 'feminine' in thought. The term 'dissonance' seems to me apt to emphasize the falsely reassuring nature of any dream of unity or global synthesis.
There is no final reconciliation between either the 'feminine' and the 'masculine', or women and discourse, or feminism and philosophy. We have to acknowledge that these segmentary lines break up into a multiplicity of scattered, separate points of reflection. We must rethink feminist theory starting from the insight of post-structuralist philosophy, especially Deleuze, without however being confined by its often disappointing conclusions and implications.
It may be that the deepest source of dissonance is the fact that the men and women in question do not agree as to the theoretical significance of their respective differences. As if they were so great as to prevent all dialogue: we do indeed differ about our differences. In the last twenty years a double vision has developed, between the critical thought developed by certain feminisms, and the philosophical investigations on the status of woman herself.
This split in a thought which aims to be critical79 betrays, I think, the growing awareness of the actual institutions of research and knowledge, of the feminist presence in domains which were hitherto exclusively masculine.
In their search for a way and a voice which are specific to women, whether it inclines to reformism or to a more radical subversion, feminist theorists are developing a radical critique of the present function of philosophy as well as of the major traditional disciplinary boundaries. This project not only disrupts the established political schemas; it also opens up new discursive structures.
Towards a Philosophical Reading of Feminist Ideas
Think we must. Let us think in offices; in omnibuses; while we are standing in the crowd watching Coronations and Lord Mayor's Shows; let us think as we pass the Cenotaph; and in Whitehall; in the gallery of the House of Commons; in the Law Courts; let us think at baptisms and marriages and funerals. Let us never cease from thinking - what is this 'civilisation' in which we find ourselves? What are these ceremonies and why should we take part in them? What are these professions and why should we make money out of them? Where in short is it leading us, the procession of the sons of educated men? Woolf
Feminist Genealogies
How shall we ever make the world intelligent on our movement? Stanton2
In many ways, it is still too soon to write the history of feminist thought,3 and besides, feminism is neither a concept, nor a theory, nor even a systematic set of utterances about women. It is, rather, the means chosen by certain women to situate themselves in reality so as to redesign their 'feminine' condition. It would be dangerous to propose a purely theoretical representation of this multiple, heterogeneous complex of women's struggles. I think that the best possible way of reading feminist thought today is by drawing a map rather than an attempt to classify.
Besides, I as the feminist who is writing this text cannot dissociate the genealogical account from a sort of narrative of my own theoretical and political origins as a feminist: the personal is not only the political, it is also the basis for the theoretical.
An added difficulty is the fact that feminism has emphasized the link between theory and practice to such a degree that it is difficult to formulate a 'history of feminist ideas' that does not also take into
account a practice of a political and epistemological value. Feminist thought remains, rather, an open question, for which we can draw diagrammatical maps as theoretical plans of action, without even hoping for a final taxonomy, let alone an ultimate methodology.
Next, the antinomy between thought and the feminine, which is deeply rooted in our culture, also creates special difficulties in that women's entitlement to theoretical subjectivity is still the object of political debate. Women traditionally have been defined as being suspended between matter (the body, nature, animality) and reason; rationality has been represented as an attribute which is divine in origin, and present in man through phallic inheritance. The belief in the natural, that is, biological, origins of the theoretical inferiority of women is one of the columns on which the patriarchal political and theoretical order rests. In the course of the centuries of patriarchal history it has led to the devaluation of women's intellectual faculties, creativity, imagination, and intelligence, as well as to the repression of their civil and political rights, and then exclusion from the places of production and the transmission of knowledge.
From there on, the link between a socio-political system based on the absence of women, and an order of discourse which legitimates their absence by defining them as reason's 'other', its converse, is a nerve-centre on which numerous feminist analyses converge. I shall return to them in the next chapter.
The longstanding absence of women from theoretical discourse also means that there is no established tradition of female thinkers, writers, teachers, no feminine theoretical and intellectual genealogy. Female thinkers are still scattered: like archives buried beneath the dust of so many temples and cities,4 the traces of their discursivity are lost in the passage of a historical time which is not their time.5 This research work prevents the dispersal and occupation of women's struggles and thus works towards the preservation of the historical continuity of women's political commitment to the struggle for subjectivity.
Moreover, the gaps and discontinuities that mark the feminist intellectual tradition make women's thought vulnerable to forms of interpretation and manipulation. One of the main feminist genealogists, Dale Spender, points out that a great deal of female intellectuals were either neglected or had their ideas used and exploited without proper acknowledgement being made to the authors. Worse dangers, however, threaten the feminist theoretical genealogy; one example of these, in the present context of 'crisis', is Allan Bloom's chapter on feminism in his conservative manifesto, The Closing of the American Mind.6 Apart from the dismissive tone, Bloom's argument perpetuates the worst possible reduction of the actual dynamics of the women's movement. By stressing the aspect of sexual liberation, to the detriment of the global critique feminism has put forward of the gender system, Bloom kills two birds with one stone: he deflates the feminist cause while attacking the
'postmodern' emphasis on sexual fulfilment, arguing that sex outside reproduction is a form of biological suicide for our species. This work of deformation of the history of the women's movement is further evidence of the need to codify and transmit women's own accounts of the intellectual forces at work in the movement.
In their critical essay on contemporary nostalgia and neoconservatism Doane and Hodges point out another interesting aspect of the nostalgic approach:7 conservative texts like Bloom's shift the theoretical battleground onto representation itself, so that the struggle becomes one of definitions. The actual description given of feminism in such texts is a pure textual invention of the authors, a strategy aiming at discrediting the feminists by evoking a fictional 'past' whose main function is to denigrate the present. By contrast, what feminist theoreticians aim at is a genealogy that aims at formulating further strategies of action.
On this point feminist criticism is quite clear: the fragmentation of women's resistance in history expresses one of the distinctive features of patriarchal power: its corporeal roots. They express a discursive power which functions through the sequestration of language, lived experience, and the body of women. The absence of women from theoretical history is the sign of a much more fundamental exclusion of the female gender from the rights of subjectivity in the political, economic, symbolic sense of the term.
The question of the theoretical and historical precedents is therefore only one aspect of the much more vast and complex problematic of filiation: the production and transmission of power/knowledge in a patronymic line. The paternal metaphor, as psychoanalytic theory has shown, takes over the social field and gives it a (single) meaning. It functions as a practice of self-legitimation and perpetuation of the male homosocial bond, of masculine power. This plays not only on the exclusion of women but also, most strikingly, in terms of the inclusion of women as exchange value, a form of objectification that implies their relinquishing the very entitlement to subjectivity. Insofar as it elucidates the material and symbolic structures of this system, feminism is a critical theoretical movement; for, far from limiting themselves to simply enumerating the crimes of oppression and omission committed against women, feminists have taken on the positive task of analysing our culture's schemes of knowledge.
The constantly re-enacted incompatibility of women and Reason, or theoretical intelligence, is one of the main obstacles in the elaboration of a theoretical and, especially, philosophical reading of feminism. Every attempt comes up against the distrust, if not hostility, of the established disciplines, and philosophy occupies a place of pre-eminence in the general context of suspicion of the feminine, women, and feminists. In the patriarchal logic subjacent to all discourse, in fact, the very idea of feminist theory seems to be a contradiction in terms: how could women
elaborate a true theory? A theory which would be rigorous, systematic, linear? Women, the eternal dark continent of man-kind, the blindspot of all processes of theorization, beggars at the philosophical banquet, seem unable to come into their own theoretically. A women's truth, expressed by women, seems endlessly fragmented, scattered, divided within itself - and always devalued.
Fortunately this is where the theoretical impact of feminism acquires the value of a real intervention insofar as it raises their consciousness and awakes the need for critical reflection. Feminist reflection is also the sketch of an other theory of human consciousness and of the epistemological premises on which its knowledge depends. I think therefore that, despite and because of the multiplicity and dispersion of contemporary feminist thought, it is possible to establish some general rules towards a reading of this heterogeneous corpus.
It is important to stress here the important role played by the new discipline known as 'women's studies' as a field of knowledge and an organizational structure aiming at systematizing, assessing and transmitting women's intellectual efforts and the feminist theoretical tradition.8
The characteristic features of feminist knowledge are no longer simply a matter of its content. In other words, women's studies or feminist theory is not (only) about women, quite the contrary: as we have seen, the explosion of interest in women and writing on them is such that this field is marketed and therefore integrated into a postmodern system of exchange of cultural goods. In feminism, on the other hand, it is more a question of a subversive quality of intelligence, a political edge of commitment to women's struggles; it is as much an intellectual style, it is the constant desire for forms of investigation, expression and transmission of knowledge other than those established within the patriarchal discursive system.
This radical demand responds, in my opinion, to an ethical and political drive which is constitutive of feminist thought and which characterizes it above and beyond any of its thematics. It involves both the relation to the institution of knowledge, and also a different relation to theorization, production and writing (ecriture). This intellectual style is, as I argued in the previous chapters, one of the points that feminist theory shares with postmodernism, despite their many differences on other scores.
In putting into play the differences existing between a certain philosophical discourse on women and feminist thought itself, my aim is twofold: firstly, to pose differently the question of 'women and philosophy', by means of a revaluation of women's theoretical intelligence. Secondly, I want to emphasize that feminist theory reveals an intellectual voice and a mode of thinking that may be specific to women. The working hypothesis this suggests translates an idea that is, for me, an intellectual passion: that at the heart of the feminist project there
remains the paradox of a collective search for singular identities. As Marcelle Marini says:
Through their exchange of words and texts women try, consciously or unconsciously, to constitute for themselves an other collective identity which can uphold the particular desire of each to live, speak, act, think, dream, love and hate ... each in her own name.9
In order to explore this paradox I will prefer to make way for the words of those women who, through their struggles with and in theory, have advanced this reflection. My account is neither an attempt at systematization, nor a simple catalogue of theoretical interventions on feminism. It is rather a cartography of feminist positions, drawing an unfinished and unfixed map of an intellectual itinerary that is still, more than ever, in motion.
Assessing the Second Wave
Since the late seventies, the need to assess the second wave has been a top priority on the feminist agenda. In my reading a great deal of contemporary feminist theory rests upon implicit or explicit readings of the impact, the basic ideas, the assumptions and the evaluation of contemporary feminist ideas. Assessing the recent past provides a much-needed 'narrative of origins' as the genealogical starting point for further theorizations of feminism. This is not only needed because of the lack of an established theoretical lineage, it rather points to an internal, structural necessity of feminist theory: the recognition that all theorizing is a genealogical rereading of the premises and assumptions that make one's discourse possible. By recognizing the cartographic nature of theory, feminists come very close to the post-structuralist philosophers' recognition of the limitations, if not the failure of their own, much more established traditions. They both come down to a crisis of legitimation, though for diametrically opposed reasons, and they both result in the redefinition of theory away from system-building, in the direction of diagrams, maps of resistance, schemes of deconstruction. 'There is no "beginning" of feminism in the sense that there is no beginning to defiance in women ... Female resistance has taken several historical shapes.'10
It therefore follows that the ways in which the ideas and the theoretical achievements of the second wave are assessed and categorized, and the criteria by which qualitative distinctions are made among feminist texts, are in themselves the expression of theoretical or intellectual positions, values and assumptions. As evidence of this, let me quote briefly three influential works that classify and reorganize the intellectual capital of the second wave.
In her reading of the development of this new field of research, Kate Stimpson distinguishes three major periodizations of women's studies: first came the critique of sexism as a permanent bias in the social as well as the discursive fields. This implied the deconstruction of the systems of knowledge resting on sexist premises; it was followed by the reconstruction of knowledge along different variables: first and foremost among them, that of gender and of women-identified discourse. The final and most recent phase, argues Stimpson, is the redefinition of universal epistemological and ethical values on the basis of gender-specific knowledge. This more explicitly philosophical phase will be explored more thoroughly in the next chapter.11
Hester Eisenstein12 also singles out three periods: the first being that of the founding texts of the great visionaries and utopian thinkers of the late 1960s. The second period is the evolution of the women-centred perspective which, for Eisensten, corresponds to a shift of emphasis from the notion of 'equality' and the ethics of sisterhood as a political rejection of oppression to that of 'difference'. In Eisenstein's reading the latter is connected to an increased emphasis on feminist 'metaphysics' which is in conflict with the stated aims of socialist feminism. The third phase results, in Eisenstein's assessment, from the relative failure of the second: the notion of difference led either to a new form of feminist 'essentialism', that is to say a substantive redefinition of woman, or to the idea of women's moral superiority. I shall be returning to these notions in the next chapter.
Jaggar organizes the material in four broad classifications, each of which corresponds simultaneously to: a theory of human nature and of subjectivity; a political philosophy and a theory of political knowledge, that is to say to a new epistemology. These positions are: the liberal feminist; traditional Marxism; radical feminism and socialist feminism.13
When I reread the actual texts of the second wave, however, I cannot help being struck by a quality in the writing, the tone and the textual structure that are very different from the analytical or critical categorization quoted above. This should not be understood as a criticism of the cartographers, but rather as a tribute to the intensity and the insight expressed in those 'founding texts'. What I find in these texts today, over and above the visceral cries of revolt, is a powerful visionary or utopian drive. This can be expressed in terms of political blueprints for action, as is the case for Atkinson and for Firestone, whose Dialectic of Sex is still a classic and one of the most incisive statements about the future of women in a highly technological society.14 The antiauthoritarian, even anarchic tone is overwhelming; the derision, the vitriolic criticism are essential to the force of something like the SCUM (Society for Cutting Up Men) Manifesto of Valerie Solanis or in Germaine Greer's book The Female Eunuch, which is in keeping with a centuries-old European tradition of the quarrel over the ladies' brainpower and civil rights.15
The intensity of tone conveys first of all the need for justice; whether the authors be of the liberal kind (Betty Friedan and the National Organization of Women) or radical (Ti-Grace Atkinson and her political battlefield maps in Amazon Odyssey) they all develop in their own ways a precise standpoint on the forms and impact of a situation of oppression. Many other passions and levels of intensity, however, flow through these texts: the desire to discover, understand and share the experience of women, in a sense of commonness that cuts across all the established differences of class, race and lifestyles that separate women.
A more poetic vain also runs through these early texts which, still free from the specialized tone of later feminist scholarship, are marked by a healthy disregard for disciplinary boundaries and academic conventions. Fictional works and poetic texts, as well as purely utopian visions mark the literary production of those days. In this respect, special mention should be made of the lesbian output that, praising the beauty of woman-to-woman relationships, laid the foundations for another view of social organization: from Wittig's Le corps lesbien to Jill Johnston's Lesbian Nation, through Mae Brown's work, a new area of analysis emerges in which the idea of sexual difference acquires a sharper edge.
Consequently, the second wave of feminism is a special moment in the long history of women's struggle. While defining it as one of the most revolutionary social movements of the century, Adrienne Rich adds:
The mid-twentieth-century wave of feminism has gone further and asked more than its predecessors. Like patriarchy itself, the extent and influence of the antipatriarchal women's movement is difficult to grasp. It is not defined by specific organizations, groupings, or factions, though these exist in abundance. It exists in many stages of development throughout the world, at the most local, pragmatic levels, as a network of formal and informal communications, as a growing body of analysis and theory, and as a profound moral, psychic, and philosophical revaluation of what it means to be 'human'.16
Twentieth-century neo-feminism, in comparison to the other historical manifestations of women's revolt, is marked by the will to break away from and question radically the political and intellectual avant-gardes of its day. As Juliet Mitchell points out in Woman's Estate, the second wave of feminism, in England as in most Western countries, grew out of the general movement of political worker and student revolt in the sixties, in a socio-cultural context shot through with Marxist-Freudian ideology.17
The spirit of 1968, in France as elsewhere, not only 'liberated' the human sciences, by turning them into an instrument for the critique of power; it also helped to recast the question of sexuality as an instance and site of struggle and thereby set the context for feminism. Some of
the historical predecessors of contemporary women's struggles tend to reveal, rather, if not a phenomenon of direct derivation, at least a fundamental agreement with the master-thinkers of their time. This is certainly true in the case of John Stuart Mill and Mary Wollstonecraft, for instance. The same sort of agreement as to women's political demands was struck, though not without pain, at the end of the nineteenth century between Marxism and feminism. This alliance between the workers' struggle and women's voices, which was cemented by the writings of Engels, Bebel, Kollontay, and Rosa Luxembourg, amongst others, gave tremendous impetus to feminist thought. In the shadow of Marxist analysis the concepts which remain fundamental to feminism developed: for instance, the relation between capitalism and patriarchy, that is, between the modes of production and kinship structures, the notion of the 'class', 'caste', or simply 'feminine stratum' of the population, the idea of 'double militancy', and so on.
In the late 1960s in Europe, however, the understanding between the feminists and their Marxist revolutionary brothers did not result in as peaceful a cooperation as the libertarian ideologies of the preceding century. From the outset, the contemporary movement in the women's struggle was defined as a double revolt: on the one hand against bourgeois patriarchal ideology and the socio-economic order which supports it; and on the other, against the political programmes and the revolutionary schema proposed by Marxist ideology which, however radical, is nonetheless male-dominated in its deep structures. Beyond all ideology, feminists have come to designate and name patriarchal power itself, in its ubiquity, as their battleground.
This double revolt at the roots of contemporary feminist thought makes the 'sisters' of the second wave the first generation to have consciously rejected all the existing, cultural models, even the most 'revolutionary' ones. 'Undutiful daughters' indeed, T>ad pupils' of the established master-thinkers, this generation of women will pass into history as that of rupture, separation and ingratitude towards those who 'formed' them politically and intellectually. It is precisely through the rejection of all 'master-narratives' that the second wave earned the qualification of 'radical feminism'.
The distance thus opened between the women and the masters, between feminist thought and ideology marks an irrevocable historical moment. It was immediately apparent in the critique of Marxist ideology, which Juliet Mitchell sums up as follows:
Radical feminism finds that the inadequacies within Marxist analyses of a comprehension of women's oppression are due not to its chronic underdevelopment in this sphere (as Marxist women believe) but to the limitations of the theory itself. The failure is not failure of attention, but limitation of scope.18
The debate with Marxism has concerned feminists for a long time, and it is far from being resolved; for by affirming that the matrix of all exploitation lies in men's power over women, and therefore in sexuality and the family, feminism disrupts the conceptual framework of Marxist thought. This line of demarcation between class analysis and radical feminism still exists within the women's movement. Joan Kelly sums up the situation as follows:
Feminist thinkers in the Marxist tradition have traced the divided socio-sexual order to the organisation of capitalist production outside the home. They have shown that the separation of work (production) and leisure (consumption) really exists for men only. As a conception of society, the notion of home as a refuge from the world of work masks a sexual division of labour. It mystifies women's work in the home, obscuring the fact that this domestic labour helps 'reproduce' capitalist and patriarchal society ... Radical feminists, concerned more with sexuality and socialization than with labour, have supplemented this analysis. Focusing upon consciousness and culture on the one hand, as well as the obscure workings of the unconscious, they have analysed the psychic, sexual and ideological structures that differentiate the sexes, setting up an antagonistic relation of dominance and subjection between them.19
The issue is and will always remain men's control of women's bodies. In the radical feminist analysis more than in any of the other styles of feminist thought there emerges a theory of modern patriarchal culture, based on the dialectical interaction of binary modes of thinking. According to Firestone, they are on the one hand, the scientific, technological, masculine mind; on the other, the aesthetic, artistic, the feminine. This binary reading will perhaps seem naive or reductive, but it is far from being outmoded, especially amidst the bio-technological revolution of the eighties. To efface the earlier human modalities and categories, and to get out of the infernal circle in which masculine and feminine principles are endlessly in opposition, Firestone argues that it will first be necessary to get rid of the keystone of the difference between the sexes: the maternal function. Thus the dialectical schema will be left behind once and for all, and the emergence of a new androgynous culture made possible. This position is defended today, in a different style and for other purposes, by Elisabeth Badinter.20
The urge to deny difference or to transcend it is to be understood as the rejection of the system of domination and social hierarchy that uses difference as synonym of oppression. H. Eisenstein comments: 'Difference from men meant inequality and continued oppression for women. Within the women's movement, to acknowledge or to emphasize differences seemed equally dangerous. It implied the creation of com-
parisons, of competition and of hierarchies, and, therefore, of insuperable obstacles to unity/21
Like Ti-Grace Atkinson, Firestone concludes therefore that inequalities will finally be abolished through a levelling of men and women. Given that the principal differential is precisely women's reproductive capacity, feminism must begin by criticizing the hold exercised over women's bodies by the culturally dominant sexuality, that is, monogamous heterosexuality.
Men neatly decimated Mankind by one half when they took advantage of the social disability of those men who bore the burden of the reproductive process. Men invaded the being of those individuals now defined as functions, or 'females', appropriated their human characteristics, and occupied their bodies. The original 'rape' was political, the robbing of one half of Mankind of its humanity.22
We have come a long way, here, from the reserved statements of a Levi-Strauss on the exchange of women as a constitutive feature of any cultural order; a long way, too, from the bad faith that led him to contemplate, as a possible but unlikely hypothesis, the converse: that is, the exchange by women of men. An abstract hypothesis, seductive in its very naivety, for if it has never materialized at any historical moment the undeniable fact that is men's violence against women has a good deal to do with it. It is this violence, constitutive of patriarchal power, that feminists condemn and analyse, arguing that it has been raised to the level of constant practice in patriarchy. As Virginia Woolf had already lucidly stated in Three Guineas, the power of patriarchy is a sort of 'metaphysical cannibalism' which feeds upon female energy, intelligence and labour-force in order to sustain the monuments of masculine power, first and foremost among them the symbolic institution that is the male ego. At the centre of the debate about the most oppressive factors which weigh on the sexes, acting as the psychological pivot of the oppression of women - heterosexual love.
It is a euphoric state of dreaming, where the victim transforms her oppressor into her redeemer. She turns against herself her natural hostility towards the aggressor. Love is the natural response of the victim towards the rapist.23
This analysis has had important political and emotional consequences for the women's movement. The key question 'If we were free, would we need love?' releases a political certainty as to the necessity of a separatist movement, a privileged place in which it would be possible to anlayse the multiple links which bind women to their oppressors.
Research by women in the movement is based on the profound conviction that oppression will cease once women have given up all
identification will the oppressor, by giving themselves other means of self-definition.
Today, still, I am struck by the militant, often desperate tone of this first phase of neo-feminism: its exasperation, its rage in the face of the crimes committed against women, its anguish speak to me, and question me. The fact that neither Ti-Grace Atkinson nor Firestone published major works after their world-shattering manifestos also reveals the unique blend of elements that made their discourse possible.
I'm not real in this culture that gave birth to me and has used me. I'm just a collection of myths: a bit-player in the drama of existence. The idea of me is real: temptress, goddess, child, mother - but I myself have no reality. Women's mythical dimension is real and recognizable; it's their human dimension that is clearly false and will be denied to the last, to my last breath.24
Woman is other - excluded, alienated, denied, a blank screen onto which man projects his anguished terror of death, his contempt for, and fear of, all that is pre-rational and corporeal.
On the positive side, the specificity of women's political struggles has been symbolized in the movement's choice of separatism, which is a quite unambiguous gesture of rejection and separation. It turned the women's movement into a place of elaboration of a political and theoretical identity proper to women. For the first time in the long history of their struggle, women's voice has not been derivative, but autonomous and thus subversive. Taking as their starting point an analysis of women's experience, that is, feminine lived corpor(e)ality, whether it be oppression or the different approaches to desire and pleasure in sexuality, radical feminism led to the critique of power-formations in the perspective of gender, and of sexual difference.
The 'problem without a name', as Betty Friedan called it in the sixties, has gradually been transformed into a movement without an ideology, and against all ideologies. As Frangoise Collin puts it:
The women's movement is not an ideology which, suitably defined and elaborated, would formulate an individual and social norm of action, resting on an audacious new conception of woman, leading towards a feminist society ... The women's movement is in the first instance a resistance to the One, in favour of the polymorphous springing emergence of women's desires and words in their unforeseeable diversity and differences.25
So feminism seems to be a struggle against the very existence of power, a struggle for a mode of organization and life which would no longer be maintained by the distinctions of class and sex. To the extent that power is coextensive with discursive structures, feminists have had
to learn, often at their expense, that knowledge in itself is not the source of salvation. Learn, too, that the links between power and knowledge are so dense that the idea of a truth or a revolutionary revelation is only a myth: there is no ultimate truth free of the faults of the cultural system from which it emerged. In other words, this desire to theorize, and the pleasure of thinking, this theoretical drive which has become apparent in the women's movement, is neither free from or uncontaminated by the premises of the culture in which it takes shape. This point has been painfully driven home by black and third-world women, as well as women from ethnic minorities in Western countries, in one of the most important debates of the last twenty years. Women from minorities have not hesitated to criticize the second feminist wave for conscious or unconscious ethnocentrism in their analysis of the woman question.26
The point of departure for second-wave feminism is the conviction that, despite all other differences of class, race and sexual preference, women, who nonetheless represent one half of the human race, and are present at every historical moment and in all social structures, are considered as a minority. The exclusion and oppression of women, as well as the repression and denial of the 'feminine' in our culture are such that it is impossible for a human being of the female sex to reflect on herself without also questioning this general condition which concerns all women.
The idea of a link between each individual women and the status of all women was launched by Simone de Beauvoir in 1949, and it still remains a key idea in radical modern feminism. In The Second Sex she admits that she had planned to write an autobiographical work, but discovered in the course of this that her specific condition was inseparable from a more general catagory: the feminine condition. This realization, which perhaps no longer suprises us today, was revolutionary; to say that woman does not exist, that she is only man's other, is now a received political idea. But what for us now is only too evident, only forty years ago was still inconceivable, and has only been explained, propagated, and accepted thanks to the responses which echo Beauvoir's arguments. As K. Stimpson put it, 'It is thanks to our joint struggle that what was blasphemy has now become a banality.'27
For what is evident in Beauvoir's work is all the force as well as the ambiguity of the woman-subject in the face not only of theory and writing, but also of love, desire, in a word, the intersubjective dimension. That women is the 'other', always the pole of opposition, defined in relation to the masculine, is the least of Beauvoir's observations. What makes her work fundamental is that she was able to assume this position of 'other', and that she could think and write from that position. In so doing she has traced a direct and, in my opinion, vital connection between a woman's coming into writing, her becoming as a subject, and her political consciousness. Three aspects of the same problematic,
which is vital for contemporary feminism. It also stresses the necessity oth£X?°f fema,e	and with ^ an
We are naive and moralistic women. We are human beings who find
P°'dcs ruf Up°n the human condition. And do not know how to cope with it except through politics. And more directiy throuA change, liberation, small personal things, subjective exerdses appropriate only to persons with enough to eat, residing in one of the
Sewyhoa1rtheevd' Tdy deVel°ped CapitaUst -d tape^Hst
nations. Who if they made certain inroads upon their own societv necks S" *° ““	others upTn Xst
fb»noth!i v°men s ™ovement-the coincidence thus established between the condition specific to a woman and the set of facts about the feminine
rSfnX^lnmest?10?^-	** practice of
fUthough in the euphoria
sisterhood', the sorority thus estabUshed is just a^ture ofthi o^variabtes3like mce ^dTex^
experience, was late m coming to the fore in feminist debates ‘an
I^HSSSSS&t
siSar“UeaCtiVf T°T °f aelf-exPressi°W which aims at defining the hailed to th re ,h0na mode' ls inseparable from political action8 and conation ref“°n 0f m0St received ideas!not only about the the 'other" beriS	““‘th*6	of language. In fact, if
the universality of wo™*' °‘her' ha‘1S/ °Ut of her awareness of from the olacT of ITT °PPress,°"; when 'she' begins to speak
wW**, is only a corporeal lived Aiffils c™	U b happening m discourse and writing
As Helene Cixous says in The Newly Bom Woman-. 8 '	'
What would happen to logocentrism, to the great philosophical systems, to the order of the world in general if the rock upon which they founded this church should crumble?31
In response to these queries that emerged from within the feminist community in response to feminist debates, it became necessary to review and correct some of the early insights of the second wave. This critical pause was also needed to take stock of the progress achieved. For women's time is passing and on several sides, the troubled question: 'What has feminism achieved?' is being asked. Elsewhere the militant mode of life and thought has worn out.
The fatigue is significant: on the positive side it signifies that a good number of the feminist targets of the earliest days have been reached, but progress towards equality has also led women towards a situation in which, according to the treacherous logic of the system, they run the risk of achieving a new invisibility: equal to and indistinct from men. I think that the misogynist fabric of our culture is such that the feminine is drained away in step with its promotion in terms of the socio-economic and discursive structures. Advanced capitalist society would even be ready - except, of course, in the context of severe economic recession -to open the doors of factories, offices, universities, some laboratories, the army and, recently in France, the Academie Frangaise to women, as long as they conform to established norms.
It is perfectly possible for a woman today to find herself in a mode of social relations in which she is treated as if she were a man (or wanted to be). Even the reforms which have been crucial to contemporary feminism - such as free contraception and freer access to abortion - can be turned against women, in making them conform to a model of constant sexual availability the 'liberating' value of which has been recently called into question. As Louise Vandelac pointed out, isn't the effect of the pill to make women all the better adapted to living in the masculine consumer society, making them always ready to enter into sexual exchange?32 Emancipation is a double-edged weapon: aware of the traps, one of the American 'historical' feminists has recently returned to the question of equality. In The Second Stage, Betty Friedan criticizes the ideal for which she had fought for fifteen years.
I sense other victories we thought were won yielding illusory gains; I see new dimensions to problems we thought were solved.33
Even if, right at the start of the second wave, an other feminism, that of the Redstockings and the Radical Feminists, had declared its opposition to Friedan's reformism and had harshly criticized her desire for 'collaboration' with the patriarchal order, we cannot be indifferent to her questions. I tend to think that the crisis for which Betty Friedan elected to speak, and which affects the ideal of equality between the sexes,
marks an internal impasse in the reformist feminist current of thought, but this does not prevent it from posing problems of a general order. It underlines, in fact, that behind the reforms - even the most liberal -patriarchy, like an omnivorous machine, persists in its assimilation of the subversive potential of each and every one, notably women.
This raises the question of the transition from a militant position to a more critical one with a new urgency. This crucial leap has been made within feminism and it has resulted in the emergence of a thought and a politics which, whilst still associated with the struggles for equality, have stated as their chief objective not reform, but rather the radical and structural change of social life, systems of knowledge and the vision of subjectivity. I shall return to this point shortly.
It is above all feminist research in the field of literary criticism that has contributed to our understanding of the problems related to the formulation of a new female feminist subjectivity, as T. de Lauretis puts
Particularly after 1973 there is quite a proliferation of feminist work on the structures and systems of thought of the patriarchal culture and knowledge-system in terms of its sexist or misogynist biases. In France the principal factor for change was the consequences of a type of psychoanalysis, Lacanian in derivation, which, as we saw earlier in this study, fuelled the post-68 leftist movement. In the next chapter I will analyse more closely the French theoreticians of difference. In the States the transition took place differently, in a more diffuse fashion; it coincided with the rapprochement between the women's movement and the peace movement and the campaign for nuclear disarmament, and also the expansion of the women's studies movement.
For instance, Kate Millett submits patriarchy to a rigorous analysis, and in order to arrive at an explanation of women's point of view, she posits feminism as a philosophical question which bears on identity and alterity. As a dialectical nucleus and open problem, subjectivity occupies the centre-stage: if patriarchal culture is the space inside which the subject is constituted - and seeing that it is, consequently, interiorized by all who might act on it — how can it be overcome?
The arena of sexual revolution is within human consciousness even more pre-eminently than it is within institutions. So deeply embedded is patriarchy that the character structure it creates in both sexes is perhaps even more a habit of mind and a way of life than a political system.
Through fiction Millett works simultaneously on patriarchy, male power, and love, desire and women's language. In her writing the fundamental postulate of feminism derived from Beauvoir - the personal is the political - comes to maturity: Millett affirms the priority of a certain definition of the personal over the political, or rather, the
coincidence between a woman's life and experience and her belonging to the women's movement.
As a writer of fiction, rather than as a political philosopher like Firestone or Atkinson, Millett defends an intellectual style where reason is not an instrumental notion, but rather an ethical and aesthetic one. The emphasis she places on subjective transformations, and therefore on the subversive power of writing as an agent of change, leads Millett not to declarations of war so much as to denunciation of violence, all violence, even that of which women are guilty among themselves. The aims of feminist struggles are thus reformulated in terms of resistance to power:
The revolution is change. Not merely rearrangement, but a deep emotional type of transformation that must also take place within us. It is a better way to live.36
Millett puts us on our guard against a simple dialectical reversal of the status quo in favour of women. The pacifist, non-violent line Millett expresses seems to me to a very pertinent critique of the traps of identification, and therefore of the mimetic relation which exists between a certain feminism and post-industrial society. Adopting a position against the violence inherent in all revolutionary theory, even and including the feminist scheme, Millett rather revaluates the subversive function of writing and creation, of language as a form of radical intervention upon reality. Her insight into the violence of representation, or rather into representation in the theoretical, poetic or visual mode as a systematic act of violence against women, will be pursued by an entire school of feminist theorists not only in the field of politics, but also in literary theory. One of the most prominent critics of the violence of literary discourse is Mieke Bal, who combines a mixture of semiotics and radical feminist analysis in the reading of both literary, biblical and visual texts.37
The analysis of patriarchal power has been transformed by a new insight. Millett:
How does change, which is, by its logical definition, the end of violence of all kinds, take power without violence? Better yet, how does change eliminate power, convert it to order, the ideal politics, that rational ordering of human affairs based on justice and good will?38
According to this definition, power constitutes a polymorphous network of controls and constraints, which circulates in the social structures. This idea of power, close to Foucault's thinking, has had very specific repercussions in the feminist milieu. By overcoming the idealist game of masters and slaves, this new conceptualization of politics as
resistance has provided new fuel for feminist ideas.
Adrienne Rich travels down the same road as Millett, in a more poetic vein: in lived feminine corpor(e)ality, in particular the maternal function, she finds a source of force and liberation, which clearly has no equivalent in men. Her point of departure is that all human life is born of women and that men, as Margaret Mead has also shown, have always felt threatened by women's reproductive power, for they inevitably depend on them for the perpetuation of the life of the species.39
Motherhood is therefore a reality and an institution, with two sides: one symbolizing women's power to create, the other, so the classic feminist analysis goes, representing the reproductive institution in whose name women have been oppressed. In her widely read essay, 'On compulsory heterosexuality and the lesbian experience', Rich pursues this point even further, positing the foundations for a women-based redefinition of the entire institution of sexuality. In Of Woman Born, she writes:
In order to live a fully human life we require not only control of our bodies ...; we must touch the unity and resonance of our physicality, our bond with the natural order, the corporeal ground of our intelligence. The ancient, continuing envy, awe, and dread of the male for the female capacity to create life has repeatedly taken the form of hatred for every other female aspect of creativity. Not only have women been told to stick to motherhood, but we have been told that our intellectual or aesthetic creations were inappropriate, inconsequential, or scandalous, an attempt to become 'like men', or to escape from the 'real' tasks of adult womanhood: marriage and childbearing. To 'think like a man' has been both praise and prison for women trying to escape the body-trap. No wonder that many intellectual and creative women have insisted that they were 'human beings' first and women only incidentally, have minimised their physicality and their bonds with other women. The body has been made so problematic for women that it has often seemed easier to shrug it off and travel as a disembodied spirit. But this reaction against the body is now coming into synthesis with new inquiries into the actual - as opposed to the culturally warped - power inherent in female biology, however we choose to use it, and by no means limited to the maternal function.40
Adrienne Rich's thought is concerned with the ethics of inter-subjective relations, taking the woman-to-woman bond as her model and moving beyond the condemnation of the socio-biological construction of women as 'different', meaning 'inferior'. Coming from a totally different tradition and without ever mentioning the word, Rich aligns herself quite closely with the positions of the post-structuralist generation of philosophers, suggesting that the first priority for feminist theory is to criticize the power of language and the hold of discourse on social
instances, in order to expose the complicity which exists between socio-economic forms of oppression and the theoretical practices and assumptions that sustain them.41 She also adds that the fundamental fault of our culture's knowledge, a fault which the term 'sexism' does not sufficiently condemn, results from men's cliquishness, from masculine solidarity - which is nothing but a form of ignorance grounded in prejudice. Never explained, and therefore purely arbitrary, this assimilates patriarchy to an immutable natural order, and regards women as a minority.
This ancient patriarchal mental habit has its basis in a whole system of binary oppositions between nature and culture, body and mind, woman and man, and so on, which enables its self-legitimation to function as a dialectical discursive mechanism. It is also because it has adopted this mode of intellectual operation that the patriarchal system has wilfully under-employed and denied women's talents, at the same time as excluding the 'feminine'.
In the same spirit, particularly in her later books, Rich condemns all the human sciences as a collection of half-truths and gaps as regards women's lived experience, knowledge and understanding.42 It is very significant that her project of radical critique of knowledge goes through the analysis of the mother's power, and underlines the specificity of the mother-daughter relation, not in order to produce a theoretical revaluation of women which would accompany their social insertion into late capitalism, but rather, in order to develop a programme of action specific to women. I think that the ultimate goal of theoretists like Rich and Millett might be the invention of a new feminist ethic.
In this sense, I think that feminist thought, which is a political act of criticism and condemnation, also aims to be a labour of creation, a site of critique and challenge to what is (taken to be) knowledge. This elaboration of the forms of expression specific to women is neither self-evident, nor without profound contradictions. At the centre of the debate I see the formidable nucleus of the issues of creation, power, and subversion.
We want to do our work, we want to create and be critical too. But how can we create if we know that our theoretical tools, our handholds, our rewards and also in part our unconscious images of what it is to be a creative person are produced by a culture which has excluded and devalued us? This is the question: how can we create, how can we create ourselves?43
The discursive order, the established modes of thought and writing, and the institutions which perpetuate them, constitute the fundamental structures of patriarchy. In this culture, reason, de facto given humanity as a whole, has been appropriated de jure by masculine logic in order to set up a direct equivalence between the rational and the masculine.
This logic of appropriation and domination, denounced by Ti-Grace Atkinson as 'metaphysical cannibalism', is supported by a particular socio-political system which I would not hesitate, following Kate Millett, to describe as masculine, military, monetary. Women who dare to penetrate this discursive territory run the risk of finding themselves stuck between hostile premises and intolerable conclusions. Bearing in mind the inherited antinomy between Woman and Reason within Western culture, women's labour of creation, whether it takes the form of the invention of new theoretical concepts or of new types of discursivity and textuality, is effected against the prescribed norms. To realize this end, women have to draw on intellectual and emotional resources which have been occulted by the dominant economy of discursive production. In the eyes of the doxa, all women's creation, all feminist thought, is 'applied', it is never a thought serenely detached from contextual considerations, above all from political commitment.
It is around this problematic nucleus of subversion and creation that feminist thought has matured its poetic or visionary current, to such a point that in recent years it has become an extremely rich and varied field. The group of revolutionary women poets in the States, around Adrienne Rich herself, but also Audre Lorde and many others, is one of the best examples of this. 'But women have survived. As poets', says Lorde;44 whereas in France, ecriture feminine (to which I shall return shortly), aims to celebrate the feminine as a space of creation. Most of the key theorists of the women's movement today are also very powerful writers: the blend of lucidity and emotion in the work of Adrienne Rich, for example, or Luce Irigaray, blurs the genres and cuts across the norms of at least two fields of discipline: theory and literature. Fictioned theories, theorizing fictions, their thought bears a truth which is, for me, emotional even before it is scientific, and which, according to Nancy K. Miller, can be seen as both the politics and the 'poetics of gender'.
It seems to me that the frontal attack women lead against the 'phallologocentrism' of discourse, the critique of meta-language, the rejection of classical rationality and its premises, above all the mind-body dualism, is conducive to a rediscovery of the subversive power of creative writing. Not unlike Derrida, many feminists know the corrosive power of lyrical verse, of 'pathos'. Poetry as radical critique of language itself, and as means to intensify its powers of perception of reality, seems to me a discursive strategy which expresses the unity of thinking and being, the indivisible connection of mind and body. The poet knows, as Kristeva puts it, that all knowledge rests on libidinal, that is to say affective and corporeal grounds.
At the centre of the debate is the emergence of a feminine sexuality and subjectivity different in the sense of differing from patriarchal definitions. It results in the deepening of the idea of separatism, in a more 'conceptual' sense, and thus marks the new theoretical chapter of
feminism as an epistemological enquiry. It would be too easy to criticize this thought's excessive aspects, or its separatist side: I prefer to read them in a strategic manner. What is at stake here seems to me to be precisely the redefinition of creative intelligence, the function of theory and the process of theorization itself, by the development of an other relation between women and these discursive modes. Minnick sums up as follows:
One of the general characteristics of feminist research, despite all the differences in content, form and political positions it involves, is a particular form of intelligence. In my view this is the result of work done by free minds capable of subverting norms, putting them in question, which have known profound emotional realities other than those usually allowed to most men and women in our society ... This feminist research gives us an insight into a human intelligence; a complete intelligence, no longer limited to the half-categories and half-opinions currently in vogue.45
This must not be understood as a magnanimous gesture towards 'humanity'; feminism does not present itself a priori as the 'future of man', last avatar of a humanism in full crisis. It is not in the name of humanity and its moral, spiritual, or economic survival that women have engaged in their struggles; they act first and foremost for themselves, on the basis of their experiences, in the name of their desire for justice and life. Feminist practice is the expression of women's ontological desire. In a very important article Christiane Makward suggests that:
It's the other's point of view that has to be expressed. Whatever the 'stolen tools', the methodologies recuperated from existing literary criticism, feminist literary criticism is inconceivable outside feminist action as a whole. It is a long-term militancy which questions cultural representations of sexuality in the domain of 'Literature' and the place that is the 'University'. These representations reflect social reality, reflect the condition of women, and structure our perception of that reality.46
Following Beauvoir, and at the same time displacing her problematic, feminists have posed the question close to my heart; given the fact that woman is the other, defined as being exterior, excluded from, the recognized circle of human experience, how can she come into a subjectivity of her own? The paradox inherent in this questioning is acknowledged and analysed by Frangoise Collin as follows:
We simultaneously regroup and situate ourselves as women in our practice, and challenge this concept as having been engendered by masculine dualist thought. This dualist thought seems in fact suspect
for it is always a thought of domination and hierarchy ... How can we traverse this dualism, we who are beginning to come together under one of its poles?47
It is in trying to answer this question that contemporary feminism takes an eminently philosophical dimension.
Oedipal Struggles
Betty Friedan's anxious questioning of the legacy of the second wave exposes the knots of contradiction which characterize the relation between different generations of women in all their violence. In this sense, the self-critique of this pioneer of feminism is summed up by the single question: 'What have we done to, and what have we left to, our daughters?'48
This difficult and painful question of motherhood, of the passing of generations, is thus asked once again within the women's movement itself. The problem has been intensified by the entry of women into the institutions, which in the intellectual world has resulted in the professionalization of feminist intellectuals, both within and without the women's studies structures. As Alice Jardine pointed out, this has resulted in the oedipalization of the public sphere, with the transposition to the institutional level of forms of interaction and of different approaches that had been experimented upon in the relative seclusion of the women's movement.49 This has not always been a smooth transition, and many differences among women - in political positions, in age, in institutional practice - have resulted in institutional conflicts. In an article on competition among academic women, E. Fox Keller draws up the balance-sheet of this problem.50
As far as the intellectual genealogy of feminism is concerned, however, the oedipalization of women's relations as a counterpart to the institutionalization of feminism offers another fruitful point of intersection between feminist theory and the post-structuralist and especially the psychoanalytic insight about the structure of symbolic and material institutions as sites of both rivalry and sublimation. This discussion is particularly relevant to the understanding of the central oedipal configuration in contemporary feminism: the relationship of contemporary feminists to Simone de Beauvoir.
Without wishing to rehabilitate the mother-daughter metaphor as a model of feminist interaction,51 it is an incontestable historical reality that Beauvoir is the symbolic mother of the second wave of feminism, which in turn is American in both origin and style. For instance, Shulamith Firestone, Kate Millett and Ti-Grace Atkinson dedicated their books to Simone de Beauvoir: 'For Simone de Beauvoir who endured'. Isn't it strange, not to say surprising that a work such as The Second Sex,
produced in the forties in France, has had to wait until the sixties before meeting in its own country with a success comparable to its American achievement. The Second Sex 'arrived' in France via a transatlantic detour.
The idyllic intercontinental disjunction of American feminism and France survives today,52 and the effects of counterpoint and resonance between the two are fascinating enough to deserve a separate study. Firstly, they have contributed to the creation of a widespread 'myth' which marks a sort of division of labour between French and American feminists: namely, the supposed theoretical superiority of the French over against the organizational superiority of the Anglo-Saxons.53
Although in one sense, this system of symbolic exchange cannot be dissociated from the network of commercial ties also known as the Atlantic Pact, I think it also shows something else. The presentation of the two movements as being on the one hand pragmatic and dynamic, and on the other, more theoretical and subtle, also reveals a division of labour that verges on competition.
At the centre of the debate the figure of Simone de Beauvoir, both nucleus and bridge, functions as the theoretical mother of us all: it is she who knows and has managed to express herself before all of us. It is perhaps a paradox, but I believe that the role of 'absent, distant mother', attributed to her through force of circumstance by American feminists, has proved to be more positive and productive for them than her real, active, living presence in the French feminist movement. In her study of the impact of Beauvoir on feminism, Toril Moi points out that over the last ten years ten out of the thirteen book-length studies of Beauvoir have been written in English. The main conferences devoted to her work have also mostly been in the USA. It is as if proximity had delayed the recognition of her work by other women; worse, the real existence of Simone de Beauvoir has often given rise to hostility to her work. This hostile attitude can be partly put down to the change in the French intellectual climate that took place at the end of the sixties with the coming of age of the post-structuralist generation that I have been describing in the first section of this book.
That post-structuralism, reliant on psychoanalysis and deconstruction, should turn its back on the thought and the public persona of Sartre is perfectly consistent. That this change in theoretical perspectives should have taken the form of a crusade against Beauvoir-style feminism, however, remains to be fully explained. In her remarkably lucid account of the history of contemporary French feminism, Claire Duchen accounts for this crusade by narrating the vehement anti-humanism of the new generation of feminists who, like Antoinette Fouque, Helene Cixous and Luce Irigaray, emphasized sexual difference and, like Julia Kristeva, believed in the importance of the unconscious. Moi backs this reading, while adding that the new post-structuralist feminists criticized Beauvoir for her over-identification with masculine power and her blindness to her own logocentrism. In a recent study on French
feminists, M. Le Doeuff offers a more pragmatic explanation in terms of struggle for leadership between two generations of power-minded left-bank intellectual women.54 While seeing good reasons to agree with all these remarks, I would like to add emphasis to the oedipal dimension of the 'case of S. de Beauvoir' within contemporary feminism. Particularly since her death, the struggle for symbolic succession has taken some clear forms, with the French radical feminists, gathered around the Questions Feministes group and inspired by the feminist sociologist Christine Delphy, taking the lead in providing the 'correct' understanding of Beauvoir-like materialism. Among the other possible 'dutiful daughters', I would include an outspoken campaigner for equality and stern believer in enlightened rationalism such as E. Badinter, who explicitly refers to Beauvoir in most of her work. More subtly, from within the French philosophical tradition of moral and political thought, M. Le Doeuff herself seems to me one of the most original and independent-minded neo-humanists continuing the Beauvoir line.
Let us stop for a while and ponder the dilemma of female oedipal rivalry as a mode of intellectual interaction: when it comes to Beauvoir as a symbolic figure, how can we explain the open homage and gratitude of some and the hesitation of others? I think that these questions plunge us into the fundamental complexity and ambiguity involved in the project of a feminist theoretical genealogy, and in the relays between the generations within the women's movement. It is as if we were only just beginning to be able to understand the dangers and traps as well as the inestimable wealth of this phenomenon which, as old as the world, is also completely new in its articulation in feminist political conflicts: the transmission from one woman to another of knowledge and know-how.
Contemporary feminists, rebellious daughters have, of course, turned their backs on the master-thinkers, and have engaged in the search for an other personal, political, and theoretical way. The quest for a common methodology is still open and it constitutes the new field of feminist epistemology, to which I shall return. On the oedipal front, it may well be the women professionally involved in pedagogical activities who will be able to begin to elucidate the domain of transmission of knowledge between women, and to define it in its intellectual specificity. In this respect one of the most important innovations is the establishment of women's studies courses in the institutions of higher learning. More than anything else, the intellectual movement has led the women to confront the inter-generational conflicts and thus face the female cultural oedipal complexes openly.
Instead of falling into facile lyrical celebrations of the mother-daughter duo, while avoiding the established patriarchal practice of denying the mother, it seems to me very important to reassess the issue of symbolic lineage very carefully. It is important to remember that the women's movement is also, implicitly, a movement of mothers and daughters;
daughters who are, will or might be mothers, and mothers who remain, in their turn, daughters. Living women, between whom there exist modes of understanding and therefore modalities of expression which are explosive in their very intensity:
We are, none of us, 'either' mothers or daughters; to our amazement, confusion, and greater complexity, we are both. Women, mothers or not, who feel committed to other women, are increasingly giving each other a quality of caring filled with the diffuse kinds of identification that exist between actual mothers and daughters.55
As far as Beauvoir is concerned, she has proved the site of such a conflict of identifications, revendications and recriminations, that she could almost count as the first feminine totem, in Freud's sense of the term. In Totem and Taboo, as well as Moses and Monotheism, Freud provides his own mythological account of the origin of the social bond, in terms of the brothers' alliance against the father, resulting in his murder and subsequent elevation to the divine rank of a common 'symbol' strong enough to force the single brothers to transcend their mutual violence. In Freud's account, the sisters are excluded from this primitive ritual, and from civil society as a consequence. Nowadays, as D. Kaufmann argues, 'the daughters seem to be imitating the masculine model as they seek to overthrow the feminist Mother, in the name, paradoxically, of feminine difference.56
I would agree with E. Spelman that S. de Beauvoir's thought needs to be reassessed and that some major points of criticism should be raised, especially concerning her treatment of all differences other than the differences between men and women: the differences among women, on the basis of race, class and lifestyles which have been at the centre of recent feminist debates.57 Nevertheless, I think that the debate on the content of Beauvoir's work has to be prefaced by the issues outlined above, both in the direction of a feminist critical genealogy and in the sense of a criticism of the inter-generational exchanges within feminism. In other words, I think we need an analysis of Beauvoir's symbolic function within the women's movement either as the 'good' founding mother of modern feminism or as the 'bad' phallic perpetuator of humanist rationalism, before we can proceed to an evaluation of her actual theoretical viability today. In this regard, I find J. Butler's critical rereading of Beauvoir in the light of Foucault a significant and positive step in the right direction; I shall return to it later. I do believe that the 'case' of Beauvoir has illustrated better than any other argument the importance of philosophers for feminism, the unique role played by women philosophers in the elaboration of feminism and, inversely, the claims made by feminism to act as an alternative form of philosophy.
There is no feminism beyond the lived experience of women themselves, expressed in a collective movement: this is the fundamental
point distinguishing it from other forms of reflection on women, above all in philosophy. To be a feminist is to be a woman aware of her oppression, acting on the basis of this awareness, with other women: it is to 'think oneself with' them.
In the elaboration of their ideas, women have adopted a variety of places of enunciation and discursive strategies, which I shall analyse in detail in another chapter. From a sarcastic, dionysian spirit, to the serious; from the poetic vein to political philosophy, different 'styles' of thought follow one another and coexist within this vast laboratory of ideas, reflection and writing that is the women's movement. As a whole, and in its very heterogeneity, this feminist domain marks a theoretical and political moment whose repercussions are vast. As Josette Feral puts it:
What is at stake in the women's struggle is much more than simply finding a place within the existing values or discourses . .. the problem raised by the women's movement is that of a subversion of the 'subject' as an entity, as truth, as subject of knowledge but also the desiring subject, as prisoner of micro and macro politics.59
Following the impulse of its own theoretical and political passions, feminist thought inevitably intersects with the principal axes of contemporary philosophical reflection, in particular the theories of subjectivity. A consensus already seems to exist, within the field of philosophy, regarding the theoretical impact of women's struggles. Thus Lyotard affirms the conceptual value of feminism by recasting the problematic of subjectivity from the point of view of sexual difference. He argues that the women's movement throws out a fundamental challenge to late capitalism, it being essentially a structure of homologation, that is, it systematically effaces any difference.60
As we have seen, Foucault, Derrida and Deleuze each in their own way conceptualize the importance of women's struggles as subversive discourse. In a certain sense they see in it a possible solution to the crisis of philosophy, and consequently as one of the possible new areas of philosophical enquiry.
In the feminist perspective, on the other hand, the order of priorities is changed: what is emphasized is the singularity of women's voices themselves, and the evolution of their struggles. I want to emphasize these different objectives and points of reference, for they can but engender deeper divergences. To say that women certainly have not developed their critique of subjectivity so as to help philosophy out of its crisis is not to deny that women and men belong to the same human kind. Clearly, the cultural context - this same late capitalism criticized by Lyotard - is the framework common to us all, men and women alike, which also enables exchange and collaboration between different thinkers. To mark the difference between feminism and the other types of
discourse is, rather, to reintroduce the dimension of sexual difference into the debate.
To this end, many current feminist works consist of calling into question the utilization of feminist theses by mainstream theoretical discourses; a utilization which the term 'recuperation' does not adequately describe. This is indissociable from the critique of the exchange value attributed to feminine cultural products in the current liberal system, as I described earlier.
Moreover, this will to demarcate, in relation to the many discourse on women, also implies the questioning, within the movement, of women's theoretical and political itinerary over the last thirty years. I am convinced that it is through this kind of constant questioning that feminist thought moves on, in such a way that the transition between the critical, reactive moment, and that of active creation, is almost imperceptible. Feminism demands this continual reflection, this calling into question of its own theoretical and practical modalities of operation. It is even this critical effort which opens up new sources for women's creativity, in order to effect the transformations necessary to make thought livable for women. In this sense, as E. Young-Bruehl argues, the feminist movement has brought about the 'bildung', the training of women as philosophers.61 Insofar as the deconstruction of the metaphysical bedrock of philosophy is characteristic of our century, feminism is part and parcel of this critical reflective tendency. Young-Bruehl's focus is on the critique of genderized dualism, especially the mind-body dichotomy. Relying extensively on the work of Adrienne Rich, she situates the reconnection of thinking with lived experience at the heart of the feminist project. An eminently philosophical task indeed.
Women's struggles, as Irigaray emphasizes, are always 'elsewhere': one foot in the system, the other outside, the movement being in itself a privileged 'elsewhere' for women, capable of furnishing a critical perspective on our crisis-ridden culture, and also, a point of departure for a radically new analysis of this culture. It is as a factor of separation and autonomy that the women's movement has functioned until now, by allowing the expression of a new language. Already in 1939 Woolf was putting women on their guard against the dangers of disappearance they ran in the society of the day; I find the words of her Three Guineas very prophetic, for they perfectly sum up both the spirit and the stakes of feminist thought in the second half of the twentieth century:62
There they go, our brothers who have been educated at public schools and universities, mounting those steps, passing in and out of those doors, ascending those pulpits, preaching, teaching, administering justice, practising medicine, transacting business, making money. It is a solemn sight always - a procession ... But now, for the past twenty years or so, it is no longer a sight merely, a photograph, or fresco scrawled upon the walls of time, at which we can look with merely an
aesthetic appreciation. For there, trapesing along at the tail end of the procession, we go ourselves. And that makes a difference ... We too can leave the house, can mount those steps, pass in and out of those doors, wear wigs and gowns, make money, administer justice ... Who can say whether, as time goes on, we may not dress in military uniform, with gold lace on our breasts, swords at our sides ... But we have not come here to laugh, or to talk of fashions — men s and women's. We are here ... to ask ourselves certain questions. And they are very important questions; and we have very little time in which to answer them. The questions that we have to ask and to answer about that procession during this moment of transition are so important that they may well change the lives of all men and women for ever. For we have to ask ourselves, here and now, do we wish to join that procession, or don't we? On what terms shall we join that procession? Above all, where is it leading us, the procession of educated men?
Feminist Discursive Tactics in Philosophy, or:
I Think Therefore He Is1
Does it seem misguided to you to believe that if women had helped to think 'thought' over the last two thousand years, the life of thought would be different today?2 Wolf
In the previous chapter I proposed a reading of feminist theoretical practice as being both implicitly and explicitly philosophical. The emphasis feminism places on reconstructing systems of knowledge and representation of women along non-stereotyped and non-discriminatory lines leads to the formulation of eminently philosophical questions about the structure of subjectivity, the ethics of theoretical discourse and political theory in the sense of resistance to the phallolo-gocentric power-system. I argued that feminist reflection calls into question the very function of theoretical intelligence, that this challenge is articulated by women in their own name, and, finally, that it has evolved through women's political struggles. Globally, feminist analysis has moved beyond simply criticizing established ideas, and has elaborated a critique of the status of theoretical discourse itself. As such, feminist theory is opposed to the supremacy of a certain form of reason, on the basis of the power relations and the vision of the human subject that they imply.
In this chapter and the next I will shift my attention more specifically to the feminist critiques of philosophical discourse. As I have been arguing throughout this study, it is in a historical context where the question of the crisis of reason and the legitimacy of theoretical discourse are already on the agenda that feminist reflection on philosophy has been able to develop. This does not mean that the two theoretical frameworks - on the one hand post-structuralist or postmodernist thought, and on the other feminist theory - are equivalent or may be assimilated to each other. On the contrary: at a time when the critique
of rationality is the dominant theoretical mode, it remains to be seen, in fact, what is specifically feminist about the denunciation of the links between knowledge and power. As I suggested earlier, the distinctive feature of feminist reflection is its desire to disclose not only the violent, power-centred character of rationality, but also the sexed nature of this violence.
This coincidence between one aspect of contemporary philosophical reflection and feminism raises another very interesting question: when new forms of philosophical reflection are instituted, the aim is evidently to renew the philosophical enterprise itself. But in women's case, what is at stake in their critique of rationality? As I have indicated in the previous chapter, when women denounce their oppression, they challenge the structure of human consciousness which upholds the power exerted by one sex over the other. This trend is all the more noticeable in that the number of feminists who have dedicated themselves to the critical analysis of philosophical rationality is relatively small, thus making the very function of this discipline suspect. Strangely enough, feminists were late in coming to philosophy; history, sociology and literature seemed to attract the immediate attention of feminist scholars, but the lofty and somehow elitist discipline of philosophy was neglected. The fact that feminism carries an implicit philosophical charge may also paradoxically explain the underplaying of explicit feminist analyses of philosophy.
Feminist philosophers have shifted feminist struggles so that they are actually inside the field of philosophy; if the majority of these philosophers share the feminist opinion that philosophy's role is normative, nonetheless they show a remarkable openness to this discipline. These women philosophers propose on the one hand a reasoned critique of theoretical reason, a theoretically rigorous critique of philosophy. On the other hand, they are also counter-thinkers, claiming a new status for the activity of thinking itself. In my view, the rare women who have undertaken this theoretical labour and chosen to think-against established reason while remaining within the domain of a precise intellectual discipline initiate a new discursive practice. They reconceptualize human consciousness and theoretical activity, connecting their epistemological quests for the foundations of feminism to larger ethical questions.
The intrusion of political-minded women into the closed territory of intellectual disciplines is a recent phenomenon. In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, feminists campaigned for women's right to access to higher education. Coinciding with the campaigns for the right to vote, the struggle for educational equality, for women to receive an intellectual training identical to that hitherto exclusively reserved for men, was for a long time one of feminism's essential issues. But it was not until the second half of the nineteenth century that women could begin to infiltrate, in small quantities, some of the exclusive theoretical domains,
and that their entry into the world of higher knowledge was no longer treated as a ludicrous proposal.3 This was an acceptance in principle which coincided historically with the laicization and democratization of the education system.
Strengthened by these historical acquisitions, modern feminism has adopted a political attitude of systematic and ironic ambivalence towards the institutions of higher learning. Aware of the fact that the presence of women in these prestigious spheres has cost generations of struggle and protest, contemporary feminism does not place all its hopes in women's wilful infiltration of the system. On the contrary, one of the strongest feminist currents, radical feminism, has displayed considerable mistrust of institutional theoretical works, justifying this response in terms of the need to reject the forms of expression and thought traditionally reserved for men. But in terms of a development I outlined earlier, this current has moved from purist, hardline rejection of any participation in the institutions of Knowledge (and Power) to the idea of a 'double militancy', a critical, 'different' participation. For feminists have realized that non-participation, in theory as in other fields, is politically dangerous, to the extent that it only confirms the patriarchal myth which associates women with the anti-social, the irrational, the immoral, the passive, the powerless, and reinforces one of the most enduring forms of women's oppression.
Thus, feminist women did come to philosophy, ever so cautiously. After all, the issue had been clearly stated by Beauvoir in The Second Sex. by analysing the position of women as being men s other, she singles out, if only to condemn, the idea of reason and rationality as being the instrument of masculine domination par excellence. Her scrutiny of myths about women and femininity unveils the process of mystification which, by elevating man to the status of the reasonable being, confines women to nature, to immanence, to the passivity of her reproductive role, thereby postulating woman's lack of reason, ethical consciousness, and political agency.
The feminist movement developed this insight further, in the heterogeneous ways I outlined in the previous chapter. Women have come to maintain that the male appropriation of theoretical reason as a masculine prerogative is but a pretext to self-aggrandizement. As Virginia Woolf so lucidly pointed out in A Room of One's Own, the technique of male ego-boosting requires the simultaneous setting up of a subordinate 'other', a second-class female subject whose weakness, incompetence and passivity justify the dominant position of the male subject. In this respect, the centuries-old list of philosophical grievances against women's alleged unworthiness or unintelligence mark the discipline of philosophy with a misogynist charge unmatched by other discourses. Consequently misogyny need not be read in a paranoid mode as the expression of woman-hating, but rather as a structural necessity of philosophy as dominant discourse. In other words, the setting up of the
male subject as the measure of all things requires the positing of the woman as other-than, that is to say less-than, and subordinate to the main point of reference. Sexist domination is therefore a structural necessity internal to philsophical discourse and as such productive of knowledge.
In my reading, feminist philosophers differ greatly among themselves as to the criteria by which they assess this systematic disqualification, exclusion and denigration of women-as-other. The question of whether the discourse which enforces differences as a sign of domination, through a disparaging dualistic system which defines woman in relation to men, is a universal, irreversible given, or whether it can be surmounted, is an open question that lies at the centre of much polemical debate in feminism at the moment. I would go so far as to say that this question can serve as the organizing principle for the classification of different feminist strategic positions in philosophy.
For instance, the spokeswomen of what I would call the 'reformist' school in philosophy, to which I shall turn in a while, would probably challenge the very terms of the question. They tend to argue, in fact, that the positing of otherness as a fundamental category in theoretical discourse and the confining of women to this category are not necessary but rather contingent factors. They are assessed as being linked to a historical tradition, and, as such, as being historically variable factors that should not be taken as an internal requirement of the discipline itself. In other words, in the reformist framework sexism is the problem, rather than phallologocentrism and the related issue of misogyny, and a more enlightened use of reason is the proposed answer. The radical approach, on the other hand, focuses, as we shall see in the next chapter, on phallocentrism as a logical system, and as such carries a much more devastating judgement on philosophy as a whole and on the project of liberating theoretical discourse from domination. In the final section of the next chapter, I will try to connect these different positions to what I see as dramatically different ways of assessing the legacy of the Enlightenment and the liberating function of reason; but more on this later.
For the moment, let me stress the leading question, around which I will organize the different feminist positions in philosophy:4 can we formulate otherness, difference without devaluing it? Can we think of the other not as other-than, but as a positively other entity? Can we utter a non-hierarchical truth, a non-hegemonic reason? Can we extricate reason from domination and the belligerent ways which guide it?
The Liberation of Philosophy
An effective way of measuring both the progress made in fifteen years of feminist work in philosophy and the large variety of positions that can
be grouped under the general heading of 'feminist reformism' is to compare some of the collections of feminist philosophical essays from the 1970s and the 1980s.
In 1976 the American academic philosopher Carole Gould edited, together with a male colleague, W. Wartofsky, one of the earliest and most influential collections.5 The preface, significantly called: 'The Woman-question: philosophy of liberation and the liberation of philosophy', states the aim of the volume as being both to identify and criticize the oppressive role played by philosophy against women. Gould and Wartofsky ally themselves with feminism in recognizing the instrumental role played by philosophy in enforcing conditions of oppression. Relying on Marxist and critical theory's evaluation of the instrumental role of reason, they aim to elaborate a fairer usage of philosophical practice. Gould is concerned to prove that feminism -which does not yet have the status of a theoretical question - should acquire an established place in modern thought, as a rigorous and innovative mode of thinking.
Accordingly, the essays collected in this volume fall into two broad categories: on the one hand, those dealing with the history of philosophy, in which its representations of women and femininity are examined; and on the other, those which explain the key ideas of feminism and justify them in theoretical terms. Gould sees feminist analysis as philosophy's new way ahead, as a possibility for critical renewal which is indispensable to the philosophical discipline, and she sets this 'critical' function in opposition to the classical speculative function.
To raise feminism to the rank of a respectable philosophical language is one of Gould's main preoccupations; indeed, this attempted self-defence constitutes a veritable apologia pro opera sua. If on the one hand she defends some of feminism's gains, elsewhere she declares herself resolutely faithful to the ideals of rigour and rationality which have dictated and still dictate the norm of philosophy; therefore her discourse does not challenge the very nature of these ideals or their links with the reality of women's oppression: here 'Rationality' and 'Rigour' are, in some sense, neutral, universal values.
Gould describes her work in the following terms: 'This book is dedicated to a task which was traditionally part of philosophy, that is, the analysis of current theories and the construction of new ones.'6 The basis for this reconstruction of women is provided by the idea of sex equality. Despite, or rather because of this aim, Gould asserts her confidence in the discursive power of philosophy and develops a feminist case in which respect for philosophical principles is constantly affirmed. While condemning the offences committed against women, she excuses them by taking into consideration the historical conditions which allowed for and upheld this oppression. She consequently argues that it is now possible to repair the injustices historically committed against women.
This concern for the professional profile of feminist philosophers is, in a certain sense, typically Anglo-Saxon. Gould is an example of the discourse produced by philosophy as it is exercised exclusively within the academic institution. It engenders much more restrictive forms of intellectual discipline than those current in countries where the practice of philosophy is more 'atomized'. To this extent, Gould's concern for 'rigour' seems to me to be the consequence of an intellectual system in which the production of ideas is the special preserve of a specialized, institutionalized, university body.
It seems to me worth emphasizing, as an example, that in the States there exists a society of women philosophers, the Society for Women in Philosophy, whose aim is philosophical progress, through the integration of women and of the feminine dimension into philosophy. In a less organized fashion, this tendency is very widespread in France too, especially in the Derridean current, where the definition of philosophy as a school of democracy invests the exercise of philosophy with a very substantial corrective power.7
On a more positive note, the concern for the professionalization of women philosophers has immediate political repercussions in the fight for the professional equality of the sexes and for equal employment opportunities for women in sectors of the labour market, such as university departments of philosophy, where jobs for women are far too few.
Gould's position, however, raises serious questions: her attempt to have feminism accepted by the discipline leaves basically unmentioned the very power-structure of philosophy as a form of dominant discourse. In other words, it makes a representation of this discipline that I find questionable. By confining the disqualification of women to the problem of sexism and by defining the latter as a contingent aspect of philosophical thought, not a necessary one, Gould sets up philosophy as a model to be followed. In so doing not only does she confirm the power of this discipline, but also she implicitly confirms women's position as outsiders in the game of theoretical reason. The reformist stance, which endeavours to remedy this disqualification by giving women an established place in philosophical discourse, ends up making them participate in a game whose rules they never established, discussed or amended. Women do gain admission to the heart of the discursive and political polis, but the burden of adapting to the rules is all on their shoulders.
Just as in our social system marriage determines a women's identity, Gould's reasoning is very much akin to the preparation of the wedding between feminist thought - still young but full of promise - and established discourse - a bit hoary but still powerful. Without being explicit, an obsession with nuptials lurks just below the surface of her whole programme which, I am tempted to suggest, is limited to the desire to substitute one theory for another, to move from one (man's)
text to another, by trying to contain women in the space between.
Feminism has specifically marked out the institution of marriage as the pillar of the patriarchal system, a crucial instance of the exchange of women which still ensures masculine power and represents a fundamental crux in women's oppression. What Gould does not say, but which emerges in radical feminist analyses, is that the movement from one man's text to another's, from man to man, traces not only the path of women's exile (whether or not they are engaged in the struggle) in a fundamentally masculine space, but also constitutes the paradigm of the female condition in our society. The circulation of women and exogamy are the necessary conditions of their neglect and silence.
This is why I disagree with Gould's lack of critical distance from the theoretical model she adopts. In political terms her position in fact translates as a benevolent liberalism which authorizes us to believe that the female condition can possibly be ameliorated within the social and political structures that are in force; that all that is needed to modify the status of women is a little collective good will - thanks to the evolution in habits, by tinkering with a few laws, and so on ... This is moreover a classical attitude, for it was already that of the feminists of the nineteenth century and the early twentieth, who claimed the right to sexual equality and condemned the oppression of women in the name of all Humanity.
It is not my intention to deny the historical importance of this idea: it is through these essentially reformist struggles that women of my generation have obtained such elementary rights as the right to vote, access to higher education, and certain minimal guarantees of progress. But now is no longer the moment for reformism, and the post-seventies' feminist wave has chosen to assume a different position, a position of consciously revendicated 'difference'. In philosophy as elsewhere, we could say that what distinguishes radical from reformist positions is that the former are committed to examining all the consequences - even the most absolute - of any given analysis. As regards women, whereas Gould adopts a reformist attitude and claims that the recognition of feminism will enrich philosophical thought, opening new cultural horizons for it, so that in this respect she professes her faith in a discipline which, in other respects, she criticizes, radical feminists challenge the actual legitimacy, nature and functions of this discipline. Poles apart from the call for integration formulated by the reformist milieu, they pose the question of women's relationship to institutions, laws, norms, disciplines, all the structures, real or symbolic, which constitute (patriarchal) society.
These are multiple, complex questions which cannot be reduced to the simple enunciation of new ideas about women, nor can they be exhausted by women's demands for their rights in politics as in morality, in art as in thought; but they challenge the play of power inherent in the operation of the institution. The difference between
reformist and radical feminism deserves emphasis, firstly because it creates, in political terms, a very real division at the core of the women's movement; and secondly because it implies divergent theoretical problematics, which posit very differently the question of the relationship to the discipline. If reformist feminism allows the liberal schema developed by eighteenth-century philosophy, radical feminism situates itself beyond this schema, and makes the critique of power its central focus.
But on another level, Gould's position is symptomatic also of women's desire for (masculine) theory, and this poses another sort of question. Even supposing that feminist reflection were accepted and incorporated into masculine theoretical discourse, it remains to be seen just how this incorporation would be beneficial for women's struggles. What would be the stakes in a struggle which attempted to have feminist thought accepted by the dominant discourse? At the risk of repeating what I said in my discussion of Foucault and Deleuze, I am sure that the type of problematic which women are in the process of developing, as regards not only theory but all aspects of their lives, cannot be transposed into even the most eminent theorists' frame of thought. At best, working across male theoretical discourse may be productive as a means to acquiring certain tools to work with, towards precise and limited ends. But there is no final theoretical solution for feminists, and therefore no threshold of tolerance beyond which our thought would be validated once and for all.
Take for instance a classic of feminist writing: Juliet Mitchell's Psychoanalysis and Feminism, in which the theories of Freud, Marx, Lacan, Levi-Strauss and others are reconsidered, the better to support certain key ideas of feminism such as the exchange of women, and the construction of the image of women by a society whose infrastructures are patriarchal and whose structures of production are capitalist. In my view this work constitutes one of the most lucid readings of Freud and Lacan that Anglo-Saxon feminism has produced, not to neglect the value of her materialist analysis of the contradictions within the capitalist system; and yet I am not always convinced that, for instance, Levi-Strauss's or Lacan's thought is of much use to women's struggles.
To say that existing disciplines have no answer when faced with the feminist problematic is both to claim specificity for women who struggle and to accept that the premise necessary to the creation of a feminist thought is theoretical solitude. I am quite convinced that any feminist who ventures into the hitherto forbidden domain of theoretical thought must confront solitude and vulnerability, the two conditions indispensable to all creativity and especially to women's thought. In the light of this perspective of isolation which the desire to create presupposes, and in the light of long-standing patriarchal prejudices about women's inability to cope with solitude, as Mottini-Coulon will point out later, it is not surprising to note just how few feminists have undertaken such an exploration. And when another reformist feminist philosopher,
Michele Le Doeuff, proceeds to the historical analysis of the role of women in philosophy, she is aware of the very specific relationship of mediation through which women who desire access to intellectual production must pass. These few 'privileged7 women have only gained right of entry into this a priori masculine territory thanks to their personal relationship with a philosopher. It is not philosophy they have been introduced to, but a specific philosophy, that of the man they admire. Philosophy's call-girls, if I may use the phrase, they were, above all, great lovers whose relation to theoretical thought passed through the intermediary of a chosen master-thinker.
Things have changed appreciably now, insofar as the master-thinkers' prestige has lost its shine, but this has not profoundly modified women's relationship of mediation to the production of theory. The case of Carole Gould is only one illustration of the model of alliance which we discover again in the work of other women theorists, for very few women yet dare to confront and assume theoretical solitude and to abolish the code which gives them access to masculine discourse.
If the radical feminists I will describe in the next chapters have been able to assume the stance of rebellious daughters, the same cannot be said of the professional women philosophers whose ties to the discipline somehow constrain them. It seems to me, therefore, that the radical philosopher Luce Irigaray is right to insist on the urgency of the need for women's theoretical discourse, and to affirm to necessity for a theoretical genealogy by and for women. The question is, how? For Le Doeuff, the solution would lie in a collective labour by women, a simultaneously political and theoretical labour which would enable them to penetrate the sacred citadel of philosophical speculation, and which would also guarantee a profound revaluation of the very meaning of thought and the function of philosophy today. Politically, experience has shown that it is not only through the inclusion of women in the structures of the state that the condition of women in today's society will be automatically improved; deeper transformations are required both at the level of the self and of social structures.
The reformist position thus described rests on premises which are not short of liberalism: the excesses of philosophical Reason can be tempered and siphoned off within the field of philosophy itself. This implies a certain relativism in comparison with the grand conceptual categories of philosophy: a resistance to global syntheses. The central question remains the solidarity between the rational and the masculine, which is a historically determined aspect of philosophy and therefore open to modification, in function of the historical progress in the position of women.
Towards a Feminist Philosophy
By way of comparison with Gould's definition of the problem-area of women and/in philosophy and of the value of the reformist stance, and also as a way of showing how reformism itself is subjected to major historical transformations, let us turn to a more recent and equally influential collection of professional American female philosophers: Discovering Reality, published in 1983 by Harding and Hintikka.8 I have selected it as a significant case-study rather than other works, such as Grimshaw's excellent work,9 and even Gould's second edited collection of essays on feminist philosophy,10 because it marks a very powerful shift in the perspective women adopt in philosophy.
Starting with the stated aim of drawing on feminist thought to implement more qualitative changes in the very structures of what we have learnt to recognize as the kernel of abstract theory - epistemology, metaphysics, methodology and the philosophy of science - Harding and Hintikka go on to draw a new map of feminist knowledge. They single out perspectives that are more distinctly feminist than Gould's critical humanism. They pursue a twofold goal in feminist theory: on the one hand the so-called 'deconstructive project' aimed at cleansing philosophy of its complicity with masculinity, on the other hand the 'reconstructive project' that tends to identify distinctive aspects of feminist knowledge. Sandra Harding, who, as a contributor to Gould's early collection, had written on the question of revolution or reform, now positions herself firmly in the field of feminist epistemology, pursuing the aims of the women's movement through her philosophical work. If her audience and interlocutors are obviously the feminist movement, however, she still remains firmly attached to the institutions where knowledge is legitimated and transmitted. The topics she is concerned with cover the whole spectrum from philosophy to contemporary psychoanalysis; her target, however, remains the desire to philosophize feminist practice and to have feminism accepted as valuable theory.
If the price to pay for this all-round capacity to take on the discipline of philosophy is the lack of a unified political line among the women philosophers, then the result is well worth the cost. What emerges from the reading of Discovering Reality is the double-edged awareness that, on the one hand, over the last fifteen years the monopoly philosophy used to exercise over the human and social sciences as a dominant discourse had been radically shaken. Thus the task of elaborating deconstructive critiques of the discriminatory aspects of philosophy has definitely replaced the earlier goals of liberating philosophy: the discipline is dissolved into a variety of discourses aimed at criticizing its power. On the other hand, the feminist position, even within the field globally known as reformist, has evolved a great deal.
Harding's own work is indicative of these changes. Her approach,
consolidated by her work on epistemology and feminist methodology,11 consists in pursuing with rigour and conviction the task of systematizing different feminist positions in philosophy, while resisting the temptation, and the professional obligation, to adapt them and translate them into the language of the discipline. Harding's reformism is more than a profession of faith in the value of philosophy as a discipline of thought: it is also a realistic evaluation of what is most needed by feminist theory at this particular historical moment, in order for it to grow and tackle effectively the hard core of theoretical discourse. The dialogue with the master-disciplines is essential. Harding's position, therefore, implies a vision of philosophy as still symbolizing a form of discursive power: it has the power to systematize, organize, and unveil the implications and connotations of other discourses. The power of feminist philosophy in this newly-defined reformist position is in being able to translate into useful guidelines for action ideas or theories that may be perceived as too abstract. However, the power of the discourse is asserted critically, and this seems to me one of the most fruitful paradoxes of the feminist reformist position: that while unveiling the power-mechanisms of their discipline in relation to gender, they nevertheless endorse one of its everlasting features: that of legislating over the truth of other discourses.
As a last point of comparison among reformist positions in feminist philosophy, let us take the collection edited by Whitford and Griffiths in 1989.12 In the preface - one of the most thorough readings of the progress accomplished by feminism within philosophy over the last fifteen years - the editors put forward feminist philosophy as being on the cutting-edge of contemporary thought. The extent to which they assume that now, at this precise historical moment, it is up to feminists to set the agenda for philosophy is such that it may even be unfair to include this volume under the general category of 'reformism'. Nevertheless, Whitford and Griffiths remain attached to the discipline through their strong sense of professional ethics. They are a good example of what Young-Bruehl defines as the philosophical impact of feminism upon women. From questions of autonomy and self-determination through to pornography, the emotions and women's experience, Whitford and Griffiths transcend the mentality of the 'special issue on feminist theory' and integrate feminism within philosophy with great ease. They highlight the work already accomplished by feminists in philosophy, and set it in a perspective dominated by the political impulse to achieve change in the status of women.
Whitford, an eminent scholar of French thought and a specialist on Luce Irigaray, manages to set the issue of 'women and/in philosophy' in the framework of the perspective of difference, while retaining strong ties to the project of political equality.
The Passion for Reform
In an extremely rigorous examination of the history of philosophy, and of 'idealist' or rationalist philosophy in particular,13 the Anglo-Saxon philosopher Jenny Lloyd embarks on a radical analysis of the Rationality which she condemns as one of the permanent myths of Western thought. She retraces its genesis in philosophy itself and considers its effects, past and present, on Western thought. She uses a detailed study of classical philosophical texts which she submits to merciless trial by analysis based on gender.
Her main premise is that rationality is a myth, and is therefore a fantasized image which is part of masculine discourse. This profoundly feminist insight immediately reveals the sexed, masculine nature of such a myth, and raises questions about the meaning of philosophical discourses which refer to Reason and the principles of rationality. What are these philosophers talking about? Via an ideal portrait of masculinity, they talk about the just masculine prerogative over the use of Reason. The myth of the reasonable man is, in the last analysis, an idealized image of masculinity. As such, it is present just below the surface of any discourse on rationality; there the masculine becomes synonymous with the rational, universal sign of Reason, which has resulted in the disastrous consequences for women I have already outlined. In some of her subsequent work, Lloyd goes on to unfasten the link between masculinity, rationality and war,14 thus emphasizing the 'rationalist aggression', to use Derrida's words, at work in philosophical discourse.
This analysis has been subsequently developed by feminist scholarship into a radical critique of classical seventeenth-century rationalism in terms of the glorification of masculinity and the implicit 'flight from the feminine'. Harding and Evelyn Fox Keller analyse it,15 and Brodo, for instance, stresses the lethal effects that the masculinization of rationality has had on women, as on the natural environment, and opposes to it the contemporary revaluation of the feminine in terms of connectedness, empathy and non-denomination.16
Jenny Lloyd does not take things so far, remaining much closer to the philosophical tradition. In my opinion, she offers a more balanced view of the advantages and the costs of classical rationality. According to Lloyd, the ancient interdiction against women's use of reason, which is particularly stringent in philosophy, implies historically determined modes of exclusion of women and prevents gross generalizations. For instance, this rejection of the feminine assumed a particular inflexion in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries with the appearance of the rationalist subject, when the definition of man as a reasonable animal dramatically changed character.
The paradigm of this change is undoubtedly the Cartesian method
(already discussed at length here), which is dedicated to the search for pure and distinct truth. This desire for a universal rationality which weaves strong links between human reason and the universal order at the same time establishes an isomorphic relationship between the human mind and the universe, the rational and the real. God, principle of absolute Reason, and man, privileged subject of reason, are the two guarantees of this order. Lloyd therefore aligns herself with Foucault's reading of the cogito, for she too interprets it as a deeply pedagogical stance, a veritable training for the use of reason; she adds that Cartesian method rests on precise rules, whose objective is to free the mind from all evidence of the senses, the better to prepare it for the intuitive apprehension of truth through the immediate comprehension of clear and distinct ideas and, in a deductive manner, through the shift from universal apprehension to specific, individual instances. This introduces the fundamental dualism between body and mind, reason and the senses, Descartes's aim being precisely to arrive at a formal distinction, in other words to legislate, between pure reason and sensory understanding.
Lloyd emphasizes that Descartes addresses his criticisms to the sensory derivation of intelligence, because for him, the senses are the vectors of a theoretical contamination, and therefore unworthy of reaching pure reason. We shall see shortly how Luce Irigaray has formulated her opposition to this aspect of the Cartesian stance which makes it its explicit aim to eliminate and purge all sensuality, all passion, all links with the body. The triumph of this acorporeal rationality marks a highpoint in the oppression of women, for the Cartesian reinterpretation of the classical polarities between body and mind reinforces their dualism in order to assimilate it to a veritable ontological gap between Reason and the senses.
This, of course, is fraught with consequences for the articulation of femininity, and validates the ancient idea that women are devoid of rationality. Before Descartes, says Lloyd, woman was certainly devalued in comparison to man, particularly when it was a question of rationality, but the difference between the sexes was essentially quantitative; woman was less rational, less moral, less responsible, and so on ... She lacked a certain amount of reason, of rational power, compared with the ideal value represented by the masculine, and the line of demarcation between masculine and feminine was located within the field of reason, tracing the unequal territories of masculine and feminine. But with Descartes, the frontier which separated the sexes in this way was displaced and reinforced, coming to form a veritable barrier between reason and its 'beyond' - in this case, madness, error, passion, women. The man-woman relation thus became emblematic of the ontological division and qualitative difference between body and mind, and sexual difference was presented as the dichotomy enabling the definition of woman as the reverse of rationality.
The practical effects of this new division made themselves felt, and profoundly modified the status of women. Given that the Cartesian method's prime objective is to train the young in the exercise of reason (and therefore of truth), it presupposes not only the pedagogical development already mentioned but also a very close relationship between the master who possesses the truth and the disciple who aspires to possess it also. Descartes affirms that at the same time as being biologically on the side of the senses and therefore of the irrational, women are incapable of using reason; it follows logically that they are excluded from the school of Reason directed by the philosophy master.
Lloyd's analysis has the merit of unveiling the sexual politics of the master-disciple relationship and thus it opens the way for a series of interesting analyses of the 'philosophical scene' as one in which transference and projection operate. In fact, pedagogical and educational reorganization in the eighteenth century offered no place for women in any domain, including, of course, philosophy. It therefore seems legitimate to think that the Cartesian diagnosis concerning women's inability to use reason has served as a decisive argument in the prescription of repressive measures taken against the female sex.
And yet the Cartesian moment, with its corollary of exclusion and domination, was not all negative. The universal/masculine value attributed to Reason made it into a desirable human ideal for all, even for women. It is through this more liberating aspect of Descartes's work that we can explain a phenomenon such as Poulain de la Barre's 'Traite de l'egalite entre les sexes'. This text is totally inspired by the principles of Cartesian rationalism and uses reason on behalf of the ladies, in the best tradition of the 'querelle des femmes'. It is clear that Poulain de la Barre's brand of rational defence of reason is extremely influential for Simone de Beauvoir, whose Second Sex is conceptually very close to this classical argument. I would also suggest that it is close to Lloyd's position, especially to her praiseworthy determination to elaborate, as a philosopher, a 'reasoned critique of reason' which could be beneficial to professional philosophers and to others alike.
Whatever the textual reality of Descartes may be, truly we women were excluded, as exemplified by the pernicious idea perfected by Rousseau in La Nouvelle Heloise that it is useless to train women in philosophical method for they are inferior by nature. As a consequence of these misogynous transformations in the order of philosophical knowledge in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, nothing seemed more reasonable and therefore respectable than to prevent women from training themselves in the exercise and art of Reason. It also became equally 'normal' to reserve it for boys who would thus enjoy a privileged relationship to the master-thinker. Subsequently the antinomy between woman and reason has been formalized, interiorized, and becomes a party to the operation of theoretical reason at the same
time as it is being inscribed in social practices, the education system, morals and so on.
Several feminist philosophers underline the importance of the changes in the status of women in the seventeenth century and connect them to the politics of education and the erotics of the pedagogical situation. Rationalist thought permits the theoretical articulation of the division between the education of girls and that of boys, between what it was necessary to teach the latter and what it was fitting to teach the former.
The predictable consequence of this discriminatory formalization, which excluded women from the domain of reason, was the assimilation of women to the irrational and their being kept in a relatively uncultured state. This situation was a vicious circle which tightened around women, whose impoverished education could only validate the prejudice that had decided they were 'not beings fit for learning'; denied because irrational, the feminine became more and more irrational according to a mode of thought which, for its part, was congealing into an intransigent rationalism. Which, it seems to me, led to the medicalization of the female (body), and to the idea of a radically 'other' feminine nature.17
As we saw earlier, the Cartesian distinctions between body and soul, knower and known aim to eliminate the threat of the irrational represented by the feminine, fixing women as the negative pole of the dichotomy, implicitly the necessary counterweight which maintains the balance of the edifice of Reason.
Lloyd recognizes that the cogito is a declaration of war against the feminine, which, she adds, introduces a qualitative distinction whose genderized, masculine character was neither clear to nor explicated by Descartes. On the contrary, he projected Reason onto a universal scale. This artifice, which was not understood as such, transforms the Cartesian ideal of rationality into a general ethical ideal: the man of reason is also the moral man par excellence - it is women who are immoral.
Lloyd argues that the situation scarcely changes with the post-Cartesian philosophers. For instance, Spinoza clearly saw the fragility of Descartes's suggested link between Reason and Ethics, and challenges the connection between human consciousness and universal Reason as much as that between Reason and Morality. He distances himself from Descartes's spatial imaginary insofar as, in his thinking, the mental transition from a passive state which is prey to blind passions to an active state which grasps eternal truths is not like crossing a frontier. For Spinoza, consciousness is evolutionary; in it passions are transformed into clear and distinct ideas according to a process of mental alchemy which makes it possible to reach the ethical objective he advocated: that is, the transition from the nebulous state of thought to the rational state, from reaction to truly creative action.
However, this stance further reinforces Cartesian Manicheism, for it too assimilates the feminine to all that is passionate, affective, sensual,
and thus affirms the universal value of Reason as the ultimate expression of human understanding, and that of thought as the privileged manifestation of Reason.
In the course of her reading of the gender bias of rationalist philosophy Lloyd undertakes an internal examination of the discipline. Taking as her point of departure the specific condition of women, she challenges the operation of philosophical mental processes which claim to be objective.
Lloyd's analysis is, ultimately, the anatomy of a myth: that of the coincidence of the rational with the masculine. As such, it emphasizes that the classical ideal of pure rationality is now exhausted, that in the twentieth century the idea of man the reasonable animal, cornerstone of rationalist philosophy's androcentric pride, is highly questionable.
For Lloyd, the revaluation of what is theoretically and culturally invested as rationality marks one of the thresholds of the contemporary epoch. It is no longer possible to place all the positive values - progress, ethics, individual happiness, and so on - on the side of Reason, and to condemn the irrational because it would be an obstacle to these ideal qualities. The discoveries concerning atomic energy have, on the contrary, engulfed any faith in the rational value of science and revealed at the very heart of scientific reason destructive forces which threaten thought and civilization. At the end of the twentieth century the reasonable man has very few reasons left for marvelling at, let alone rejoicing in, the benefits of his own rationality.
The revolts against Reason traced by the history of philosophy have always taken the form of a reversal of values: thus it happens that in certain epochs the emotions, the passions, the feelings, and therefore women, are more highly prized than the power and value of Reason. But at present, as we have already seen, it is the actual logic of the dualist opposition that is challenged, making insufficient or derisory any project of dialectical reversal. Besides, to repudiate rationality en bloc would only be a sterile gesture of rejection. Lloyd opposes this, and presents us with a subversive reading of the grand historical narratives of theoretical reason, whose traps and implicit omissions she reveals, with a view to bringing to light the mechanisms which have permitted rationality to occupy the place of the ideal, filling men with pride and women with envy.
According to Lloyd, any feminist critique of Reason in philosophy should show clearly the limits of this ideal, both in the philosophical texts which have only served to propagate it and in their practical institutional applications. The aim is to allow philosophy to continue, progress and be relevant for modernity by questioning the boundaries and dividing lines tljat make it into a 'discipline' in the Foucauldian sense. The hope which nurtures the feminist project is to evolve towards the discovery of a richer, more living form of thought, above all a thought with which women can more creatively live.
Lloyd's reasoned critique of philosophical reason unveils the masculine bias of this discipline, but does not identify rationality with masculinity: on the contrary, she claims it back for women philosophers. This reformist move can be compared to the argument developed y Lorraine Code in favour of 'epistemic responsibility'.
Arguing for the inextricable connection of ethics and epistemology, Code proposes feminist philosophy as a critique of both masculine and feminine stereotypes, as they operate in the realm of thinking. Code advances that epistemic responsibility 'plays a regulatory role in cognitive activity analogous to the role moral virtues can play m moral activity'.19 Quoting the case of feminist psychologist Carol Gilligan as an example of responsible knowing, Code defines it in terms of 'receptiveness and humility'20 to the words of the other; as opposed to epistemic indolence or epistemic imperialism'21 which she sees as brutal shortcuts
thought the complexity of the other's personality.
In Code's argument feminist epistemology differs from what she facetiously calls 'malestream' philosophy, not in being based on female experience or female identification, but rather in making a difference in terms of responsibility. Thus Code takes a very firm position against theories of sexual difference within feminism; her criticism of the latter is based on her resistance to all global synthetic theories, which tend to amalgamate the complexity and multiplicity of experience into gran syntheses. Code's aim is not to theorize, but better to understand the field of human female experience and to turn philosophy into a useful instrument by which to achieve an adequate description of reality.
What we see in this position is the reduction of sexism to a lazy, unscientific form of mental indolence, an irresponsible form of knowledge that feeds illusions and fantasies, not truth. By juxtaposition, feminist philosophers can bring new life into discursive ethics.
Another interesting example of innovative reformism and of a new approach to epistemology is French philosopher and historian of ideas Genevieve Fraisse. A disciple of the school of feminist history of Michelle Perrot, whom I mentioned in the Foucault section of this work,22 Fraisse has consequently inherited both a classical French materialist approach and the more post-structuralist method ol Foucault. In many respects, she is one of the most interesting pos -
Foucauldian thinkers in French feminism.	.	,	, l
Working primarily in the field of history of ideas m the late eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, Fraisse's central concern is to identify the philosophical foundations for feminist theory at different histonca
fraisse starts from the observation that feminism has no founding text; instead, it feeds from a heterogeneous set of discourses, determined by the specific historical forms taken by women's rebellion, t hus, in her latest book, Muse de la raison, Fraisse analyses the evolution ot the discourse about differences between the sexes since the eighteenth
century, in medical, juridical, philosophical and literary texts. Regretting that the question of difference has not, at least in France, received enough historical attention and has been unduly confined to psychoanalysis or literature, Fraisse argues for a methodology of discourse analysis very akin to Foucault, consisting in gathering concrete evidence of the series of montages and discursive shifts that were needed in order to redistribute the roles between the sexes in the aftermath of the French Revolution.
The questions Fraisse deals with are qualitatively different from the interrogations of classical liberalism. The problem is not how the French Revolution treated women's social and political rights, or how women intellectuals saw and commented upon the events of those days: the key issue is the construction of a discourse about sexual difference. Following Foucault, discourse production implies the simultaneous intervention of material, symbolic and chance events. An idea, as a discursive event, has a history of its own, which coincides with the network of often contradictory statements that have been made, and with aftions taken in its subject-area. Sexual difference has its own historicity, and it must be analysed as the result of close interplay of interacting forces, in a process marked by discontinuity and multiplicity. Fraisse's work can be read as the genealogy of a modern definition of sexual difference, under the impact of the notion of equality as the key term in the Enlightenment. The problem being, how did the notion of equality manage to be upheld while women were being deprived of all political rights?
Having approached the problem of feminism in this light, Fraisse strongly resists any suggestion that sexual difference is a founding, ontological category. She even takes a stand very clearly against the most outspoken examples of feminist theories of difference, such as Irigaray's. Arguing that the key issue is the network of power/ knowledge relations, Fraisse States that too much emphasis has been placed on masculine and feminine attributes, especially in the French feminism of the last fifteen years. She calls for more emphasis to be placed on social relations of power and questions of domination. Most of all, she suggests that feminist theory should leave behind the false alternative in which it has got stuck, 'either stating that the future will gradually abolish sexual difference in favour of a new common identity between the sexes, or appealing to sexual difference as a censored but promising source of feminist utopia'.24
Another significant case is that of the French philosopher Michele Le Doeuff, known in the English-speaking world for her work on women and philosophy.25 A disciple of Simone de Beauvoir, trained by Vladimir Jankelevitch in a tradition of moral philosophy, Le Doeuff argues that compared to other manifestations of women's oppression, which are often much more harmful, this philosophical prejudice against the feminine may seem insignificant; and yet it has the important effect of
engendering new social and political consequences.
In her most recent work,26 Le Doeuff develops the idea that all theory is elaborated at a necessary distance and therefore in juxtaposition to fiction, the imaginary, and myth. Le Doeuff's critique of this system of representation, which also draws on Derridean sources, has clear implications for the analysis of the textual feminine, and for the role of women in philosophy.
What distinguishes philosophy and gives it all its prestige and power is its ability to maintain a discourse on its own discourse, to criticize its own texts, to give itself specific premises, and therefore to serve as a criterion of judgement for all the other disciplines. Historically philosophy has played the role of high court of theoretical reason; its privilege of self-validation has allowed it to be the norm on the basis of which what is theoretical can be distinguished from what is not. It is the case, adds Le Doeuff, that self-validation and normative value have separated philosophical reason from myth and pictorial images, as is proved by the example of Hegel, for whom theoretical thought was the final stage in the human mind, and philosophical thought the perfect achievement of consciousness.
As a consequence all other forms of thought, which function by images or mythical tales, are considered to be the inferior products of human creativity. Le Doeuff here joins the criticisms of rationality mentioned already, notably in Adrienne Rich's work, which challenge the establishment of the reign of Reason to the detriment of other forms of thought that are consequently defined as 'irrational'. The construction of the irrational as a philosophical category is a necessary step in the process of self-legitimation by which philosophy has made itself into a master-discipline. The irrationality which is present within philosophy from its origins is the exclusive prerogative of certain groups - 'uncivilized' primitive peoples, children, the mentality of the common people and, evidently, women - who seem permanently to think on the basis of non-philosophical images and forms of consciousness. I have already emphasized the projective link between on the one hand what philosophy deems 'theoretical' and on the other what it excludes as being irrational.
Le Doeuff concentrates on analysing the modalities through which this game of projection has helped to ensure the value of philosophical reason. 'Philosophers project their desires and anxieties, and attempt to pass off this discourse of desire and defence as a rational theoretical discourse.'27
It is always as if, behind each theoretical system, philosophy protected unacknowledged mythical images and play of phantasmatic projections, the unacceptable face of philosophical reflection. Le Doeuff claims the status of authentic thought for this dark side, in virtue of what she calls the 'feedback' relationship between the imaginary and theoretical reason. These images are thus akin to a form of institutionalization of
subjectivity, equivalent to theoretical forms of thought. This stance opens up a wound at the heart of the notion of theoretical reason, and ruins the universal claim which motivated it.
In this new space of reflection, she begins the analysis of the feminine as a constant mythic image in philosophical discourse. The position of women m philosophy has always been overdetermined by a plav of imaginary projection which can only see them as icons of the feminine and as the sign of irrational disorder. This is why classical philosophy associates the feminine with the enumeration of established polarities.
In the list of Pythagorean oppositions (given in Hegel's Lectures in the History of Philosophy, vol. I), one finds the following:
limit and infinity unity and multiplicity masculine and feminine light and dark good and evil
date ^nd the associations which ^ suggests) is probably not out of
Far from haying become obsolete, this inventory, which is also analysed m very different terms - by Helene Cixous in The Newly Born Woman and by Ingaray throughout her work, expresses clearly the still current antagonisms m the dualist system. It is essentially founded on an unacknowiedged and camouflaged sexual distinction at the very heart of philosophy, which puts women in a position of radical otherness vis-a-vis theoretical reason. In recognizing it as such Michele Le Doeuff
•Hd i\uen°UnCf the links imPHcitly uniting rationality and masculinity, and the complicity which welds together theoretical thought and the homosocial bond, the noblest expression of which is the idea of the nghts of men. Her definition is excellent:
The phallocratic point of view: according to this idea, there is only one sex, the other half of the sky being emasculated. The phallocentric point of view: an ideological justification of the exclusion of women om valorized domains of society, and a project for maintaining all lorms of social domination of women, maintaining their inferiority.29
^he PuJ?ues the lssue through an analysis of the function of that other myth the image of women philosophy yields, which will only be overthrown by doing without the logocentric/phallocratic imaginary. If JL,°eU 1S Interested m this telling list of antinomies it is because she attr butes to it a dynamic role in thought. In fact, women's presence in philosophy only ever serves as pretext; she is endlessly short-circuited to the point of one's having to ask: 'When a philosopher is talking about
women, what exactly is he talking about?'
The question recurs, quite independently, in Lloyd's critical project, which also questions the idea of reason as a mythical image. But Le Doeuff, following Beauvoir, prefers to tackle the critique of the dominant rationality by centring her reflection on the image and myth of the feminine, so much a part of the philosophical discourse which condenses it into the phantasmic screen of reason's inner conflicts. Le Doeuff emphasizes the paradox that philosophy entertains as regards women, a paradox which simultaneously obliterates sexual difference and exacerbates the sexual specificity of the feminine. In short, everything about women is sexualized, with the exception of her own sexuality. This equivocation leads to a 'double bind' which simultaneously makes a dark continent out of women's bodies, and a problem of female sexuality, by sexually overdetermining them. Woman is so much the sign of sexed-ness that she loses her own libidinal corporeality in the process of becoming the incarnation of sex. Such systematic forgetting of sexual difference through the process of constructing this image of the feminine, is, Le Doeuff concludes, essential to the philosophical stance.
But on the other hand, following what I consider a permanent feature of the reformist stance, the masculine-feminine division which splits philosophy cannot be taken for an immutable universal given. In other words, Reason's play of projection, which fixes the icon of the feminine, at the same time reveals the mobility of the play of representation of philosophical discourse, which is itself in continuous mutation. There is therefore no final projection, but rather, constant transformations between thought and its images: 'No closure of discourse is ever anything but compromise, bricolage of what it is legitimate to say, what one would like to propose or claim, and what one is obliged to recognize.'30
It follows logically that the exclusion of the other, above all, that of woman, is not a sign of negativity; for thought creates what it excludes, and simultaneously creates itself in what it represses: 'As it is essential that it [the other] be repressed, it never stops separating itself from it, closing, becoming insular.'31
On the basis of this indivisibility of Reason and its others, Le Doeuff claims back the status of thought for these mythical images which, however devalued, are still essential to the process of self-validation of philosophy. Although she only uses Marxist vocabulary to denounce the masters' oppression of the slaves, she does take up its schema of dialectical opposition. Drawing on psychoanalysis, she suggests that what is excluded or unsaid creates a shadow zone, a zone of indeterminacy within the circle of the light of reason.
Le Doeuff therefore refuses to assimilate women and femininity to silence, negativity, and the repressed. Firstly, because if women's theoretical silence did correspond to the place assigned to them in discourse, that of the image reflected by theoretical Reason, it could not
translate any form of essential truth about women; in fact, it too functions as a masculine principle of self-validation: 'that someone is incapable of thinking philosophically is comforting in that it suggests that philosophy is capable of something'.32
Next, in more general terms, this is because this exclusion is much more a crucial moment in the development of discourse than the final distancing of the other. Traditionally barred from the exercise of philosophy, women have been condemned to theoretical silence; more exactly, they shelter in philosophy's silence, thanks to which the voice of others may be heard:
This something that philosophy works to leave outside its field cannot, properly speaking, be determined. It is not, whether because it is precisely that which is indeterminate or because philosophy confuses itself with the formal idea that there must be exclusion, that there must be discipline in the discourse, that the acceptable modes of thought cannot be indeterminate. This would be a general form of exclusion which could be open to a certain number of contents, but which would not in itself be bound to any specific content.33
The absence of women is, therefore, a 'general form of exclusion', without, for all that, constituting a specific essence. If we take this argument further, it develops into the idea that the feminist political standpoint cannot lead to the 'return of the repressed' in our culture, as the French theoreticians of sexual difference claim. Here Le Doeuff aligns herself with the current of feminist thought which claims women's silence as a possibility of new creativity, but takes her distance from radical feminism. In effect, whilst affirming that the feminine represents, in itself, a principle hostile to the dominant reason, a sort of inner enemy, she is wary of giving her support to the notion of revolutionary value which some feminists give to the idea of difference.
This refusal rests on the rejection of the equivalences between the masculine and the rational, and the feminine and the irrational, as posited by the classical dualist schema. For Le Doeuff, phallocentrism is not the inevitable condition of all rationality.
I have never had any quarrel with philosophical rationality. But its irrationality is another matter. More precisely, it seems to me that philosophy does not stem from a properly 'masculine rationality', but rather, that it often infers a misogynist imaginary in trying to be more than it is. In trying to make rationalization operate beyond its limits.34
Le Doeuff sees in the phallocentric nature of philosophy the (false) product of a false consciousness, rather than the 'true' discourse of a consciousness which lies about women. She thus validates philosophical consciousness and, at the same time as condemning its endemic
phallocentrism, locates it in precise historical conditions. Faithful to the premise of historical materialism which ties the history of ideas to their socio-political context, she condemns philosophy's collusion with political power: historically philosophy has served to train the young for political power. As a parallel to this, thanks to the changes which have disrupted the order of Knowledge, notably the deconstructions of rationality accomplished by modern philosophy, it is now possible to free Reason from its links with Power.
One of the aims of her work being to think rationality in terms other than those of the hegemonic mode, in Le Doeuff's work we do not find any attempt to define the feminine; her rejection of the masculine-rational couple, based on a historical study of reason and the modalities of thought it has assumed, is, in my opinion, evidence of resistance to all substantialism and essentialism. The logic of the oppression of women is therefore inscribed in a political and theoretical dynamic. The 'liberation' of women's theoretical voices, which is inconceivable without their socio-political liberation, will come about thanks to changes within Reason.
What we notice here, once again, is the agreement between Le Doeuff's and Lloyd's critical position, in their advocacy of a reasoned critique of Reason rather than a pure and simple rejection of theoretical intellection by feminists. At the same time, both hesitate to put their faith fully in the evolution of a different femininity, and in this, oppose the solutions suggested by the radical feminists in general, and the theoreticians of difference like Irigaray in particular. Choosing to call into question the 'irrationality of philosophy rather than its rationality -which differentiates between the hegemony of reason and its "misogynist imaginary" ',35 Le Doeuff considers that the activity of reflection will be able to repair the prejudices which it has itself inflicted on women. The solution, she says, is without doubt to be found in the evolution of theoretical discourse towards incompleteness. This point becomes the heart of her book on women and philosophy and gives it its polemical tone.
In effect, classical philosophy's 'irrational' is located precisely in its claim to present itself as the absolute theoretical value, the criterion of judgement of all the other disciplines. Philosophical knowledge is defective, incomplete and yet necessary; it must recognize its limits and acknowledge this incompleteness in order to convey to it a concrete political value. The acceptance of philosophy's lack and partiality becomes the guarantee of its ability to act on the real, to be relevant and operational here and now. It also constitutes, as Foucault suggests, the moment when the classical distinction between hegemonic Reason and the revolt of Unreason is no longer insurmountable.
Le Doeuff does not present the incompleteness of thought as an achieved solution, but rather as a historical objective whose realization depends largely on the transformation of the role of the subject; along
with Foucault and Deleuze, she affirms that we must move beyond the idea that the individual is the subject of enunciation, in order to restore to discursive activity its collective character. Any evolution in discourse does require, in fact, collective, multiple and non-individual labour. This displacement of the subject implies the transformation of the didactic relationship between master and pupil, and institutes new pedagogical demands, which is laden with consequences for feminism.
With a certain political caution, which is evidence of her theoretical finesse, Le Doeuff keeps her distance from radical feminist arguments, while at the same time supporting them, notably those concerning the rejection of the masculine sexualization of theoretical discourse. Her work seems to me remarkably important in many respects, but nonetheless, I shall voice some reservations about her distinction between the philosophical imaginary, defined as misogynist, and rationality.
This distinction, which is fundamental to her stance, enables her to circumscribe phallocentrism within the imaginary, that is, within the play of phantasmic projection, and thus to clear the name of the rational. Whilst revealing the latent play of power at the roots of philosophical reason, a play through which women are excluded, she does not call into question rationality's role as instrument of domination; she simply explicates the links between theoretical thought and its pictorial images and emphasizes their relationship of complementarity. In my perspective, however, the differentiation between the imaginary and the rational which Le Doeuff defends seems inadequate to the task of rejecting the sexed masculine character of rationality that has historically been the prerogative of Western philosophy.
In the most pertinent interpretation of Le Doeuff to date, in her reading of L'lmaginaire philosophique, Maeghan Morris points out some of the inner tensions in Le Doeuff's position.36 In a move that Morris aptly describes as a 'double restriction',37 Le Doeuff urges the reader not to fall into the trap of repeating the large outlines of a critique of Western Rationality as a whole, but rather to stick to a restricted critique of certain aspects of philosophical discourse. The advantage of this position is that general syntheses lose much of their prestige and, as Lorraine Code also argues, the elaboration of a global theory about women and philosophy appears as less important than the task of reforming philosophy of its sexism. Thus one of the most fertile aspects of Le Doeuff's work is her critique of the institutional and inter-relational aspects of philosophical practice, especially the sexual politics of the pedagogical situation.
The disadvantage of this philosophical style, however, is that, by claiming aversion to syntheses, it ends up avoiding taking a stand on some of the most controversial aspects of the contemporary feminist debate. Morris's reading, for instance, highlights a point that I find most problematic in Le Doeuff's work, namely the fact that, in the name of her aversion to general theories, among which she classifies the femin-
ism of sexual difference, she refuses to situate herself as a reader of theoreticians such as Irigaray, Kofman, Cixous and many other contemporary French women philosophers. They are striking omissions in Le Doeuff's text and this absence can be read as a form of refusal or avoidance.
The combination of these two features, the refusal to theorize and the rejection of the radical feminism of difference, makes it difficult for the reader to approach Le Doeuff, whose work can only be read as 'a woman writing philosophy'.38 What is even more problematic than this double restriction, whose inhibitory effects can, after all, be overcome, is the fact that Le Doeuff gives no indication as to how she actually intends to throw out the anti-feminism of philosophy while retaining philosophy itself. Reformist zeal leads Le Doeuff to omit a number of absolutely crucial clarifications about her strategy. In this respect, her analysis of the notion of 'image', and of the 'imaginary' turns out to be, in Morris's analysis, particularly unsatisfactory.
Le Doeuff's more recent book-length study of women and philosophy does not answer any of the above objections, nor does it move any further in the direction of providing a counter-strategy. L'Etude et le Rouet is a wittily and elegantly written text; it is also one of the best pamphlets on the question of gender and philosophy ever written in French. In her presentation of French feminism, the seventies are privileged over the eighties and the sociological materialism of some gets more attention than the symbolic revolution attempted by others. Nevertheless Le Doeuff produces an account second only to Claire Duchen's of the real roots of the women's movement in France, avoiding over-emphasis on the stars. In her choice of philosophical references (Comte, Bachelard, Bergson, Canguilhem, Foucault and, of course, Sartre) as in her terminology, Le Doeuff avoids jargon of the post-68 kind, achieving a remarkable level of classical French prose.
In a tantalizing textual practice that confirms her dislike for theorybuilding and global syntheses, Le Doeuff confines most of her theoretical statements to the footnotes. The leading notion of philosophy as 'pensees detachees', scattered thoughts, consolidates the insight of her early work about the need to make philosophy accept its incompleteness and its reliance on other disciplines. The same style, however, makes it once again impossible to locate Le Doeuff in one specific position.
At the level of critique, she pursues the crusade against the sexism of philosophy, which she calls 'masculinisin', but she does not assimilate the whole of philosophy to it, arguing for the possibility of new ways of philosophizing. As far as the definition of feminism is concerned, however, the result seems to me disappointing: Le Doeuff argues that the feminist is implicitly a philosopher insofar as she has learnt to use her own head and express her own judgement. She does not, however, believe in a specifically female or even feminist way of actually doing philosophy; her aversion to the radical feminism of difference has now
grown to a real denial: the existence, let alone the validity of the theoretical corpus of a Kristeva, an Irigaray, a Kofman, are completely ignored.
With the above, the entire post-structuralist generation is dismissed by Le Doeuff as a misguided episode in French philosophy, fortunately unimportant enough to be forgotten. In a style that fits the mood of neo-humanism that has taken over French thought (see chapter 1 above), Le Doeuff aims to redirect the focus of philosophy away from the agenda set in the sixties, and especially away from the emphasis on subjectivity. The dismissal of the phenomenological tradition and of structuralist psychoanalysis are particularly problematic to me, especially as Le Doeuff devotes a great deal of attention to Sartre, whose attachment to phenomenology is obvious. In a way, Le Doeuff plays the great tradition of the crisis of metaphysics against the long French tradition of epistemology and philosophy of science: Bachelard against Lacan. Even then, the question of the unconscious is not raised rigorously and the feminist attempts to deal with the issues do not, it seems, even deserve a mention. In this respect, Le Doeuff is a stated opponent of radicalism in philosophy and especially of deconstructionism in any form. The notion of subversion simply is not operative in her thinking. Contrary to E. Grosz, I therefore find Le Doeuff's position incompatible with the post-structuralist project.
Declaring the rationalist egalitarianism and the materialism of Beauvoir as the truly French tradition, Le Doeuff dismisses the last twenty years of French feminist theory as a mistake that did not produce any lasting effect. She opposes to it the ethics of feminist solidarity and the classical feminist humanism of Beauvoir, resulting in the creation of a community of responsible knowing subjects, whose task it is to free society and philosophy alike from sexism. More importantly still, the modes of negotiation for this new cognitive and ethical community are not explicated; as in her previous work, the question of how exactly to avoid radicalism by attempting other steps is left unanswered. That, after this, she should declare the feminism of difference as being 'voluntarist', that is, over-involved with issues of wilful transformation, leaves one staggered.
Although on several occasions Le Doeuff refers to the poststructuralist generation (Foucault, Deleuze and Derrida), they get quoted on questions of details, whereas the substance of their position is ignored. In my opinion this is representative of the limitations of the reformist position in philosophy and as such it goes beyond the case of Le Doeuff. In my reading, not one of the reformist feminist philosophers can accept, let alone come to terms with the idea of the crisis of the discipline of philosophy. Questions about loss, decline, crisis, fragmentation; concepts such as discourse, power, the unconscious, alterity and difference are simply not part of their conceptual horizon. The reformists live theoretically in a pre-modern universe, where the sub-
ject, although he or she may be made complex and seen as multiple, still coincides with his or her wilful conscious self. As a consequence, the unconscious, along with the leading concepts of desire and difference, is not granted the status of a philosophical idea. It is replaced by more classical ideas, such as the imagination, the feelings, emotions or passions: all eminently pre-Freudian elements of a philosophical psychology that has seen better days.
What is the vision of philosophy that emerges from these positions? At best, it is the provider of a new discursive ethics (Code); or of an ethics that recognizes the mode of intersubjectivity experienced by women in the feminist movement (Le Doeuff). It can lead to fairer accounts of the history of philosophical ideas (Lloyd); or else it can be the instrument by which feminist ideas can be perfected and elucidated (Gould).
The idea of philosophy as a technique that can be used to elaborate feminist knowledge is defended by a great deal of professional women philosophers, often with devastating results for feminism. The case of J. Radcliffe-Richards' excessively negative analysis of feminist ideas39 is significant enough to serve as a warning for anyone who would still be tempted to uphold the definition of philosophy as a technique of reasoning, pure elucidation of arguments for the sake of clarity: a new rhetoric of thought that would emphasize the objects of thinking, rather than the subject.
Despite these problems, however, it seems to me that the reformist work accomplished by feminist philosophers has been one of the most important theoretical events of the last ten years: it has literally redrawn the face of the discipline. I would also like to add that, despite my dissatisfaction with the conceptual references of these philosophers, I recognize their work as rigorous and honest analyses of philosophy. What is most striking is the enthusiasm and commitment of these feminists to the task of reforming their discipline. In this respect, despite their resistance to the crisis of modernity, these feminist philosophers have a vision and a force of insight that is sadly lacking elsewhere, precisely because the discipline is in a state of full crisis. Feminist reformist philosophers are totally free from nostalgia: their eyes are firmly fixed in the future and, indeed, they do see women as the future of mankind.
As a point of comparison, aiming to highlight the validity of the reformist position, I shall turn my attention briefly to two female examples of total philosophical nostalgia, trying to point out their reactionary undertones.
Discontinuous Variations on a Nostalgic Theme i Mottini-Coulon
Edmee Mottini-Coulon's Essai d'ontologie specifiquement feminine develops arguments which run alongside feminist discourse but are on their own admission openly reactionary.40 The point of departure for this reflection is that women's real and profound vocation is alien to solitude and autonomy. And yet, with an intention which may seem contradictory, the author declares she is looking for a specifically feminine voice in philosophy, chiefly in metaphysics; on the basis of the classical definition of ontology as the authentic source of the real, she tries to discover a feminine contribution to the question of Being. Now, ontology essentially poses the question in relation to the other, otherness:
We are like a link in a chain, between two things: between the inside of consciousness of being and outside the consciousness of being; it is between these two impossible positivities that our positivity of life and consciousness is installed, between two enigmas.41
Following the classical formulation of the problem, Mottini-Coulon posits the will to affirm the subjectivity of the One in terms of the desire for recognition by the Other; her stance therefore recognizes the validity of the Hegelian duel, for she situates herself in a context of the putting-to-death of the Other. However, the author makes an exception for Woman, who, thanks to her privileged experience of motherhood, has an immediate and distinctive perception of her other, which enables her to surmount the dialectical relationship. Perceived from the point of view of ontology, motherhood becomes the moment of revelation of a dazzling truth: the other as biological presence of the child in the mother's body represents the basis of a new transcendence, fundamentally opposed to the cogito. The mother's knowledge in relation to her child is immediate, that is, without any possible mediation, 'and so I am objectively, scientifically assured of an existence which I neither perceive through objective observation, nor grasp internally, that is, subjectively ... My knowledge of this existence is therefore a perceptile form of not-knowing.'42
Of course, the conformity of the mother's being and her child leads Mottini-Coulon to certain theoretical consequences, which she emphasizes repeatedly. For instance, in that particular adventure that is motherhood, the subjectivity-objectivity relationship is never a relationship of dialectical opposition, of contradiction, but stems from an existential relationship of harmony and reciprocal recognition: 'an existence within me which is that of my difference'.43 As a result, the experience of pregnancy, or, more precisely, the ontological reality of
this experience, may be used to assert a new metaphysics based on harmony rather than conflict. Along the way, motherhood finds itself elevated to the status of transcendental experience, and acquires a universal value, in epistemological no less than ontological terms.
To defend this claim to universality the author presents a number of examples, which all derive from empirical reality; according to Mottini-Coulon, the transcendental function of pregnancy is supposedly underscored by its opposites, such as profound mourning in response to the accidental death of the foetus, which the mother sees as a mutilation of her own body, a personal wound and more besides. Or the ordeal of sterility, which arouses in the women a 'natural' feeling of incompleteness and lack, especially if we consider that maternal love is a 'naturally feminine' emotional quality.
These examples should indicate clearly enough the general direction of Mottini-Coulon's argument, and her approval of patriarchal society's most ordinary conventions. If by chance her insistence on the specificity of the mother-child relationship seems close to what feminists call a new relationship to filiation, this illusion is quickly shattered by the contemptuous terminology she uses to define woman. In this theoretical work, this woman philosopher adopts, one by one, the norms of sexist society.
To say that woman is ontologically remote from any possibility of solitude amounts of designating her a secondary subject in social and political terms; for if she is 'naturally' devoted to the other, that is, her children, she can only be the system's sexual slave. The assertion that women are incapable of confronting solitude may be summed up by the famous paradigm: a woman = 0, a woman plus a child = 1.
The ontologically solitary woman would be an invalid, or as if dead, having been unable to be. It is this that is revealed by the grief of the woman who has been unable to be a mother ... The feminine feeling of existence which, on the psychological level, reveals her specific ontology, is joined to others, as, moreover, is indicated by her spontaneous vocation to work in the field of education, for instance. Such work in turn strengthens this vocation. Thus it is that the problem of properly feminine freedom can be neither posed, nor subsequently resolved, in terms of a search for a separate autonomy, antagonistic to her nature; no more can the problem be viewed as tending towards an end that is a much more clearly conceived and named liberty: liberation.44
If I thought it interesting to mention this catalogue of misogynist banalities, it is because the author makes of it the basis for a new demand for women, in the sense of a search for difference and, running parallel, this affirmation, void as it is of all reality, serves as a facade behind which the most basic phallocentrism is concealed. Woman does not exist as an autonomous being, she is by nature servile and inclined
to assist, serve, and be submissive. Not only does Mottini-Coulon give these 'virtues' a positive value which reinforces patriarchal assumptions about women; she also projects them onto a cosmic scale in order to extend her new ontology. For me, this ontological language is only ever the transposition to the universal level of a very widespread prejudice which determines women's destiny in terms of her biology.
But if the woman is really or potentially bearer of others, she is also borne by others. This is no mere wordplay. This desire for liberty is not based on a cogito closed in on itself, in the exclusive, relentless affirmation of the self. The feminine cogito, like any cogito, generating centre of desire, perception, the idea of wanting-to-be and wanting-to-become, is an escorted cogito. We think we have shown that this escort is ontologically vital to it. Feminine actions and thoughts do more than, and something other than, accommodate the existence of others; in the woman, actions and thoughts are 'surrounded'. She thinks and acts easily 'with'; she is thus a born collaborator.45
Strong stuff! Of all the misogynist banalties which riddle this quotation, I would like to emphasize, if only on the philosophical level, that of the 'escorted cogito', on the basis of which Mottini-Coulon concludes that all women are 'born collaborators'.
Related to the Cartesian stance, this concept of the 'escorted cogito' is at the very least surprising - unless we infer that the escort is God himself, as guarantee of the universal value of Reason. Would this then be a way for Mottini-Coulon to suggest that pregnancy, and the woman's childbearing capacity, makes her a privileged being in terms of the divine? At this point the image of the Virgin Mary 'naturally' springs to mind, all the more so given that the exalted description this text gives us of motherhood seems to refer directly to the Madonna, mother of all Humanity.
This praising to the skies, this return to myth, is presented as the form of the rational par excellence. However, on examination, we notice that in spite of its claims, this text shows no evidence of any intellectual dynamic, and is motivated only by the desire to validate an extremely widespread anti-feminist opinion, by masking it in a language borrowed from the language of the human sciences, classical metaphysics, and above all, Heideggerian ontology.
From a political perspective, I find only a juxtaposition of the status quo, which neither adds to, nor in any way modifies the sexist commonplaces; the idea of the 'escorted cogito' is neither articulated theoretically, nor defended philosophically; it simply expresses a value judgement about woman's biological inability to attain autonomy and independence. I have only cited the text here to illustrate a position which is widely held in post-industrial society, which years of feminist struggle have scarcely begun to affect - and which these days, certain
women defend more vehemently than do men. Indeed, none of the men's texts I have discussed here can rival the contempt for women expressed in Mottini-Coulon's work; few theorists besides would dare display such a will to dominate.
I am not saying that contempt for women is a prerogative of women themselves, and it is easy to find masculine texts, both past and current, which are as misogynist as this. But in most cases, they do not claim to establish a feminine specificity, whereas Mottini-Coulon's arguments are all developed on the basis of a flagrant (mis)appropriation of feminist ideas which denatures their political conclusions.
Finally, by drawing attention to this type of thinking, which is so common that it often passes unnoticed, I refuse to see it as being so banal that it might seem negligible or anodyne. For it seems to me a grave mistake to think that feminism has already had a profound and positive impact, and to forget that this type of misogyny still constitutes the norm for the silent majority, and moreover, enjoys a relative impunity, even among women who struggle. In my view, the need to adopt a feminist position in this respect is more urgent than ever.
In this respect, it may be useful to compare Mottini-Coulon's ideas on motherhood to the feminist accounts of the same that I sketched out in chapter 6. An interesting comparison may be with Adrienne Rich's work on mothers as feminists, which offers, in my opinion, a formidable counter-argument to Mottini-Coulon's reactionary vision. The sophistication of Rich's reasoning clashes significantly with the triviality of Mottini-Coulon's Christian adaptation of Heidegger.
So for all these reasons, I find the new ontology suggested by Mottini-Coulon interesting enough in terms of its theoretical and political implications; besides, to read this text in the context of feminist thought enables us to reduce it to its real value, to the handful of vulgar prejudices which fuel it.
The existence of this opinion, still so widespread, underlines the urgency of and need for women's struggles in the field of philosophy. Our silence on this question would be catastrophic, for it would, as Le Doeuff emphasizes, 'function as a block, renew an interdiction, and, finally, betray a lack of confidence in our ability to transform struggles and terrains',46 and, as she adds elsewhere, 'we will not talk pidgin just to please the colonialists'.47
ii Mary Daly
Another powerful nostalgic tendency consists in falling into a new uniformity, a neo-normativity. For instance, in an ontological vein, the American philosopher Mary Daly offers feminism a universal vision as a spiritual revolution. She is in favour of a veritable 'ontological leap': from feminism to a new spirituality based on the cult of the great
Goddess. Her points of reference are radical feminism, a certain American existentialism tinged with anti-psychiatry, and classical theology. The eclecticism of her sources influences the style of her argument, which is simultaneously 'professional' and very imaginative. She describes her theoretical objectives as follows:
My purpose is to show that the women's revolution, insofar as it is true to its own essential dynamics, is an ontological, spiritual revolution, pointing beyond the idolatries of sexist society and sparking creative action in and towards transcendence. The becoming of women implies universal human becoming. It has everything to do with the search for ultimate meaning and reality, which some would call God.48
This premise enables her critically to analyse the phallocratic prejudices of the origins of Judeo-Christian theology, but in other respects, leads to a hyperbolic discourse which has the negative effect of conjuring away feminism's diversity. For her - and it is the central theme of her reflection - feminism is essentially defined as a movement of opposition to all patriarchal religion. She describes this opposition as the fight between the gods of the patriarchal system and the new divinity, the Goddess, who is represented by the women who struggle.
The becoming of women in sisterhood is the countercultural phenomenon par excellence which can indicate the future course of human spiritual evolution ... none of the methods acceptable to male philosophers and theologians can begin to speak to this task. Women are not merely 're-thinking' philosophy and theology but are participating in new creation.49
'Spiritual evolution', 'task', 'creation'; through these terms, clearly borrowed from the vocabulary of theology, Mary Daly offers her synthesis of feminist activities and objectives. The results seem to me to be rather ambiguous. Women's becoming-God (through which they find their divine nature restored), presupposes that the divinities in sway - those patriarchical idols who, for Mary Daly, are without real spiritual value - will be overtaken. The 'task' which falls to feminists is therefore to bring about a new 'creation', for the sake of the progress of all humanity. The possessors of the interplanetary good news offer a message akin to a veritable revelation, whose content has the value of absolute truth. Already understood by feminists, it announces a new form of consciousness, a new perception of the divine, the dawning of a new world. In this semi-biblical vision, feminism is glorified, its exaltation being both ethical and aesthetic; persuaded that a supernatural revelatory principle animates each and every act of women who struggle, Mary Daly calls creation the least of their actions. The better
theoretically to justify this over-investment in feminist activity, she presents us with an ontological reading of feminism, based on the classical argument of the three ways, which serves to demonstrate the existence of God.
The ontological value of feminism resides in the fact that it marks women's emergence from the darkness where patriarchal thought had confined them; as for its spiritual value, it is determined by the rejection of non-being. Even the political and social meaning of women's struggles spring from its being articulated in ontological terms, all historical becoming rests on the struggle for the emergence of Being, over against non-Being. Women are overflowing with existential courage, the condition necessary for the struggle for liberty and existence, overflowing with the desire to come to life as free beings. Daly, who believes that the oppression of women will be defeated by a leap forward which will tear women from their silence, sees what is at stake in feminism in terms of a dispute between the forces of light and darkness, of being against nothingness. Whence her affirmation of the universal value of the feminist message which, moreover, proclaims existential courage and creative force.
Here, insofar as all action is given ontological status, history and ontology go hand in hand in the struggles for women's becoming. Whence, also, the desexualization of feminist struggles, all the more so because the divinity postulated by Mary Daly as the effect of these becomings must mark the beginning of an androgynous phase for humanity; the new phase of being, which is in fact nothing other than a new form of spiritual transcendence, involving the creation of an undifferentiated sexuality. All things considered, the specifically feminine dimension of becoming remains quite limited, and what we are being told about is, rather, the universal projection of the feminine into a new vision of being based on the spiritual predominance of women, and of the feminization of being.
The cult of the Great Goddess, a currently very widespread phenomenon in Anglo-Saxon feminism, inserts the objectives of women's struggles into a theosophical framework which magnifies them to a cosmic scale. What is the point? I am tempted to think that the prophetic value with which the thought and activities of women who struggle find themselves invested may enable the metaphysical void left by the 'death' of God to be filled through feminist discourse.
Daly's thinking is deeply nostalgic, though in a different sense from the arch-conservative nostalgia of the moral majority, Bloom and others. It depends on an imaginary and fantasized vision of an idyllic matriarchy supposedly suppressed by patriarchy and which, consequently, defends feminism on the basis of doctrines alien to it. Reversing the course of history, Daly presents the future victory of the Great Goddess as the cosmic return of the great repressed and explains feminist
sisterhood as the final cause of this new being. If this stance allows her to develop an excellent critique of the repressive role of traditional morality, and of the role of scapegoat it has forced women to play, her vision of feminism as the final stage of Being, her feminization of cosmic divinities, her glorification of feminine creativity as the manifestation of a final truth seem to me to need to be handled with care.
A preliminary analysis already reveals that these words modify nothing, and offer absolutely no innovation in terms of the ideas structuring the current moral and religious order. Daly simply indulges in a substitutive operation which puts women in the place of men, on earth as in heaven, thus preserving intact the state of things. As M. Morris argues, Daly operates her re-naming at the level of lexicon, of the vocabulary, leaving unchanged the syntax of representation.
A much more formidable objection was moved by black women, especially Audre Lorde, in her open letter to Mary Daly, where she points out the gender-blindness of her accounts of divinity and her utter indifference to the sensitive issue of racial differences. In this respect, the enormous output by black women over the last ten years has revolutionized our perception of the religious. Daly's over-emphasis on white Christianity seems peculiarly out of touch with black grass-root religious experiences.
The ontological leap she offers humanity seems to me, in the last analysis, to be a great leap backwards for women, leading them back to the most nebulous metaphysics, and to meta- and supra-terrestrial beliefs whose admissibility is very doubtful. In my opinion, to suggest the existence of a feminine source of the Divine serves only to confirm that feminism is the supreme cause, the war to end all wars, that it is the ultimate beatific vision. So Daly falls into what I consider one of the worst traps besetting feminism today: the replacement of the masculine subject by a feminine subject. The mantle of sacredness she lends this new universal subjectivity aggravates the situation still further: the cult of the Great Goddess is doubtless the final version of an absolute desire, of a thirst for eternity which has always haunted Western culture, and whose consequences women have suffered in their long history as oppressed beings.
The latent dogmatism in Daly's thought, quite as much as its reactionary nature, seems to me potentially dangerous for current feminism, insofar as it subverts the signs, not the codes.
Paradoxically, in these two ideologically opposed cases, Mottini-Coulon and Daly, we find not only absence of reference to variables other than gender - neither class nor race rate highly in their estimate -but also we can see the same conceptual tendency to naturalize the feminine. These two thinkers are each, in different ways, very essential-ist: they uphold a substantial definition of the female subject and they conjugate it with a vision of the role women can and should play in
history. The essentialism implicit in this position rests on a biological support which makes the /feminine, a position defined according to pre-existing parameters.
It is this theoretical convergence of two currents of feminine thought which are in other respects opposed that has marked the recent history of feminism, especially in the States. Some of the most 'radical' feminists and women who have faith and are practising Christians have formed a common front on issues such as prostitution, pornography and sadomasochism. Their consensus rests on a 'certain idea of woman', in which the ideal of dignity and the desire for ideological purity seem to meet.50 How can we fail to locate a projection of women's ideal self in this tendency?
On this level, the nostalgic tendency, along with the essentialist naturalization of the feminine it introduces, and the implicit racism, constitutes a spuriously 'noble' impulse founded in a total misunderstanding of what it means to speak, to be in/of language. In the next chapter I will turn my attention to the feminist philosophers who have made reflection on language the centre of their thought.
Radical Philosophies of Sexual Difference, or:
I Think Therefore She Is
It would seem to follow then as an indisputable fact that 'we' -meaning by 'we' a whole made up of body, brain, and spirit, influenced by memory and tradition - must still differ in some essential respects from 'you', whose body, brain and spirit have been so differently trained and are so differently influenced by memory and tradition. Though we see the same world, we see it through different eyes. Any help we can give you must be different from that you can give yourselves, and perhaps the value of that help may lie in the fact of that difference. Therefore before we agree to sign your manifesto or join your society, it might be well to discover where the difference also lies, because then we may discover where the help lies also.1 Woolf
Do people suspect, do we suspect, how difficult and in fact dangerous it can be when life is restored to an 'object'? When the idol begins to feel again? When 'it' finds speech again? When it has to say 'I', as a woman?2 Wolf
By comparison with the philosophical positions outlined so far, namely the vehement militants of the nostalgic mode and the dutiful daughters of reformist goodwill, let me turn my attention now to the radical position, which I will defend as feminist critical theory. Let me state, as a general premise, that in this chaper I will be using the term 'radical' in a tradition of philosophy and political theory dominated by French and Italian references.3 In this tradition, as Teresa de Lauretis so clearly puts it, 'feminist theory is all about an essential difference, an irreducible difference, though not a difference between man and woman, nor a difference inherent in 'woman's nature' (in woman as nature), but a difference in the feminist conception of woman, women and the world'.4
Thus I want to link the notion of radicality to that of sexual difference,
that is to say to the revendication of a female specificity in terms of political and epistemological subjectivity. For English-speaking readers a useful counterpoint of comparison to my usage of the term might be the inflexion given to it by Eisenstein and Jaggar, who, from a very different cultural tradition, define 'radical' rather in terms of gender analysis, metaphysical essentialism and socialist feminist materialism.
In comparing the two traditions, de Lauretis states that the question of difference as being the difference that feminism makes to our understanding of the subject, of knowledge and politics is central to some European feminist theory: while 'their Anglo-American counterparts seem for the most part engaged in typologizing, defining, and branding various "feminisms" along an ascending scale of theoretico-political sophistication where "essentialism" weighs heavy at the lower end'.5 I shall return to the issue of essentialism later.
My argument here is that the radical feminism of difference, like structuralist thought, takes up the conceptual challenge of philosophical modernity, without shrinking away out of resistance or nostalgia. It takes on the question of the crisis of metaphysics and the decline of the classical system of representation of the subject as self-reflecting consciousness. As a consequence, feminist critical thinkers stress the importance of positive difference as a fundamental category of thought and strategy of action. What characterizes them as a distinctive trend, as opposed to the male post-structuralists I presented earlier, is that they sexualize the issue, by positing differences between men and women as the prototype of all differences. This sexualization of discourse contrasts greatly with the de-sexualization operated by most male postmodernist philosophers.
Analysing female oppression in terms of simultaneous symbolic disqualification by patriarchal theoretical representations and concrete exploitation and humiliation in their daily social lives, feminist women have turned their exclusion into an inexhaustible source which feeds their desire for in-depth transformations. This aim also differentiates radical feminism from the reformist position I outlined in the previous chapter. The focus on subjectivity results in the definition of feminism as an epistemological struggle as well as a struggle of a political nature. In this framework epistemology means the political process of comprehending and redefining the woman as subject of knowledge, and of inscribing these changes into a new social and historical reality for women.
This revendication of the difference that feminism makes to women's sense of identity and to their political and epistemological subjectivity is the basis for what I would call, following Teresa de Lauretis, the politics of the female feminist subject.6
It is this aspect of the radical feminist position that brings it close to contemporary post-structuralist philosophy. By situating the question of subjectivity in the framework of a critique of power, the feminism of
difference emphasizes issues such as the empowerment of individual becoming as a political process. The intensity (potentia) of the subject's own becoming is the crucial aspect of the epistemological process of repossessing female subjectivity so as to redefine it positively. The feminist critique of phallologocentrism should be read in this light, not as simple rejection of reason. Rather it is situated alongside the neo-Nietszcheans, such as Deleuze, who call for the triumph of the intensive, libidinal, affective Dionysian spirit over Apollonian rationalism, in order to develop a new subjectivity which would be not individualist but multiple.
Feminist reflection on philosophy, formulated in these terms, aims at moving beyond the analysis of the modalities of exclusion of women, which is viewed as an internal necessity of the philosophical order itself. It moves, rather, towards a radical epistemology that reads the disqualification of women as a step in a process that must be questioned as a whole: the disqualification of the woman is a structural need of the phallologocentric system of knowledge, which is read in the light of the 'metaphysical cannibalism' that consumes the many 'others' of theoretical reason, in order to legitimate itself.
This radical epistemological standpoint is all the more important at this particular historical moment, which is deeply affected by the 'crisis' of rationality, and of the system of values that sustained it since the seventeenth century. It is clearly no accident that philosophy's crisis of legitimation occurs at the same historical moment as the emergence of women's political movements. As I have been trying to argue in this book, however, it is equally clear that the feminist women who have grasped the historical opportunity of radically questioning the disciplinary foundations of philosophy, have different goals and aims from the male thinkers of the same 'crisis'. The essential point of divergence is, as I stated before, the feminist concern with giving their struggles a sex-specific character, aiming at redefining and empowering the becoming-subjects of women.
Radically Others
From a radical feminist perspective of difference, the activity of thought, viewed as a specific instance of authority in a chain of effects of power, can be neither pure nor universal. It is always sexed and as a result it manifests the power intrinsic to/in language. The sexed character of discursive power, seen also in terms of its links with the socio-political structures of patriarchy, forms the basis of the radical feminist critique of Reason. A discursive strategy, of course: and this reading expresses a clear political position, as Carla Lonzi indicates: 'We demand satisfaction [raison] from the centuries of philosophical thought which have theorized women's inferiority.'7 This implies that philosophy, like all
theoretical thought, is intrinsically connected to the 'feminine' by negation: the systematic exclusion of women is a gesture constitutive of theoretical discourse.8
Starting from the issue of women's exclusion and disqualification, feminists have opened a debate in which philosophy is an important referent, for it is with terms borrowed from philosophical discourse that the alliance between rationality and violence has been articulated, to the exclusion of women from theoretical and intellectual production. Philosophy is accused of actively participating in upholding male supremacy, but also of producing half-truths about women in particular and about the human activity of thinking in general.
Masculine intellectual systems are inadequate because they lack the wholeness that female consciousness, excluded from contributing to them, could provide. In taking the 'otherness' of the 'second' sex for granted, these systems are erected on an essential intellectual fault. Truly to liberate women, then, means to change thinking itself: to reintegrate what has been named the unconscious, the subjective, the emotional with the structural, the rational, the intellectual.9
In this view, philosophy is one of the conceptual weapons of phallologocentric thought: it helps to wage war on women, or rather, on the feminine as representing the physical, the natural, the irrational and consequently the anti-philosophical par excellence. Rationality, notably in its classical Cartesian inception, which I have analysed at some length earlier in this study, rejects madness, error, and dreams, and this founding act of modern reason also condemns woman as the referent for that which is 'other-than' philosophical reason.
As opposed to the reformists' belief in the possibility of cleansing the rational of its sexist biases, the theoreticians of difference argue that rationality is the mode of thinking of an idealized form of masculinity. They consequently oppose to it the elaboration of a counter-system that would symbolize and empower the female subject. If this aim is a point of consensus, however, the strategies and methods by which this alternative symbolic can be brought about vary.
For instance, in a very Nietszchean, polemical and provocative style, the radical Italian feminist Carla Lonzi develops this argument in terms of the postulate that the oppression of women is a structural necessity internal to the establishment of culture. The disqualification of women corresponds to the emergence of culture, it is the founding moment of the cultural order and as such it marks it with the sign of a sacrificial violence. To speak of this oppression is therefore to ask oneself questions about the very nature of the cultural order that governs the production of thought. Lonzi pursues this analysis through Hegel's dialectical opposition between a divine feminine principle which is manifest within the family, and a virile masculine principle which
controls the community, to show to what an extent the metaphysical foundations of the masculine/feminine dichotomy affect the creation of political categories such as the public and the private.
The relationship of man and woman thus described is different to that of master and slave: with good reason, according to Carla Lonzi. For if Hegel had rigorously applied this dialectic to the relationship between the sexes, he would have had to acknowledge both the reality and the theoretical necessity of the oppression of women. This realization would have been doubly catastrophic for his theory: on the one hand, he would have had to accept as theoretically valid the widespread sexist prejudice about the absolute primacy of men over women. On the other hand, he would have had to yield to the evidence that his dialectical scheme does not adequately analyse and explain the oppression of women; in other words, that this theoretical structure is not universally valid.
The difference between the sexes constitutes the natural metaphysical basis for their opposition as well as for their reunification. Through the feminine principle Hegel proposes an a priori principle of passivity which acts as an exhaustive proof of masculine power.10
Patriarchy is the practice, phallologocentrism the theory; both coincide, however, in producing an economy, material as well as libidinal, where the law is upheld by a phallic symbol that operates by constructing differences and organizing them hierarchically. A dialectic of one/other is thus established, which organizes the sexes in a power relation. Through such a dualistic grip on the question of difference, patriarchal thought has associated woman with nature, the body, the physical, as matter to be tamed and domesticated. This stigmatization of woman turns her into the outsider, or rather, the borderline image, pointing to the outside of the cultural and symbolic order. As the metaphor for the ever-receding possibility of non-order, just like the image of chaos or of the evil genius in Descartes, woman in the patriarchal imaginary incarnates the disquieting possibility of the absence of the law, of its decomposition. This image of woman, which feminist critical philosopher T. de Lauretis writes in capital letters as Woman, evokes both horror and fascination. As a borderline notion, she is the signpost that marks the boundaries of theoretical representation.
In my reading, the crucial tenet of the radical feminism of difference is the idea that the self-legitimation of the One rests on the exclusion of the Other, that the transcendental masculine narcissism feeds on the exclusion and fragmentation of the feminine. Thus Lonzi emphasizes Reason's hegemonic role in the Hegelian scheme, and she underlines the complicity between Reason and Power. In this framework, this infernal logic of domination by symbolic disqualification - the triumpth of the One over the Other - cannot be remedied by a straight reversal of the balance of power that would counter the game of self-affirmation
and the space of projection of the One in favour of the Other. This reversal would in fact leave the dialectical opposition intact: one must tackle the very structures of the framework, not its propositional contents, in order to overcome the power relations that sustain it.
By working to invalidate the master-slave dualism, feminists present the possibility of a new articulation of the subject in the field of knowledge, with the evident corollary that the man's role as sole protagonist on the centre-stage of the history of thought will be abolished. Feminists denounce the single-sexed male prerogative on rationality as an act of metaphysical cannibalism. Christa Wolf, among others, states that the centring around the Logos is 'perhaps the deepest superstition of the West';11 as such it still structures the process of individuation of the subject, motivates his or her desires and justifies his or her eroticism, thus perpetuating the all too old logic of exclusion and debasement of the feminine.
This analysis results in a methodology as well as in a political strategy: the call for a different reading of women's otherness, a radical redefinition of difference away from domination and subordination. Can difference be disentangled from this hierarchy of values? As Alice Jardine puts it:
Is there a way to think outside the patriarchally determined Same/ Other, Subject/Object dichotomies diagnosed as the fact of culture by Simone de Beauvoir thirty years ago, and, in the process, still include women as a presence? In other words, do we want to continue re-organizing the relationship of difference to sameness through a dialectics of valorization, or is there a way to break down the overdetermined metaphors which continue to organize our perceptions of reality?12
Josette Feral clarifies the question:
'Theorizing always needs a Savage.' The Savage in the West has always been the Woman: simultaneously present and absent, present when absent, and all the more absent when she is there. She is needed so that her difference can act as a confirmation of man's 'natural superiority' and of his 'birthright' to be the best... She is the Savage whose existence is denied in its authenticity, in its originality, insofar as it does not support her conqueror's claim. She is, but at the same time, she is not ... Master and slave, conqueror and savage, such are the reductive dichotomies through which the relationships of difference have always been perceived in our Aristotelian West. The Oneness of the master confronts the slave's duplicity, fullness, con-tronts the void, and presence confronts absence. Thus difference has always been construed and perceived through a set of binary oppositions that leaves no room for an authentic difference set outside the established system.13
I hope readers keep in mind, at this stage, the examples of mainstream philosophers' critique of the function of 'otherness' that I presented in the earlier sections of this book: they should be read both as confirming the feminist analysis of the structural function of difference within a system of thought - metaphysics - that postulates a central point of reference. However, they also express the specificity of the modern condition as being precisely the critique of the whole conceptual framework of classical thought.
The most common trait in the radical feminist reappropriation of difference is the critique of the transcendental and universal value granted to the masculine subject as rational, the counter-part of which is the symbolic sacrifice of the feminine, its bracketing-off. This symbolic disqualification is coextensive with the material, socio-economic oppression of real-life women. The radicality of this position consists precisely in refusing to detach the symbolic from the material, thus pointing out that the sacrifice of the female subject merges with the very foundations of the homosocial bond and the cultural order. Christiane Makward adds that in our culture the feminine as a mark of depreciation plays a fundamental role, which runs parallel to the use the economy makes of women's bodies: 'Woman is supposedly the site of man's assertion of his being-for-himself, the absolute other, strangeness and mystery ... but this, solely within a discourse and a culture dominated by the masculine.'14
Taking a rather different line, Helene Cixous says the same: the hierarchical opposition which makes woman the dialetical inverse of man underlies all thought and culture. Consequently, thought is logocentric; it is characterized by the negation of the feminine; therefore logocentrism and phallocentrism are interdependent, as they are for Derrida:
What is the 'Other'? If it is truly the 'other', there is nothing to say; it cannot be theorized. The 'other' escapes me. It is elsewhere, outside: absolutely other. It doesn't settle down. But in History, of course, what is called 'other' is an alterity that does settle down, that falls into the dialectical circle. It is the other in a hierarchically organized relationship in which the same rules, names, defines and assigns 'its' other.15
In this perspective, history has always travelled down a one-way street, affirming masculine primacy through the wilful burial of the feminine. And what women denounce in the dualist opposition of masculine to femine are precisely the power struggles it involves: a masculine-dominated economy, and exercise of power, are inherent in the use of reason and necessary to the establishment of rational order.
In other words, theroretical reason imposes itself through a logic of exclusion and domination, which posits the ideal of rationality as the
norm. The violent character of the exercise of reason is thus reasserted, in a way that can be compared to Foucault's and Derrida's assertion of the rationalist aggression at work in philosophy. Where the women do differ, however, is in providing a gender-specific analysis: masculinity and rationality go hand-in-hand, making the idea of a politicized, alternative sexual difference into the most effective form of political resistance for feminists.
The central point is still that the economy of the rational order is basically an economy of war, in which women have suffered. Theory -as women have learned at their expense - serves above all to create depreciative differences better to control the radical otherness of its manifold 'others'. This is why I find the parallel between theoretical reason and the war-function particularly significant: as Ti-Grace Atkinson's writing has shown us, the expression 'the war of the sexes' is quite inaccurate insofar as women never fought a war but rather suffered endless massacres and violence. Women have been historically cast in the figure of the prisoner, the exile, kept at a distance and locked away. The character of Cassandra in Christa Wolf s celebrated novel is, in my eyes, the perfect symbol of the non-status traditionally given to the thinking and intellectual woman; it is also one of the most poignant depictions of violence and war ever written.
The radical feminist position on sexual difference has evolved according to a double articulation that may seem paradoxical. On the one hand it underlines the masculine and belligerent character of theoretical reason: from this, feminism draws the argument that it is not because men are naturally rational that they are the masters, but that their position as masters has allowed them to monopolize rationality and to present it as their own prerogative. On the other, it criticizes the links between power and knowledge and tries to realize a new way of thinking and of envisaging theoretical reflection. Nancy Huston puts it as follows: 'Is it possible to utter a truth without erecting it? Are there words that will not be made into statements, that will resist turning into acceptable truths?'16
What seems to be at stake in this aspect of feminist reflection is the rereading of the grand narrative of rationality, and of the history of thought, in order to inscribe in it the living presence of women in their multiplicity. As Cixous asks: 'When they will awake from among the dead, the words, the laws?'17
In their critique of rationality, these feminists express the desire to push back the frontiers of theory and to extend the very notion of intelligence, in order to make way for women. Before examining the modalities of this critique and the various forms of this attempt to include women in the power-game of legitimation that characterizes theoretical reason, I should repeat that any labour of feminist reflection is above all creative labour. Women's thinking is always oriented towards creation, in several ways at once: whether it looks to the past, to
recover cultural traditions and ways of knowing by women that have not been preserved by mainstream culture, or whether it aims at illuminating a present that women often experience as conflictual and contradictory, in feminist thought critique and invention progress together.
Feminist reflection has destroyed theoretical discourse's claim to universality or to some pure objectivity, and it has simultaneously demonstrated the sexed character of the discursive power that sustains theoretical reason. Reason, established fact of humanity, has been appropriated (as if) as a masculine right, thereby leading to the exclusion of the feminine. Christiane Makward observes that it is through the critique of power-knowledge that women can now intervene in more general theoretical questions, but maintains that the specific angle of intervention of feminism in larger questions is through the question of the sexualization of discourse.
By denouncing the complicity which exists between phallocentrism and philosophy, the theoreticians of difference unmask a strategy of domination beneath the phallocentric claims to meta-language. They reveal that there is no master-language, no discourse on discourses and that logocentrism and the will-to-truth, fundamental traits of Western philosophy, which rest on a system of dualistic thought that relegates women to the status of the other, are nothing more nor less than the language of what is commonly called 'power'.
In an enlightened article about the role of the 'feminine' as privileged sign of otherness in the philosophy of modernity, Lyotard goes further and spells out the impact of the feminist critique of meta-discourse.18 In his reading, the feminist rejection of meta-language reveals, firstly, the congruence between the establishment of the philosophical order and that of masculine political power: the corpus socians is a male body; and secondly, on the level of the representation of sexuality, especially in psychoanalytic accounts of desire in terms of 'libidinal economy', it points out that by confining woman to the role of privileged other, the referent for the body, for nature, man projects (onto her) his fear of death and castration, his dread of the question of the origin, his inability to think separation in non-oppositional terms.
Feminism's rejection of the master-language of classical philosophy therefore brings to the fore the very groundwork of what Lyotard calls the 'postmodern condition', the loss of legitimation and the collapse of the traditional power strategies. This crisis also forms the theoretical junction between women and philosophy, which Lyotard welcomes as a mutually enriching event. As I have argued all along, this happy 'coincidence' between crisis and feminization, as well as the poststructuralist project of turning the crisis into the questioning and the deconstruction of the language of mastery, seem to me very problematic. As Frangoise Collin, a philosopher trained in the tradition of Heidegger and Blanchot, emphasizes, contemporary philosophy makes
much of the death of God and the end of the subject. The emphasis placed, instead, on the recognition of a fundamental alterity, a difference, is much more profitable for feminism.19 So too the denunciation of the internal relationship which binds rationality, the masculine instrument of domination, to violence.
In the beginning, there is difference. This difference is not reducible to duality: there is not, on the one hand, man, and on the other, woman, each having their own and additional characteristics. There is in the beginning the not-one, which must be allowed free play ... But Western man has tried to reduce this beginning to unity by bringing the other back to himself, whether it be women, foreigners or strangers, the young or the working class.20
For its part, contemporary philosophy, drawing on the contributions of psychoanalysis and ethnology, reaches the same conclusion about the structural inextricability of positive assertion (presence/discourse of the One) and negative disqualification (absence/discourse on the Other). The dialectics of inclusion/exclusion is the economy of power specific to discourse. The philosophy of modernity unveils and criticizes these mechanisms; contemporary philosophers like Lyotard, Foucault, and Deleuze devote themselves, precisely, to the task of freeing new forms of rationality in order to set them to work for resistance, not for power.
As I have been suggesting throughout this book, the fact that rationalist thought has reached a situation of crisis has enabled feminist thought to evolve: in some strange and yet historically bound context the evolution of feminist thought is coextensive with the breaking up of the ideal of rationality. This coincidence, however, far from producing complementary thoughts, is leading to very different theoretical directions. It is my belief that the radical feminism of sexual difference is one of the most innovative and significant developments of contemporary critical philosophy.
Repossessing Bodily Space: A Timely Project
The rejection of the alleged universality of the knowing subject, and the critique of the complicity of masculinity and rationality, results in a renewal of interest in the sex-specific nature of the subject, and therefore in the notion that, when speaking of subjectivity, one must begin with the idea of embodiment. This notion involves the idea of the simultaneous material oppression and symbolic disqualification of women, which in turn leads to the strategy that I see as the trait of the radical feminism of difference: that of speaking the/from the body. Whether it is in the sense suggested by Adrienne Rich (see chapter 6), of emphasizing the importance of the 'embodied' nature of the subject and the specific-
ity of female corporeality, or in the more French-based movement of deconstructive philosophy known as 'ecriture feminine', the question of the body has emerged as central to radical feminist philosophies of the subject. 1
It is extremely important to note the extent to which these feminist positions have assimilated the fundamental epistemological insight of psychoanalysis and post-structuralist theory, namely that the body thus defined cannot be reduced to the biological, nor can it be confined to social conditioning. In a new form of "corporeal materialism', the body is seen as an inter-face, a threshold, a field of intersection of material and symbolic forces; it is a surface where multiple codes of power and knowledge are inscribed; it is a construction that transforms and capitalizes on energies of a heterogeneous and discontinuous nature. The body is not an essence, and therefore not an anatomical destiny: it is one's primary location in the world, one's primary situation in reality. As a consequence, in the radical feminist philosophies of sexual difference, the strategy of repossessing the body aims at elaborating alternative forms of knowledge and representation of the subject. The embodied nature of subjectivity is posited so as to allow for the radical subversion of culture.
According to the feminist philosophy of embodiment, women must bring about structural transformations in our understanding of the human subject, either through radical feminist epistemologies or through the strategy of 'speaking the feminine'. I will return to this shortly. They must in any case take up their place of enunciation, for as long as they are refused the status of thinking subject, their exclusion from the field of theory will allow the legitimation and renewal of the achieved historical fact of their oppression. Theoretically justified by a tradition of misogyny that stated that woman has no direct relation with rationality, no soul, no speculative reason or superego capacity, the appropriation and exchange of women have had enormous social and political repercussions on their condition. In this respect, the feminist position rests on the sexualization of theoretical practice.
In terms of the archaeology of modernity (see chapter 3) the emphasis on the body coincides with the post-Nietzschean appeal to overcome the classical mind-body dualism in order to think anew about the structures of human subjectivity. As I have argued previously, the discourse of psychoanalysis is one of the most influential theories of the embodied nature of the subject. In chapter 6, in my reading of the evolution of feminist ideas, I tried to show that, starting from totally different traditions of thought, contemporary feminist theory has led to rethinking the corporeal roots of human intelligence in general and of female intelligence in particular. I would now like to argue that the radical feminism of sexual difference is another significant elaboration of the notion of embodiment, in radically new terms.
Insofar as it confronts head-on the question of the structures of
subjectivity at a time of 'crisis' of the classical representations of human consciousness, and insofar as it does so by sexualizing the subject and his or her practices, feminism as the critical theory of sexual difference cannot afford to ignore the insight and the lessons of psychoanalysis. Unlike the reformist stance described earlier, the radical emphasis on difference leads to questions about the structures of identity meant as a dialectic of identifications and desire.
As soon as feminism abandons simple demands for equality, in order to move on to a less reactive position in both its thought and practice -or in other terms, as soon as the affirmation of difference as positive value has replaced the demand for equality - it connects with certain aspects of psychoanalytic theory, in particular its critique of the primacy of rationality and the notion of the sexed nature of the subject. As Carolyn Burke so clearly puts it:
Attempting to see woman not as man's 'other', as in the negative sense of 'difference', but as a plurality of meanings, we recharge the concept with new, more positive valence. Now, as theory begins to catch up with artistic experience, we are looking into our reasons for wishing to minimize difference. I would like to suggest that a certain psychoanalysis has its uses in an approach to a feminist theory of difference. Furthermore, it is likely that this approach will lead to a revaluation of the 'female' as understood in relation to the 'maternal'.22
As I argued earlier, the relation between women and psychoanalysis has never been exactly laidback, despite or because of the fact that most psychoanalytic clients actually are women. During the early years of the second feminist phase, especially in the United States, Freud was the object of quite virulent critique and attacks. Exhaustive inventories of the different critiques addressed by feminists to psychoanalysis are now available, and I do not intend to report the details of this debate.23 More recently, for reasons I outlined before (see chapter 2), the debate shifted towards/against Lacanian re-interpretations of Freud and the possible implications they may have for feminism. I think that the work of Juliet Mitchell and Jacqueline Rose in English and, in French, the excellent introduction by Marcelle Marini outline clearly the main points of the debate.24 To summarize simply: feminist critique has primarily revolved around the normative function of psychoanalysis, which still offers prescriptive notions of woman and the feminine.
In her state-of-the-arts introduction to a recent collection of articles on feminism and psychoanalysis, Between Feminism and Psychoanalysis, Teresa Brennan sums up a decade of polemics as follows: 'The issues are: the status of the Lacanian "symbolic", sexual difference and knowledge, the bearing of essentialism on feminist politics, and the relation between psychic reality and the social.'25 In what follows, I will concentrate
especially on the question of the symbolic, sexual difference and the thorny issue of how to implement social change.
In this context it is important to maintain the distinction I made in chapter 2, between a critique, elaborated within psychoanalysis, concerning the role of the 'feminine' in the psychic life of both sexes, and a socio-political critique centred on the relationship of women to the psychoanalytic institution as an established form of knowledge, as a dominant theory of subjectivity. Feminists often suggest that if on the one hand psychoanalysis has contributed to our understanding of the process of formation of the subject, on the other, it has in no way helped to modify the existing social relations between the sexes. Brennan, however, warns us against any hasty polarization between psychic life and socio-political practices. The question remains open: given that the women's movement regards the social inscription of transformations of the self as crucial, the mode of interaction of feminism and psychoanalytic politics is problematic. Almost as if they were defining themselves against each other, these two theorizations of the 'female' subject lead not to parallel but diagonal ways of posing the question of female subjectivity.
In trying to assess and unblock this debate, it is also important to keep in mind the importance of the Franco-American connection in feminist theory that I analysed at some length in chapter 6. Nowhere as clearly as in the debate over psychoanalysis, in fact, do we find cultural differences playing a major role in feminist theory. Brennan assesses it as follows:
French feminism is meant to be about the insistence that women are different, and a challenge to phallogocentric thinking and patriarchal structures of language. Its Anglo-American counterpart is characterized by the insistence that women are equal, and its concern with the real world. Yet this division is occludent. It hides substantial differences between the 'Anglo' and the 'American', as well as the French, on the question of the symbolic.26
As Brennan rightly suggests, instead of getting deadlocked into a sterile Franco vs. American feminist debate, let us turn to the content. The issue at stake in the Lacanian symbolic, from a feminist perspective, is that it seems to make patriarchy inevitable insofar as the Phallus as main signifier of desire is also said to guarantee psychic sanity by allowing for differentiation and mediation of differences between the subjects.
The interrelation of psychic functions, also called logical operators of mental life, and empirical referents, between 'the feminine' and real-life women, is, however, a problem that has not escaped the attention of even the most Lacanian of analysts. That Woman's role as a psychic logical operator to be assigned to obscurity, to the dark continent,
assimilated to the male unconscious is not without consequences for the status of women. Radical feminists denounce the non-said, the silence and symbolic absence of women as laying the very conditions of possibility for masculine discourse, and declare the possibility of expressing a female voice of her own as a subversive strategy. Quite simply, the recognition that woman, far from being the unconscious of man, has a structure of her own is, for radical feminism, a fundamental challenge to phallocentrism, insofar as the latter reduced Woman to a surplus or an excess which it cannot and will not hear - for this surplus puts into question its very possibility of existence.
I would like to suggest that feminist psychoanalysis has moved beyond this formulation of the problem and that, from many quarters of French, Anglo and American feminisms the very formulation of the problem as proposed by Lacan is already being dramatically challenged. In my reading, the main divide in this debate is between the feminists who accept as valid the Lacanian formulation of the issues at stake in female subjectivity and those who question the very terms of the problem and simply put it differently. The former include both the orthodox Lacanians and the 'alternative symbolic school', better known in the English-speaking world as 'ecriture feminine'. Before turning to some examples of Lacanian feminisms in France, to see both the strengths and the disadvantages of this position, I shall go on to defend the idea that other approaches are emerging within feminist theory.
For instance, in contrast to the Lacanian formulations of the question, we could take another example of radical feminist adaptations of psychoanalytic notions by the Italian Lea Melandri, who uses the insights of feminism as a guiding thread in her analysis of sexist theoretical discourse, especially psychoanalysis and Marxist theory.27
For Melandri, sexual difference, in the sense of the dialectical opposition between man and woman, is the fundamental contradiction, inherent in the establishment of all cultural order. This originary violence has the historical consequence of silencing women. More significant still, for Melandri, is the way in which female sexuality is misrepresented in this system. For everything that touches (on) women's bodies and jouissance has been deciphered in terms of an exclusively masculine grid that measures and reduces the Other in relation to the One. For women the implications of patriarchal theories of female sexuality have been historically: the appropriation of their bodies, masculine control of maternity, patronymic filiation; in other words, the setting aside, silence, and murdering of the maternal.
A large number of feminist theorists agree on this point; they note that the denial of the maternal feminine and its seemingly inevitable subjection to a phallic law hollows out an irredeemable distance between the sexes. This is a difference in the respective positions they occupy vis-a-vis the historically recognized symbol of 'power': on one side the phallus, universal signifier of (desire/power/being) and on the
other, the feminine, symbol of lack, condemned to negation, to depreciated difference.	r
From the moment when her body becomes matter for the reproduction of the species, and object of sexual satisfaction for the man, the woman loses her autonomy and the possibility of historical existence. Through the relation with her that the man establishes and sustains, he himself is alienated and separated ... from one aspect of his material existence (his need for love, his sexuality).28
The constant control that men have exercised on women's bodies founded and renews patriarchal power - the power of the father - a system in which the socio-political structure, and still more, the symbolic structure (language, traditions, customs, rites and myths) everywhere submit women to men's domination. In which the rejection of the mother's body is the prerequisite for the subject's entry into culture. Forms of power and control that are also the keys to women's symbolic silence, to the secondary role to which they are confined in culture and in the pursuit of scientific knowledge. How could they be whole human beings when our culture only grants them an abstract exchange value, equivalent to that of money? They are the currency of the patriarchal symbolic, as Luce Irigaray affirms and condemns:
In our social order, women are 'products' used and exchanged by men. Their status is that of merchandise ... Women's social inferiority is reinforced and complicated by the fact that woman does not have access to language, except through recourse to 'masculine' systems of representation.29
Melandri points out ironically the ways in which psychoanalysis perpetuates some of the most misogynist mental habits of patriarchy. For instance in order to recover the first traces of the idea, central to psychoanalysis, that woman is akin to a hole, a void, and is symbolically speaking, amorphous, we could easily go as far back as Aristotle. His theory of generation presents woman as an unaccomplished and botched man, externally devoid of the essential attributes.30 In the course of centuries of misogyny woman's ontological deficiencies led to the tautological reasoning which makes reason and theoretical intelligence the essential attributes and prerogatives of the masculine subject. The same tradition of misogyny results also in the affirmation of woman's ethical incompetence and moral lack, which made them supposedly unable to entertain any direct relationship with God, whose earthly representatives were necessarily men. Thus the vicious circle, which has no other aim than to forbid women access to all theoretical discourse, that is, all exercise of power, comes full circle:
It is not from God the Father that we derive the idea of paternal authority; it is out of the struggle for paternal control of the family tha God the Father is created. His word is law and the idea of his power becomes more important than any demonstration of it; it becomes internalized as 'conscience', 'tradition', 'the moral law within . The idea of power thus becomes the power of an idea, which saturates all
other notions of power.31
But in other respects this absence serves to justify womens being assigned the role of sexual slaves to masculine power:
We who have always been bound by reproduction have everything still to invent towards the production of our desires, pleasures and 'work'. What is most urgently at stake in women's struggles today is this- what must we do to ensure that these forces which we are discovering, above and beyond our traditional procreative power will be creative of our values? To confine ourselves too exclusively to criticism is to perpetuate the risk of self-destruction and sterility, in cultural terms, and, more radically, of corporeal and sexual self-destruction.32
In Lacan's Shadow
i	Feminine versus feminist analysts
Accepting the Lacanian formulation of the problem means that the analysis of female subjectivity starts from the assertion that Woman is the necessary other, she is the sign for the 'feminine' whose psychic function it is to be unrepresentable for both sexes. What seems to me to have happened in post-Lacanian French psychoanalysis is that more and more women psychoanalysts have turned their attention critically to the distinction so rigidly upheld by Lacan between the psychic and the social, the symbolic and the empirical-historical dimension.
As I argued in chapter 2, the discussion about the feminine has been inextricably connected to the question of how to write - or should I say 'transcribe' - the psychoanalytic experience. In the transition from the verbal, oral, invisible material of which the cure is made to the written solid, visible material of texts, a set of epistemological and ethical problems arise for psychoanalysis. As I argued m chapter 2 the question whether analysis can ever be written, that is, the question of the statu of the psychoanalytic text, is in reality a juridical question. It has to do with the legitimation, codification and transmission of psychoanalytic practice. Once again, to understand this, one has to keep in mind t e specificity of the French situation in terms of psychoanalysis. Lacan
abolished the classical Freudian rule that the proper training for analysts was the medical or psychiatric profession, and inaugurated a system of 'lay' analysts. This move substituted the authority of the training analyst for the texts of the bio-medical disciplines as the canon by which new analysts could be formed. The question of writing therefore becomes the question of how to produce texts whose status is, indeed, canonical, that is to say, texts that can be taught as documents.
No doubt the whole Lacanian question of the transmission of psychoanalysis would have benefited a great deal from Foucault's subtle distinctions between texts, documents and monuments, but as we saw earlier on this turned out to be a point of quarrel between them. That the problem of the transmission through writing of psychoanalysis continued to haunt Lacan to the end of his career can be clearly seen: a few years before his death he dissolved his own training school so as to select and keep order among the increasing number of dissidents in his rank-and-file. After his death, the question of the legal property of his papers led to a few heated quarrels, including court cases about copyrights and unauthorized publications or translations of his work.
I want to stress all of this to make the point that the unresolved nature of the question of the 'feminine' as that which sets the limits of representation was woven into the larger debate about what exactly can be represented of the psychoanalytic situation. What is specifically Lacanian about this debate is that the more juridical aspects of the issue were conveniently left out of the public debate and that, in launching the whole problem of 'ecriture' - writing - the all-important question of the institutionalization of the practice of analysis was not put into discourse.33
Some women psychoanalysts put the case of writing in relation to the feminine with admirable clarity. According to Anne Anzieu:
One cannot fail to be aware these days of the proliferation of studies on this theme, the tone of which, depending on the individual author, is more or less markedly polemical. These books and articles are largely the work of women whose main concern is to claim the right to be women and to write 'as women': Helene Cixous, Michele Montre-lay, Luce Irigaray, and many more, demonstrate their anxiety about the status of woman in our society and about the status of women's thought, as well as about her opportunities freely to make her presence felt in a universe which they present as being wholly and resolutely male ... Their questions and the answers they offer have put me in a most perplexing position, on account of my situation as a female analyst and therefore bound to use language under very specific conditions. And so it has happened that I have gradually come to feel I am moving closer and closer to the kernel of feminine thought and its questions.34
What is this 'feminine kernel', for Anzieu? It has to do with the woman's representation of her own sexual organs and anatomical configuration, with her 'inside'. A woman confronted by writing is faced with her entire erotic and libidinal organization; insofar as the act of writing is socially valorized in terms of knowledge and know-how, it is a phallic gesture, that leads the woman to a direct confrontation with the dialectics of identification to the parental figures. Anzieu's conclusion, which I already quoted earlier on, is that it is no coincidence that this increase in the number of women writing, not to speak of the revendica-tion of writing as the expression of female subjectivity, takes place at the historical moment when the means of contraception have emancipated women from their reproductive anatomy. Hence her questions: What connection is there between the legalization of contraception and abortion and the crisis in women's writing? What sort of antagonism is stirred up by sexual liberation, when sexual pleasure is no longer founded on an assured feminine identity?'35
In the psychoanalytic framework the fact that the phallus is the primary signifier of desire implies, thanks to the dialectics of opposition that govern the Lacanian theory of subjectivity, that there can be no symbolic representation of the female sex. There is a logical, structural necessity at work in the disqualification of the feminine; the more practical consequence is that it is on woman that the whole weight of the male's castration anxiety falls; evidence of the possibility of castration, the female sex is the symbolic's blind spot, the flaw in the process of symbolic representation.
As opposed to Anzieu's rather timid appraisal of women's attempts to break out of the symbolic paralysis to which the psychoanalytic representation of woman confines them, other psychoanalysts - mostly female — take up the issue in a different way. They are the same women who seem to have aroused Anzieu's questions about feminine writing.
In L'Ombre et le Nom Michele Montrelay accepts as a diagnosis, that is, an accurate description, the Lacanian premise of the zero symbolic value accorded to the female sex.36 In so doing, she develops one of the most interesting arguments of French psychoanalytic feminism; the stages of this interpretation are as follows.
Montrelay returns to the claim that woman does not exist on the symbolic level, but she reverses the conclusion by adding that this is precisely her real force. The symbolic lack that makes woman an outsider, or rather, that constructs her as the necessary outsider of culture, gives her, in other ways, an immense symbolic force. Not unlike Derrida, Montrelay turns an absence into a strength by arguing that the borderline or marginal position the feminine occupies vis-a-vis the Phallus leaves it free to play and to undo the power of the signifier. She ascribes positive value to lack and to women's exile from the symbolic, because it allows them to maintain a privileged relationship with the pre-symbolic.
This possibly enables them to make a breach in the code of symbolic representation. In the name of the repressed, which is where they have been positioned, women are capable of producing a 'boomerang effect', opening the way to the return of the repressed, that is, to new forms of representation.
In her analysis of these issues Montrelay connects with a whole movement of post-Lacanian women who, on the basis of the axiomatic non-existence of Woman as such, develop what amounts to a positive logic of negativity, whereby woman's role as absent (other) is transformed into a really revolutionary force.
A consensus has emerged among commentators of French feminism that the single most important concentration of post-Lacanian women's thinking is the publishing house des femmes, founded and run by Antoinette Fouque. Fouque's writings are scattered and they alone do not warrant the influence that her oral teaching has had on a whole generation of French women. Conscious of the historical moment of crisis of Western logocentrism, Fouque plans to develop it in the direction of a feminist critique of logocentric culture.
In one of her rare interviews Fouque expresses her critique of the phallocentrism inherent in the feminist stance.37 Feminism is a movement of homologation of women into a masculine model, it is the becoming-men of women: 'Feminism took up anti-Oedipal positions in an encounter, often full of hatred, with the father, under the guise of a struggle against patriarchy. This was the father as authority to contest rather than as symbolic function to introject. It is, therefore, a regressive, anti-authority, illusory, infantile position: feminism is the infantile malady of the Women's Liberation Movement.'38
In Fouque's framework, the 'humanist' feminist stance, as exemplified by Simone de Beauvoir, is implicitly misogynist insofar as it rejects as alienating traditional female identity and forms of identification, as well as woman-identified values and ways of knowing. Fouque contrasts this infantile position with the reappropriation of the maternal-feminine by women. The emphasis of Fouque's thought is on the symbolic reempowerment of the mother and the maternal bond; arguing that the 'black continent' must decolonize itself, Fouque challenges the idea of the Law of the father as the structural necessity of psychic sanity:
Why should it be the father who has the function of language? Who says so? The mother speaks to her child. The division of humanity between body and discourse is aberrant - for it is to cast the body in terms of the phallic - but, undoubtedly, it is very satisfying and effective, in terms of exploitative appropriation. What is occulted is that women produce life and that, when it is granted, then the father arrives.
Arguing for a materialist analysis of who benefits from the symbolic
and historical appropriation of women's creative capacity, Fouque makes a strong case for the 'female homosexual libidinal economy', that is to say for a woman-identified mode of representation and expression of the bond to the mother as a positive identification. This originary love-story with another woman, the mother, is at the heart of the project of a symbolic revolution that would shift the position of structural exclusion to which the feminine is confined. Fouque, like Cixous, Irigaray and many other French theoreticians of difference, draws a distinction between this homosexual female libidinal economy, which implies a positive identification to the maternal, and the lesbian position. The latter is seen as symmetrical to, and therefore complementary with the phallologocentric position.
Our enemy isn't man, but phallocracy, that is, the imperialism of the phallus ... What we wanted, and what we have effected, was to transform our condition of exclusion and internment in the world not into emancipation (inclusion and internment) but, through a 'huge leap beyond', into independence.40
According to such distinctions the homosexual is the revolutionary position and the lesbian the ideological one. Fouque then goes on to extend to the whole women's movement this function of symbolic rehabilitation of a specific female libidinal economy. The seemingly paradoxical outcome is that a new definition of heterosexuality can be reached, one that would recognize the importance of the differences between the sexes.41
The great challenge that the Lacanian female theorists of the feminine threw open for feminism has to do with the political impact of symbolic shifts. That in order to reset the agenda in this way, they criticized traditional feminists, like Beauvoir, for their phallicism may appear an excessive price to pay in order to bring feminism up to date with the post-structuralist generation. The shift in emphasis did, however, take place and a whole new field of reflection opened up. This was influential right across Europe; for instance, the impact of Fouque's group has been recently confirmed by one of the first genealogical histories of Italian feminism, Non credere di avere dei diritti.42 There is no question, however, that the dialogue between the des femmes group and the rest of the women's movement was violent and most unpleasant.43
The criticism of des femmes did not come only from the feminists: it also involved sections of the psychoanalytic movement. In the post-Lacanian climate where the issue of the transmission of psychoanalysis and the training of analysts had become very polemical, the fidelity Fouque professed to the Lacanian formulation of the question of the feminine seemed suspect to many analysts themselves, who saw des femmes as the excessively dutiful daughters of an authoritarian father. This is the line pursued by Michelle Bouraux-Hartemann in her ironic piece, 'Le
mouvement de Serge Antoinette Lacan', where she spares no criticism of Leclaire, Fouque and Lacan, respectively.44
The voice of practising psychoanalysts warning us against the ways in which Lacanian feminists were damaging the analytic practice, through their theoretico-political appropriation of the words of the father, widened the gap between the practice of analysis and its theoretical implications which I outlined in chapter 2. Let us just quote two other female analytic voices that warned against the dangers of too faithful an application of Lacan; Jeanne Favret-Saada and Luce Irigaray both comment on the disasters caused by Lacan's ambivalent and contradictory policy over the training of lay analysts 45 They both connect his authoritarian style to phallic paternal authority and wonder how any self-respecting feminists could possibly see in the Lacanian institutions — in both the material and the imaginary sense of the term - a model for any theory of practice of liberation. These women analysts denounce the phallocentrism of the analytic practice and see Lacan as having strengthened the totalitarian male hold over the process of the cure. Luce Irigaray is the most eloquent on this point: she addresses the male analysts on the topic of women as follows:
But you use their work, their desire, and their puissance to stoke up your machinery of production: writings, seminars, colloquia. And this without citing your sources, except in negative terms. Without indicating what is at stake in your debates, the cause of your interest - which is, after all, only too recent - although that doesn't stem the flow - in women s sexuality, to take just one example. This is a renewal which goes hand in hand with arrogant and contemptuous verdicts on women's struggles to discover or to rediscover access to the language of their puissance.*6	°
I shall come back to Irigaray in a while.
ii Kristeva
Julia Kristeva is in a sense a case apart. Her fidelity to Lacanian principles, coupled with her background in Marxist historical materialism, produces a significant variation on the theme of the symbolic revolution.47
Her contribution to the feminist debate rests on the idea that women can be transformed into revolutionary subjects insofar as they uncover and repossess a positive relation to what she calls the 'semiotic'. This refers to the pre-oedipal relationship to the mother's body, that is, all that is pre-symbolic in Lacan's terms. The semiotic has to do with the pre-Oedipal processes, and as such, has a strong relationship with the unconscious. As Burke puts it:
Kristeva associates the semiotic with the stage in psychic development in which the infant perceives the world through the rhythms, melodies and gestures of the mother's body. If the semiotic is linked with the maternal, the symbolic is associated with the paternal: the realm of Lacan's Name-of-the-Father.48
The semiotic is the dark, repressed side of the patriarchal socio-symbolic pact: in the idiom of English-speaking feminism, Kristeva can be seen as conceptualizing the patriarchal appropriation of motherhood. Alice Jardine reads Kristeva's semiotic as follows: 'It is a pre-verbal, pre-Oedipal locus where the world is perceived by the child as rhythmic, intonational, melodic, and where the child is dependent on a semiotic relationship with the mother's body.'49 In Jardine's assessment, Kristeva sees the negation of this semiotic bond as the prototype of all negativity. This is in turn taken by Kristeva as the underlying logic of dialectical opposition that characterizes Western modes of thinking. The repression of the maternal bond in the name of the Law of the father is the founding gesture of separation that opens the way for all subsequent forms of dualism. As such, the mother-child relationship stands for an untapped and wilfully repressed potential, on the silencing of which the phallic system erects itself.
The semiotic is therefore set in opposition to the organizational principle of the symbolic order. Seeing in women's symbolic silence the groundwork which supports monotheistic, capitalist societies, Kristeva takes the political decision to valorize this silence, by linking it to the pre-symbolic processes. The possibility of a real revolution in the structures of human, and especially of female subjectivity rests, for Kristeva, on the repossession of the force of the maternal, by subtracting from the domination of the phallus. The political difference that Kristeva makes to the analysis of the position of women is, according to Jardine, the fact that she uncovers the very groundwork of the Western social contract, by exploring the unconscious psychic roots of patriarchal power.50
For Kristeva, as for all the theorists of difference, the social order rests on a fundamentally symbolic structure: the phallus as principle of identity provides the men with an image of identification that entitles them to make differences between the sexes and among the men, in a hierarchical scale which provides the inner structure of the social bond.
If mastery is coded in our societies as being masculine, along with logic and syntax, and if, on the other hand, the rhythms, glossolalia, and pre-Oedipal processes are located on the side of the mother, we may say that all creation stems not from difference but from sexual differentiation between the edges of these two sides.51
In her extremely interesting reading of the evolution of Kristeva's
work, Jackie Rose reaches a similar evaluation by stating that Kristeva's work on the maternal is in fact a way of drawing attention to what constitutes the foundation of the Western contract.52 Rose traces the transition from the early Marxist and Maoist period, dominated by the idea of the revolution, to the recognition of the autonomy of the psychic processes. This also coincides with her training and then setting up a practice as a psychoanalyst, which marks a shift towards the politics of subjectivity.
The main problem Kristeva addresses throughout her career is the intersection of the psychosexual with the social; in the early phase this takes the form of the way in which the process of differentiation functions in literary production. The focal point of her reflection is the revolutionary charge of a certain type of avant-garde poetic language -Mallarme, Artaud, Proust, Joyce, Beckett, Lautreamont - in whose writing she traces the irruptions of the semiotic, as a form of reenactment of the relationship to the mother.
To summarize:
-	Feminine specificity is located in the strong relation with the semiotic which is the pre-symbolic moment.
-	The semiotic represents the possibility of radical subversion in the symbolic order.
-	The feminine is therefore valorized to the extent that it represents the possibility of subverting the symbolic chain of our cultural order.
In what may seem a sort of conceptual slippage, but which is in fact a deliberate strategy, women become assimilated to Woman, as sign for the feminine, whereas the cultural order as a whole is linked to the symbolic. This allows Kristeva to pose the question of transformations on the symbolic level in terms of literary or poetic subversion; her idea of the 'avant-garde' is influenced by the modernist vision of the 'revolution'. No attempt is made by Kristeva to theorize the steps of the transition from Woman to women, from the symbolic to the empirical; her focus remains firmly on the interface between the psychic and the political, or the extent to which the unconscious structures the social field.
In my reading, however, to make the feminine the sign of the subversion which might occur at the heart of the order of representation also entails that sexual difference, that is, the difference that women make, is never mentioned in Kristeva's discourse. In this respect she is less adventurous than Fouque; in her view the potential for subversion is of a non-sexed order. On the level of discursive production, then, sexual difference counts for nothing - just as, according to psychoanalysis, Woman is not.
In other words, there is no form of revolt or expression which would be specifically 'feminine', or rather, as we have seen before, this femininity bears no necessary relationship to women, except for the historical role they are called upon to play as agents of a major symbolic breakdown in the Western social order. It seems to me that alongside the set of unexplored feminine potentialities, there is the reality of women's socio-cultural marginality, but Kristeva's attention is focused on the former.
She defines women's creativity as 'a new comprehensive legitimacy with regard to feminine puissance',53 and therefore a different relation to cultural production, to the symbolic. Kristeva concludes, therefore, that the importance of women's struggles and their inscription in the symbolic is less due to the sexualization of cultural production than to the struggles for the emergence of a new singularity, a new definition of the subject, that would take sexual difference into account.
In whose interest is it to ask a woman to write like (all) women? That there may be a generality that is the feminine condition should only be a lever which enables each woman to express her singularity. And this expression is no more 'man' than 'woman'. It cannot be generalized, it is specific and incomparable; and, as such, only an innovation, a possible contribution to a lucid civilization which is aware of its constraints, free from new totalitarianisms.54
The emphasis on resistance to totalitarianism and the formation of a new symbolic and social order links the question of the feminine to a more general problematic, close to the preoccupations of modern culture's intellectuals. She defines the culture of the future, free of its past schemas, as: 'communal but particular, addressed to all and yet carried out by each individual'.55
The coming about of this new singularity requires a questioning of the role of intellectuals and its redefinition in terms of 'dissidence', of radical opposition to existing power, via an analysis of 'conceptual, subjective, sexual, and intellectual identities'. For instance the politicized intellectual who fights the political system, the psychoanalyst who explodes discourse by submitting it to the law of desire, the writer who blurs the barriers of individuality in his texts. And the women too, who, thanks to their past absence, discover they are in a privileged position in the face of this new subjectivity:
This female exile in relation to the General and to Meaning is such that a woman is always singular, to the point where she comes to represent the singularity of the singular - the fragmentation, the drive, the unnameable.56
We may be a little surprised by this definition of woman as 'naturally'
dissident precisely because she is 'culturally' absent as a signifying subject; that is, as the 'pivot of sociality'57, suspended between culture and nature, ethics (or reason) and animality. It is thanks to her non-being that she can now achieve a singularity severed from all lived feminine corporeal existence. Paradoxically taking up the psychoanalytic model, Kristeva pushes the negation of the feminine to its extreme, its positive affirmation. This is the ultimate signification of women's struggles: struggles in the symbolic which enable them, as subjects-in-process, to be at the avant-garde of Western culture. The question whether one is or is not a woman, and what social value is given to that facticity, is not central to Kristeva's thinking.
If it is true that the sudden surge of women and children in discourse poses insoluble questions for reason and Right, it is because this surge is also yet another symptom of the Death of Man (with all the intolerable consequences that this entails for classical rationality and individuality). So the sole sublation of the Death is perhaps not a Resurrection: what form could the Transcendence take, if the Beyond has already become incarnate in Madness? And it is even less a Renaissance: since the enlightened Prince has ended up working for the Politburo or the Corporation. But through the efforts of thought in language, or precisely through the excesses of the languages whose very multitude is the only sign of life, one can attempt to bring about multiple sublations of the unnameable, the unrepresentable, the void. This is the real cutting edge of dissidence.58
Here we come back to the philosophy of difference and the discourse of the other as one of the fundamental themes of contemporary thought; it is on these philosophical premises that Kristeva's idea of dissidence rests. However, I find the formulation of these premises rather doubtful, in particular the notion of the 'dissident'. For Kristeva links together the militant, the psychoanalyst and the avant-garde writer on the same plane of political and discursive validity. Thus a relation of equivalence is set up between someone who provokes political effects, someone who decodes the language of desire, and someone who produces written texts - which makes them politically interchangeable.
And it is this interchangeability between the fields of politics, desire and texts which I find problematic; although one can speak on a theoretical level of the eroticization of power, or of 'inscriptions of the effects of power on the body', this does not authorize the substitution of any one of these three essentially different practices for any other. Nor can it legitimate the merry confusion of registers of enunciation. Above all, I do not see how a generalized stance as 'dissidents' would function as a principle allowing for the articulation of a new community, or social bonding. I think that the notion of 'dissidence', when proposed in these terms, is too global a blanket term, covering diverse tactics that may all
lead to a critique of the modalities of power but whose differences far outweigh their similarities.
When set out in this form, the association of diverse forms of discourse through the notion of dissidence leads simply to the privileging of textual practices over the others, a stance which seems to me rather reductive. This becomes very clear when one realizes that Kristeva never explains the relation which exists between certain philosophical presuppositions and the concrete political struggles women engage in. As if the link between the end of the subject of absolute knowledge and feminism were blatant, as if it were logically necessary that the death of man - in successive phases of decomposition in the order of knowledge it involves - gave rise to the emergence of a new subjectivity. Or, better still, as if the death of the universal subject were the sufficient condition of such an evolution of the feminine.
By examining the alternatives offered by contemporary thinkers as a solution to this crisis, I pointed out earlier on that they all come together in the possibility of subversion in the symbolic, in the revolution in language. I also concluded that the conception of the revolutionary role that women will play in the new visions of subjectivity rests on a series of theoretical postulates. It seems to me that Kristeva's arguments have a lot in common with the currently dominant idea that makes the 'becoming-woman' of culture a necessary stage in the cultural evolution, an indispensable moment of transition.
This approach influences the reading of contemporary feminism as a historical phenomenon: according to Kristeva, either feminism is only a chance mishap in the capitalist system, in which case it will serve to reinforce the new bourgeois economic rationality, or it is a symptom which proves the failure of the political and discursive economy of the whole of Western society:
It isn't only a matter of 'liberating' women so that they serve the new capitalist rationality more effectively; order, the State, the family, production and reproduction are themselves in question. For never before in history has the question of social transformation been posed so obviously and lucidly on the level of the regulation of relations of reproduction: that is, on the level of all that has always been repressed, and in the mysteries of religion banished, censured, and/or regarded as sacred. Which is to say that for the first time in history a social change is being worked in the first place through women, which will subsequently burst upon the social order as a whole.59
I want to draw attention to several aspects of this passage, starting with the conclusion that, for the first time in history, women are the active subjects of social transformations. Setting aside the different value judgements which may arise from this stand, I shall simply consider it as an open question. For the role of women in history is clearly one of
feminism's most radical questions for our culture, one which challenges the ideological function of the historical transmission of knowledge. But Kristeva's glorification of women's struggles today, as part of the contemporary avant-garde, is akin to a real mystification, an effective occupation of the place of women in history. Instead of acknowledging the problematic nature of this question, Kristeva presents contemporary feminism as an inevitable historical data. In so doing she transforms an open question into a historical given, and censures the true motivation and only dynamic in women's history: women's struggles. Here again, glorification is no more than a subtle form of discrimination, and the 'feminine' at stake yet another form of disembodiment, namely the appropriation of the female feminist experience.
On the same level as this silence about women in history, which is already vast and which amounts in historical terms to women's oppression, I find elements in this text which are more ambiguous still. By saying nothing about the problematic of women in history, and about what this implies in terms of challenging historical knowledge itself, Kristeva reduces feminism to a symptom of the failure of the Western system. As psychoanalysis has taught us, a symptom is not simply an effect which leads back to the causal origin of a dysfunction, but rather, is inscribed in a chain of signifiers; it is therefore both cause and effect, or more precisely neither one nor the other, given that the relation between each element in the chain of signifiers exceeds the problematic of a search for origins. Which said, we cannot present feminism as a symptom without specifying that it stands in a certain relationship or interaction with this moment of crisis in Western society. Simply to argue for an automatic relationship between feminism and modernity is not enough.
As I have been arguing all along, if it is true that the 'death of man', as signifying point of our historicity, has contributed to the emergence of women's struggles, these struggles cannot be reduced to a moment of crisis in the system. In other words, one should recognize that they have effectively had an impact on this system, that they have helped intensify the crisis, and one should not reduce the complex and autonomous phenomenon of feminism to that of a historical symptom, thereby annulling women's agency in these struggles. The symptomatic reading of feminism is in my view quite ambiguous for, while implicitly acknowledging the centuries-old exclusion of women, it settles the matter by over-emphasizing their present-day inclusion. The presence of women is in turn overdetermined by considerations concerning the analysis of contemporary discursive transformations.
The emphasis thus placed on the concealed creative potential of the feminine, of an other feminine, leads to the dissolution of feminism into a more general idea: the feminization of the cultural order. According to Kristeva, in effect, if the feminine wants to be truly revolutionary, it must know how to surmount the limits of femininity, and have the
capacity to do so, and become other than woman: the subject of a new individuality. What will occur through feminism is not simply the end of the oppression of women, but a complete revolution of the cultural order, a new, neuter singularity.
Concealed behind this new assimilation of women to the feminine redefined as general revolutionary potential is the danger of seeing women disappearing yet again, before they have had the historical opportunity of fixing the parameters and defining the terms of a new female subjectivity in all spheres of human activity. Not only does the affirmation of this notion of the feminine consecrate the creative, imaginative and artistic aspect of femininity, but also it bases the political valorization of women's struggles on that aspect alone. It therefore comes paradoxically and dangerously close to the old dichotomy which constructs man as the heir to Reason and woman as the receptacle of the passions and the Imagination. To agree with Kristeva and say that women are 'naturally' creative, is nothing more nor less than to support the existing theoretical regime, for which women are symbolically inferior beings.
Kaja Silverman's exciting reading of Kristeva points out some of the tensions and contradictions in her thinking. She stresses particularly the mixture of utopianism and negativity of her approach: the celebration of the semiotic as a subversive bond is assessed as paradoxical, when read alongside Kristeva's acceptance of the Lacanian Symbolic as a guarantee of psychic order. The pre-Oedipal mother is not, for Silverman, a genuinely pre-Symbolic instance:
The pre-Oedipal tableau comes into play only as an after-the-fact construction that permits the subject who has already entered into language and desire to dream of maternal unity and phenomenal plenitude. It is a regressive fantasy, that is, through which the female subject pursues both the Oedipal mother and the wholeness lost to her through symbolic castration.
This view of the mother is actually taken by Silverman as a very reductive and phantasmatic one, which does not do full justice to the role the mother plays in psychic life.
Rose raises the same question, and draws a different conclusion: 'For what does it mean, we can ask, to place the mother at the source and the fading-point of all subjectivity and language, a point which, as Kristeva herself has argued, threatens the subject with collapse?'61 The strength of Kristeva's position for Rose is that she puts the problem of the psychic and the political accurately, by asking: is the repudiation of the mother as having the power of life and death the precondition of the cultural order, as the radical feminists would say, or is the pre-Oedipal relation to the mother the unconscious base of this repudiation? How do the
psychic and the socio-cultural interact on the thorny issue of negating the mother? The political usefulness of this position is, for Rose, that it forces us to confront the pitfalls of identity; Kristeva's analysis of the power of the mother, both in the semiotic phase and in her later work Powers of Horror, points out the vicious circles in which all identity is caught, and especially the female one. In other words, she shows the difficulties of bringing about a symbolic revolution, or a 'different difference. By keeping open the definition of this new subjectivity, Kristeva nonetheless uses her analysis of negativity to lay the foundations of a new ethics of femininty.62 Rose concludes that 'her work gives us the measure of the difficulties when politics tries to open itself up to the ravages of the unconscious mind'. In this sense, the therapeutic effect of Kristeva's work is to explode any ready-made Utopias about wilful changes in the in-depth structures of subjectivity, by sressing the primacy and all-pervasiveness of the unconscious.
In a recent text, 'Women's time'63, Kristeva again puts the question in terms of the extent to which women's struggles will bring about a general renegotiation of the social bond. Kristeva speaks of the socio-symbolic' contract as the political reality of phallologocentrism; aware of the subjugated role women have played within it, she spells out the impact of the feminist struggles in bringing about the collapse from within of the paternal authority, or phallic law. Again, combining critical theory with the psychoanalytic insight, Kristeva sees in the implosion of the logocentric capitalist order both the depiction of modernity and the opening up of a great historical chance for women.64
What is crucial to Kristeva's argument is the recognition of the dual structure of time: the linear time of historical progress, and the longer, discontinuous time of psychic unconscious processes. If the first generation of feminists worked towards the empowerment of women and their inclusion into the social order, following the view of the linear progress, Kristeva argues that the historical duty of the new generation of feminists today is to redefine the very terms of their belonging to the social contract. Not unlike Woolf, Kristeva invites us to think carefully about the terms by which we intend to be part of the symbolic and material process of social exchanges.
K. Silverman reads 'Women's Time' Tike an inadvertent autocriticism'65; this qualifies the emphasis Kristeva placed in her earlier work on the semiotic bond as a whole and all-englobing relationship to the mother. By accepting the twofold structure of time, Kristeva turns the relationship to the mother into the emblem of the radical loss of wholeness, that is, the splitting of the subject, which is the price to pay for gaining entry into language. By interiorizing the terms of the social contract in the relationship to the mother, Kristeva ends up being an orthodox Lacanian, but in her call for a radical renegotiation by women of the terms by which they intend to participate in the socio-symbolic contract, Kristeva comes out on the side of the feminist symbolic
revolution. How she reconciles these two positions, however, remains an open question.
This profoundly unresolved aspect of her thought seems to me particularly problematic when compared with some of the recent political positions Kristeva has taken. Her statements about the new forms of procreation, either by surrogate mothers or by artificial insemination, have brought out some of the more conservative aspects of her thought. The fear of the decline of paternal authority, or the historical decline of the role of the father, seem to have filled her with horror. Denouncing the danger of a triumph of female homosexuality, and of making the father redundant in the reproductive process, Kristeva's position on the new reproductive technologies and the possibility of single mothers or lesbian women's mothering have been extremely conservative.66
Without going as far as Gayatri Spivak's devastating criticism of Kristeva: 'What seems to me to be her reliance on the sort of banal historical narrative to produce "women's time"; what seems to me Christianizing psychoanalysis; what seems to me to be her sort of ferocious Western Europeanism .. ,'67, I do think that Kristeva's relationship to psychoanalysis and to feminism is one of the greatest attachment to the former and the strongest ambivalence to the latter. In her more recent work, it seems to me that the dutiful Lacanian daughter takes the upper hand over the critical feminist theorist.
Ecriture Feminine, or: Feminist Handprints on the City
Walls
Oddly enough, this conclusion closely resembles a theory of femininity known as 'neo-femininity' or 'ecriture feminine', a position with which in other respects Kristeva cannot possibly agree. This theory flourished in post-structuralist, post-68 France and it was at the centre of the Franco-American connection that I have mentioned earlier. The focus on 'la feminin' - the female feminine, with the emphasis placed on the specificity of female sexuality, the female unconscious, of her morphology and her specific relationship to the flesh, has been received, especially in the United States, as a breath of fresh air.
Although the 'ecriture feminine' movement never was a constituted school of thought, it tended to gravitate around Antoinette Fouque's publishing house, des femmes, and saw striking writers such as Helene Cixous, Jeanne Hyvrard, Josette Feral and others explore in their texts an embodied female subjectivity for which the most apt French term is 'LA feminin', a 'female feminine'.68
The textual production of feminine writings is an experiment which, in order to refute the psychoanalytic assertion that woman does not exist, aims at challenging the notion of the lack with the positive
affirmation of female subjectivity. The starting point was the recognition that, as theorists like Fouque and Irigaray had been arguing, there was a need for women to state, to positively assert their lived experience, avoiding the trap of classical visions of femininity as man's other. The style known as feminine, characterized by disruptions of syntax leading to the disturbance of meaning, tends to express the body understood as a cultural counter-text, in order to decode the blanks in language and to express sexual difference.
Indisputably the main spokeswoman of 'ecriture feminine' and the most talented 'feminine' writer is Helene Cixous. Explicitly inspired on the one hand by the Lacanian assertion of the primacy of the unconscious and on the other by Derrida's textual strategies of critique of logocentrism, Cixous creates a series of textual performances that can be viewed as experimentation with an-other female feminine embodied subject.69
As a creative writer, Cixous has experimented with a range of genres and forms; for a brilliant overview of her corpus, let me refer you to Morag Shiach's work. I will concentrate here on the aspects of Cixous's work that I see as most relevant to my philosophical interests. Helene Cixous's work is based on the claim that 'woman must write woman', a wilful determination to rewrite the grammar of female desire which reinvests language with a revolutionary potential for social and political changes. She bases this on the idea that 'nearly the entire history of writing is confounded with the history of reason, of which it is at once the effect, the support, and one of the privileged alibis. It has been one with the phallocentric tradition.'70
In other words, Cixous takes as her starting point the poststructuralist notion that the textual is isomorphic with the psychic, insofar as both are the construct of language. Whilst Lacan deduces from this isomorphism a law of phallic supremacy that confines woman to symbolic silence, Cixous invests the act of writing in a creative mode as a challenge to the phallic order; as such it constitutes a revolutionary event which permits women to get out of the role assigned to them in the phallocentric regime - silence. Contrary to Derrida's tendency to desexualize discursive practices and move towards a definition of difference that would transcend sexual dichotomies (see chapter 5), Cixous sexualizes her textual practice to an extreme degree. Through the direct identification of women with women's texts, Cixous claims the subversive power of feminine sexuality and feminine texts; in the same move, she criticizes both psychoanalysis which, by setting up the phallus as the a priori of any symbolic function, has exiled women through the device of metaphor, and post-structuralist deconstructions. 'Flesh is writing (ecriture) and writing (ecriture) is never read: it always remains to be read, to be studied, to be found, invented.'71
Cixous sees the feminine textual body as the return of the repressed of phallocratic culture, a return which is achieved in texts which express
feminine jouissance. This is defined as what is in excess of phallic logic: the subversive, all-transcending force that displaces the binary oppositions of Western thought. Not unlike the other theorists of difference, Cixous connects the repression of the feminine to the originary violence that seals the Western socio-symbolic contract. It is the murderous logic of this femino-phobic culture that Cixous challenges through a practice where difference is conceived in positive terms, rather than in terms of opposition. Taking the difference between the sexes - in terms of the fundamental lack of symmetry between them - seriously, Cixous comes to model ecriture feminine on woman's jouissance and qualifies both with the same attributes: each is cosmic, heterogeneous, limitless:
She lets the other language speak - the language of 1,000 tongues which knows neither enclosure nor death. To life she refuses nothing. Her language does not contain, it carries; it does not hold back, it makes possible.72
This description of femininity may appear idealized, and yet within the textual space opened by Cixous, writing the female-feminine triggers off textual effects whose intensity and novelty cannot fail to affect the reader. The exploration of difference becomes, in Cixous, a new women's nature, described in incandescent words:
Heterogeneous, yes. For her joyous benefits she is erogeneous; she is the erotogeneity of the heterogeneous: airborne swimmer, in flight, she does not cling to herself; she is dispersible, prodigious, stunning, desirous and capable of others, of the other woman that she will be, of the other woman she isn't, of him, of you.73
The column on which her vision rests is a totally positive portrait of the mother-child relationship. The mother as life-giver is the very prototype of the gift-giver for Cixous. The sweetness of mother's milk turning to ink flows through the powerful pages of her texts. The rhythm, the syntax, the very sounds suggest an-other vision of woman: it is the mother/lover that triumphs in Cixous's textual practice. This positive vision of the site of origin as life-giving force can best be read in terms of Fouque's subtle and, in my opinion, extremely useful distinction between a female homosexual libidinal economy and the phallic mimetism of the lesbian stance. In other words, the point is not to love the woman-in-the-mother, or the mother/lover, but rather to position oneself differently vis-a-vis the loved one, whatever her or his genital sex may be.
The notion of positionality is absolutely essential to Cixous, and it is a point in which she differs the most from Derrida's technique of 'difference', to which it nonetheless remains indebted. The textual mother/lover marks a relationship to the unconscious, a position from
whence it is possible to speak of what one does not know. Cixous's term for this position is 'Vapproche' and she develops it most extensively in her work on the Brazilian writer Clarice Lispector.74 The approach consists in a 'giving receptivity', in a patient respect for the other: 'a (compassion in non-mastery'75; this position is presented by Cixous as having transcended the phallic (im)posture:
There must be an attentiveness to these beings who are so close, so feminine-familiar that they are forgotten, that is just as powerfully thoughtful, alert and open, if there is to come a time that the women who have always been there will finally appear.76
Writing is approaching the text, that is to say the mother's body as the loved one, in this manner, without phallic envy, without desire to appropriate, and yet with a desire that is all-encompassing. This is Cixous's description of reading/writing/approaching the text: 'I approach every tongue (never my own) delicately, to lick it, breathe it in, to worship its difference, respect its gifts, talents, movements. Above all, to leave it in that elsewhere that bears it, to leave its strangeness intact/77 The notion of the 'flesh' is central to Cixous's rehabilitation of the symbolic, structuring power of the mother; through this image, she expresses the specificity of the female unconscious as the desire, even the adoration of the mother's body. Ecriturefeminine is the style by which the woman as socially constructed can resurrect from underneath her phallic skin the pre-historic material of that adoring love, and let it express itself, with an intensity that blows the phallic law asunder.
Cixous argues that this new position is a symbolic revolution in that it produces effects that make us shift and reorient our own sense of identity as women. Cixous's 'intensive' style transforms the reader, in what is almost a spiritual exercise or, as we saw earlier in the sections devoted to Deleuze, as a desiring machine that displaces our own subjectivity as readers. A text by Cixous fits in perfectly with the Deleuzian description of the book as a transformer of energy and a multiplier of effects.
Although I find her textual performances perfectly convincing, and productive of new effects, I think that in more rigidly theoretical terms Cixous's position is not less contradictory than Kristeva's, though differently so. In my assessment, the central tension in Cixous's conceptual frame is symptomatic of the very problem that she is trying to tackle, that is to say: how are we to express that for which we as yet have no adequate language? On the one hand, she follows Lacan in stating the sexed nature of the subject, the primacy of the unconscious and therefore of desire. This allows her to postulate the sexual/textual body as the political material on which she acts. She then leaves Lacan behind in positing a sexually-differentiated unconscious and an alternative female symbolic. On the other hand, she follows Derrida in wanting to
displace the dominion of the phallus by cultivating a more feminine style, or textual approach to it. This leads her to postulate either a moment that would be prior to or outside sexual differentiation, or else to posit a new feminine universal in a sort of 'cosmogyny' where the 'sacred' (Irigaray would say 'divine') would indeed be a mother/lover's body. In her more recent writings Cixous seems to me to have taken the second option, thus leaving Derrida well behind.
How her systematic shifts, 'ecarts'*, can be reconciled, however, with the theoretical premises on which her position rests, remains unexplained. The issue at stake is not one of fidelity to the masters' voice, but rather of the coherence and therefore the accessibility of Cixous's way of thinking. In many respects her texts defy theorizations, and yet they claim to lay the foundations of a new philosophy of the female sexed body: how this can be understood in a recognizable, that is to say accessible way, remains unresolved.
A style of thinking that insists on staying in a 'neither-nor' position vis-a-vis mainstream philosophy, while being also vehemently opposed to feminism as being phallocentric, seems to me problematic. Cixous's endless qualifications or conceptual shifts ('ecarts') raise a number of theoretical expectations in the reader that her texts do not fulfil. To claim that these successive shifts are in themselves the theoretical answer strikes me as a form of avoidance. Furthermore, Cixous's theoretical a-centredness lends itself to proving Derrida's point about the structural incapacity of theory to move beyond phallologocentrism. As you may remember from chapter 4, Derrida claims that where the logos falters, 'pathos' gets through: literature therefore works where theory fails. If that is the case, however, what has Cixous done except confirm the centuries-old association of the female with pathos and the male with logos, of women with literature and men with philosophy? And what would be so new and symbolically subversive about this?
To fully assess the position of ecriture feminine, one would have to take into account other speci(wo)men and other texts. Within the limits imposed by my research here, however, let me quote one highly significant work on ecriture feminine that in many respects sums up and canonizes it into a new genre, Jeanne Hyvrard's La Pensee-corps. In a dictionary-like style, Hyvrard exposes one after the other the key concepts of the philosophy of sexual difference, such as it is exposed in ecriture feminine. For instance, she defines 'difference' as follows: 'One is impossible, because there are two. Two suffers for he thinks she is like him. Three is beyond the horizon. They have no boat.'79
Again, the quest for a new, radical heterosexuality is stated as the utopian goal of a mono-sexed social order dominated by the masculine homosocial bond. The idea of La pensee-corps refers to all that escapes, is
* In the French, ecarts is a very beautiful but untranslatable notion that suggests successive and systematic shifts of perspective.
in excess of the law, the libidinal economy of the phallus, and to the psychoanalytic reduction of woman to lack. Patriarchy gets redefined as 'logarchy' and the patriarchs as 'logarchs'; politically, the issue is clear:
Difference, feminine, in terms of biology is tautological. Identical is essentially the acknowledgement of the very existence of a human culture. Enclosed in the identity/difference dichotomy, women's thought cannot be formed, and strays instead into ideological quarrels about categories which have been established by and for men. Woman is not in herself different or identical to men. It depends on the question at issue. Sometimes this, sometimes that, depending on the architecture of the idea as a whole. It is aberrant to declare woman identical when it's a matter of sexuality, just as it is aberrant to declare it when discussing equal rights. In the current state of our understanding, our analysis can only be fragmentary.80
This statement is extremely important, in my opinion, if we are to dispel one of the prevailing misconceptions about ecriture feminine: the charge of biological determinism, or of essentialism. I think it crucial to see that the 'body' in question in the ecriture feminine movement is not a natural, biologically determined body, but rather a cultural artifact that carries a whole history, a memory of coding and conditioning. The debate on essentialism has taken a new and more positive turn of late, and I do not wish to go into details here.81 Nonetheless let us bear in mind that, despite lapses and moments of seeming collapse into determinism, the conceptual framework for the feminine libidinal economy is radically anti-naturalistic.
In Cixous's work, this extremely passionate relationship to 'lafeminin' often has the unfortunate effect of making feminists appear somewhat less radiant. In this respect Cixous applies Fouque's insight and also inherits the least sympathetic aspect of Derrida's thought: his assimilation of feminism to the phallic order insofar as it revendicates the same status for women as for men. This emphasis on sameness is related to the phallologocentric order and violently criticized as the refusal of the feminine. According to Cixous:
As for feminism, for the moment it is a word which refers either to the historical field, or to the actuality of ideological manifestations. And it is a word heavily laden with ambiguity. For me, in an extremely precise way, feminism today is an ideology which, in the last analysis, is reactionary. Before what we call the 'Women's Movement' existed, the word referred to something, whose history was of little consequence, and which was a specific or regional attempt on the part of women, within a certain cultural and political system, to focus attention on 'the condition of women'. In our day, to call oneself a feminist signifies something completely different, it is a certain mode of conduct, which once again draws on a certain ideology, whose
assumptions. Instead of pursuing our attachment to this term, by inventing a form of writing that would suit it better, as in what she assesses as the naturalistic tendency of ecriture feminine, Wittig suggests that we opt for the quest for a 'minoritary' subjectivity. Readers should, by now, recognize the Deleuzian undertones of this terminology; unfortunately, they are not commented upon by Wittig, who proceeds to defend it as a purely feminist position. The 'minoritary' position is the lesbian stance: the lesbian is already no longer a woman insofar as she has subtracted herself from identities determined by the phallus. As such she is a subversive subject: multi-centric or a-centric, instead of being phallo-centric. By the same token, Wittig abandons the notion of sexual difference for the more general one of 'gender', defined as the social organization of the differences between the sexes.
Wittig's thought has been influential in revitalizing a tendency that was present in feminist theory all along: the lesbian utopia, which posits the hypothesis of a 'third sex', or a trans-sexual category capable of freeing women from the dualistic opposition of male/female in which they are caught. Wittig's position has launched a whole field of reflection that questions the possibility of overcoming gender, surmounting sexual difference and thus undoing the fundamental dualism of psychic life.
Personally, I find this position as dangerous as any utopia can be: it perpetuates the dream of an easy escape from psychic life, merrily confusing the register of wilful choice with that of unconscious desires. Identity is relinquished into a set of social conditionings without sufficient attention being paid to the games of identification that structure psychic life. As in the case of Delphy, I see here a form of reductivism at work that provides ideological answers to serious conceptual questions. Finally, this position deliberately ignores advances in knowledge and in research on subjectivity accomplished over the last twenty years and allows a stubborn fidelity to Beauvoir's thought to replace more reasoned replies to the new theoretical challenges facing feminism.
That the lesbian is not a woman, but a third pole, or an-other sex, is far less convincing for me than the argument about the new female homosexual libidinal economy which is developed by the theorists of difference. A. Fouque comments, aptly: 'This is to be phobic about the term woman ... Monique Wittig has chosen the term lesbian in preference to woman, having been unable effectively to find the possible relationship between woman and female homosexual. It is in fact a 'natural' relationship, if one can call it that: every woman is homosexual, there are only homosexual women, and therefore every female homosexual is a woman whether she knows it or not, no doubt about it, a woman -unless a transexual .. ,'.87 The only possible way I see of reconciling these two positions is by stressing that both address the problem of how to move beyond sexual identities determined by the phallus. They share
this question as the starting point, but differ about everything else. Focusing the problem on a question of values and representation, psycho-feminism views women's historical silence as the pretext to what they are voicing in their present-day textual production. The text, with the gesture of ecriture that accompanies it, is alone a justification for the claim that the feminine today is the only new voice in a culture in which the presence of man (to himself) has faded. But this flattering celebration minimizes the impact of the concrete social situations which are women's daily lives.
The crucial theoretical factor in the ecriture feminine school is the mixture of Lacanianism and deconstruction; this contrasts flagrantly with the materialist-humanist feminists like Wittig and Delphy's attitude towards psychoanalysis. The rejection of meta-language that Lyotard praised earlier, is very strong within feminism: that the Phallus is not unrelated to the penis and that both exercise a constant authority in the social as well as in the symbolic field is incontestable. This demonstrates that amongst other things, feminist reflection concentrates on decoding the meta-languages by reducing their signs to more 'ordinary' enunciations.
The method underlying this decoding relies on the evidence that everything that claims to be meta-, any utterance which is presented as discourse on discourse, is determined in terms of a structure of meaning in which the masculine is implicitly and systematically valorized as the primary signifier. All meta-discourse is only ever the discourse of legitimation of the rational, power, the masculine. As Marcelle Marini puts it:
Baptizing the father as the Name-of-the-Father, Oedipus as the symbolic structure, the penis as the Phallus, signifier of desire, master-signifier of language, doesn't change much as far as we are concerned. Rather, this would add to women's accumulated burden, for it is no longer a question of concrete beings and situations, which we can always struggle against, but of a law which is presented as a fundamental pact without which nothing human could ever be set up.88
In order to palliate the prescriptive tone of some of the explorations of the feminine by psycho-feminism which, reducing the feminine to the repressed, presents its return as the reintroduction of a hitherto concealed essentially feminine identity, a more political feminist current based on women's lived experience talks of the 'foreclosure of the feminine'. The psychoanalytic origins of the terms are clear.89 It has been used extensively by Luce Irigaray who is, in my opinion, the most interesting thinker in the sexual difference trend.
Irigaray
We have seen so far that what is at stake in the claim to redefine sexual difference positively is not to arrive at a new nominal definition of woman but to try to express in discourse the difference between the sexes. A difference inscribed, clearly, in the anatomy of each sex, but inscribed above all in the imaginary and its representations, that is to say, dominated by culture.
Luce Irigaray is one of the theorists most passionately interested in difference: differences between the sexes, differences among women, differences within the single individual woman.90 She adopts as her premise that feminine jouissance, that is to say a specific female representation of the unconscious and of desire, is the non-said of all discourse, and develops a fundamental critique of discourse by trying to inscribe sexual difference in it. Her field of operation is essentially the history of metaphysics, and although her writing style is profoundly literary and very creative, the corpus she deals with is the master-texts of Western philosophy.
Irigaray's work can be read as a 'positive' reaction to the crisis of modernity; not only is it inscribed in this 'crisis', but also it may be read as a direct answer to the stance of the modern master-thinkers: Foucault's archaeological/genealogical method, Derrida's metaphysical deconstruction, Deleuze's desiring machines. Irigaray's thought engages in an in-depth dialogue with these theories, responds to them and adapts them to her project of expressing the positivity of sexual difference. As such, her thought stands as one of the most exhaustive and significant examples of reflection from a woman's perspective. As object/subject of her analysis she privileges the master-thinkers of Western ontology, those who have theorized human subjectivity in terms of a transcendental rationality, a rational essence which maintains a close link with the divine.
Considering the difficulty of the texts of the metaphysical tradition, the question of accessibility and of how to read Irigaray's complex and highly elaborate books has been raised; the most clear reply is given by M. Whitford91 who warns us against reductive readings and takes a stand, especially against the charges of essentialism, which have been made even more strongly against Irigaray than against Cixous.92
The question of the relation between writing as a space of subjective creation - pathos - and thought as a moment of elaboration and critical self-reflection - logos - is one of the axes of Irigaray's texts. The coherence of her varied and seemingly heterogeneous corpus rests on an effective, imaginary, and conceptual or theoretical bond between literature and philosophy. Irigaray operates on both registers at once, producing texts where theoretical elaboration is accompanied by textual performance. At times she may appear to be in suspension and, in a
way, vacillating between the two, yet she never loses her focus.
At the outset, reading Irigaray's texts will pose the question of her place and mode of enunciation: whom is she addressing? For whom is she writing? As I understand it, her works plays on a double register: she affirms the subversive novelty and also the historical reality that is feminism, while keeping open an intense dialogue with the master-thinkers of Western philosophy. Her methodological stance seems to me to pose a crucial question: how can we nourish and develop what is most innovative and subversive in women's thought, while avoiding the classic traps awaiting the feminine: mimetism, dependency, denegation, hysteria, aporia? How can we speak, think and create, within structures that are misogynist and seem to feed off the exclusion and appropriation of the feminine? How can one be a conceptual thinker and not be contaminated by the 'femino-phobic' nature of theoretical thought? How can women repossess and recover the positivity of the feminine? In reply to these crucial issues Irigaray adopts a series of discursive tactics, in a set of discontinuous variations on the theme. In a double movement that combines denunciation and creation, she unveils the masculine character of discourse, while positing a new female feminist subject.
Consequently, one has to learn to read the images that mark Irigaray's texts and maximize their power of inspiration. For instance, challenging the zero-value, value as black hole that psychoanalysis attaches to woman, Irigaray overthrows the metaphorical code by opposing the notion of the 'close-by' to the conceptual void, or the 'nothingness' of the female sex. This 'closeness' or proximity is translated in new images of the woman's body, in the lips of her sex which touch each other, move apart, are each other's double. This image serves to crystallize Luce Irigaray's intuition about ecriture feminine as sign of an other relation to meaning, and of a profound dislocation of the relationship to alterity.
One would have to listen with another ear, as if hearing an 'other meaning' always in the process of weaving itself of embracing itself with words, but also of getting rid of words in order not to become fixed, congealed in them. For if 'she' says something, it is not, it is already no longer, identical with what she means. What she says is never identical with anything, moreover; rather, it is contiguous. It touches (upon). And when it strays too far from that proximity, she breaks off and starts over at 'zero': her body-sex.93
If woman has always been outside the economy of the logos, it is because she is in herself an excess, a too much which cannot find its place in traditional discourses, 'whence this mystery she represents, in a culture which claims to enumerate and decipher everything in terms of unity, and to inventory everything in terms of individuality. She is
neither one nor two.'9^ It is on feminine multiple, plural jouissance that Irigaray bases her revaluation of ecriture feminine.
Women's coming into writing and, therefore, the expression of a specifically feminine speech in the text, is not a historical given which has already been achieved in the current context; no more is it a guaranteed future triumph, the glorious return of the repressed, but — and this is what seems to me important about Irigaray's articulation of the question - rather, an event which rests on a certain number of preconditions, including, in particular, the development of women's socio-political struggles. Textual practice cannot be severed from political practice: together they form the multiple nucleus of the struggles on which the consolidation of the women's movement depends.
The women's movement is for Irigaray the privileged space of elaboration of new discursive practices, which enables the political evolution of feminism. Her position on feminism is much more positive than that of the other ecriture feminine women; Irigaray is also the only one to have been involved in feminist actions through the 1970s.
In other words, while committing herself to feminist struggles for equality, Irigaray defends the notion of 'difference' in a conditional mode. This means that woman does not yet exist and that she will be unable to come into being without women's collective efforts, which empower and symbolize her specific sexuality, jouissance, textual practice, and political vision. Sexual difference as the difference that women make has to be constructed and, for Irigaray, it is the task of the women's movement to set the conditions of possibility for this becoming.
In several of her writings, and most explicitly in This Sex which is Not One, Irigaray addresses the question of the relationship between equality and difference. She repeatedly warns women against the fact that emancipation leads to homologation to masculine modes: Woman could be man's equal. In this case she would enjoy, in a more or less near future, the same economic, social, political rights as men. She would be a potential man.'95 The political danger of fitting into pre-established masculine canons is one of Irigaray's firmest points of critique of emancipatory feminism. In a recent article, called, appropriately, Egales a qui?, 6 Irigaray compares the equality and difference positions on the issue of women's relationship to the divine and the problem of female priesthood. Taking her distance from the work of Mary Daly, Irigaray stresses the fact that, when dealing with issues such as religion and the divine, the revendication of equal rights is simply not enough. What is needed is the symbolic recognition of both sexes' access to the divine, both sexes' notion of the divine. A new symbolic system by and for women is needed and Irigaray proposes the image of the mother/ daughter couple as the starting point. Attacking the monosexed image of the Christian God, Irigaray emphasizes the importance for women of
defining their own relationship to the divine:
We need not become 'other' in relation to ourselves. And yet there is a threshold we should be aware of. In my view, it is marked by sexual difference. Within the same sex, what usually rules is quantity. It is a question of leaving behind our comparative state, by perception, by the exercise and expression of our sexuality, our sensibility, and our minds, by living as subjects our relations to our mothers, to the universe, to other women, to other men.97
It is important to see, however, that contrary to Cixous, this theory of difference leads Irigaray to provide further theoretical defence of feminism and its stakes; her justification of ecriture feminine is articulated along with the search for women's unexplored possibilities and potentialities, so that this 'other' which is concealed by the masquerade known as femininity may be revealed. This project is developed in the privileged place that is the women's movement. The premise that women's entry into the cultural order was necessarily accompanied by radical political changes in their status serves to conclude her theory of difference in a defence of feminism as a political movement.
Women's movements, a separatist space, are essential if women are to speak their desires and to shatter the silence about the exploitation they have undergone; it is the theoretical and political building site for forms of expression and multiple struggles:
What is happening in the women's liberation movement cannot simply be surveyed, described, related 'from the outside'... I prefer to speak, in the plural, of women's liberation movements ... there are multiple groups and tendencies in women's struggles today, and to reduce them to a single movement involves a risk of introducing phenomena of hierarchization, claims of orthodoxy, and so on.98
The multiplicity of theoretical and political positions is the source of the very wealth of feminist consciousness. The aim is not to elaborate a single-minded and all-encompassing feminist politics, but rather to bring on the conditions of possibility of in-depth transformations, which themselves stem from the collective political struggle.
When women want to escape from exploitation, they do not merely destroy a few 'prejudices', they disrupt the entire order of dominant values, economic, social, moral and sexual. They call into question all existing theory, all thought, all language, inasmuch as these are monopolized by men and men alone. They challenge the very foundation of our social and cultural order, whose organization has been prescribed by the patriarchal system.99
Like all modern philosophy, she takes as her point of departure the dispersal of the classical subject into a multiplicity of 'discursive practices'. But although her critique is a party to the massive labour of demolition and cleaning-up of the classical system of representation, her aim is to denounce the implicit link between reason and Masculinity. Written in the 'female feminine mode', her approach provides a theoretical basis for the radical transformation that feminism has brought about in our understanding of subjectivity.
That the subject is no longer the privileged link in the formation and legitimation of knowledge, but is, on the contrary, the effect of a system of signification is the idea which, as we have already seen, has inspired the whole structuralist generation. On a certain level, Irigaray is implicated in the post-structuralist condition, but her aim is the deconstruction of phallologocentrism through the affirmation of another symbolic system, based on female feminine specificity. For her, deconstruction only constitutes the most critical - and most explicitly feminist stage in her rereading of the history of Western philosophy: the heart of her work is about creating an alternative system.
The oppression of women is both real and symbolic, that is, it rests as much on material structures of repression as on philosophical presuppositions. Irigaray's discursive tactics aim to restore particularity and sex-specificity to discourse, against its universalizing claims. She sees in sexual in-difference the basis of masculine logic in its entirety, its tendency to reduce everything to the same, to the One:
This domination of the philosophical logos stems in large part from its power to reduce all others to the economy of the Same. The teleologically constructive project it takes on is always also a project of diversion, deflection, reduction of the other in the Same ... Whence the necessity of 'reopening' the figures of philosophical discourse - idea, substance, transcendental subjectivity, absolute knowledge - in order to pry out of them what they have borrowed that is feminine, from the feminine, to make them 'render up' and give back what they owe the feminine. This may be done in various ways, along various 'paths'; moreover, at minimum several of these must be pursued.100
In other words, the historical phenomenon that is the dissolution of the classical subject of representation could and should lead us on to unveil the possibility of a new non-logocentric way of thinking: this is the philosophy of sexual difference. It is not enough to denounce the obsessional narcissism of theoretical reason, as does one current in modern philosophy; it is more a question of making a different discursive space available for the 'female feminine'.
It is this precise objective that orientates Irigaray's critique of classical philosophy. Her reading of Western philosophy rests on two premises: firstly she retraces the history of the male sexed subject of knowledge
and of the primacy according to Reason. The later is analysed as the 'natural' light which allegedly illuminates all truth, but which for Irigaray reflects more particularly the male subject's self-image in a mirror-game of speculation: self-reflection.101 This specular game essentially functions at the expense of the woman's body; material body, matrix of being, it is repudiated and devalued by the self-affirmation of the masculine logos which uses pure Reason as its pretext.
In Plato's texts, for example, Irigaray observes the establishment of a theroetical and geometric technique, a veritable discursive machine which serves as the basis for the logos' appropriation of matter. Plato's eternal Ideas mark the beginning of a process of exclusion of the feminine. Irigaray insists on this point: all intellection operates against matter and physis.
Later, Aristotle submitted physis to a rigorous analysis - but in so doing, he validated the fact that matter is already invested by a certain form of speculation: 'Physis is always already an act of appropriation to a telos.'102 It is a specular process, through which philosophical reflexion evolves towards a definition of the absolute Being, towards the supreme abstraction. The notion of God articulated by Aristotle (the Unmoved Mover), was already founded on the divorce from the mother-matter; clearly a sex-specific break, modelled on the man-woman relation. This is close to some of the aspects of Mary Daly's thought, and Irigaray unveils the discursive mechanisms which have allowed the articulation of the inferiority of woman, with the help of an ontological terminology which presents her as incomplete, unfinished.
The blind spot of Western Reason's dream of symmetry, woman as non-place of Being, lack, absence and indeterminacy, also invests what are known as the 'natural' sciences. Aristotle's theory of generation, in which the biological conception of a female sexed being becomes an accident of nature (since the only 'natural' form of human life is the male), proves the power of the prejudice thus established at the heart of the enterprise of philosophy.
Assumptions, yet they weighed heavily on the destiny of women, for it was not until the twentieth century that they were 'scientifically' refuted. Irigaray emphasizes the consequences of this misogyny, and the links between the 'blind spot' and the privilege philosophy accords to pure luminous rationality. Reducing this universalizing claim to the most specific of its prejudices, taking as her essential point of departure the Cartesian cogito, she retraces the development of the modern forms of phallocentrism.
Descartes's point of departure was irrefutable, namely that the relation between subject and predicate leaves no room for indeterminacy. In this correspondence theory of truth, the copula becomes the indubitable sign of the identity of subject and predicate, and the guarantee of a 'universal nature' inherent in individual propositions, which thus enables the rational to be assimilated to the real. Irigaray
emphasizes that this correspondence relation between subject and predicate, which is the basis of the legitimation of the subject, corresponds to the subject's separation from matter.
If there is no more earth to press down/repress, to work, to represent, but also and always to desire (for one's own), no opaque matter which in theory does not know herself, then what pedestal remains for the ex-istence of the 'subject'?103
The Cartesian subject is transcendental - what he transcends is, precisely, his material basis, and he expels matter-earth. But at the time of Descartes - and this is what distinguishes him from his predecessors -the idea that the subject is necessarily the site of Being and Knowledge had become so essential to the order of discourse that it was indispensable to the Cartesian validation of the universal.
In a fundamental reversal, not dissimilar to some of the feminist reformist strategies analysed above, the singular authority represented by the Cartesian subject then turns into the way of attesting the (existence of the) universal. Not only does the Cartesian subject present himself as privileged moment of discourse, but also passes himself off as the foundation of his own condition of being.
And so the Cartesian method traces an intellectual route which passes beyond doubt, beyond all possible speculation by the Other, or others. The cogito, which, precisely by doubting its universal knowledge, legitimates itself, is careful not to presuppose that some other being could also doubt:
Representation here is auto-effective, auto-effecting solipsism. It embroiders its dream of potentiality alone in its chamber, indifferent, at least for a while, to the rest of (its) history that is still being woven.
All alone, with an ever cautious negativism, it cuts up and rewords the subject's links to his archives. And to his process!trial of engendering. Once upon a time, something related to genesis and becoming used also to appear and even to precede the specific predicates attributed to the substance, the sub-jectum. But now, by a stroke of almost incredible boldness, it is the singular subject who is charged with giving birth to the universe all over again, after he has brought himself back into the world in a way that avoids the precariousness of existence as it is usually understood. Once the chain of relationships, the cord, has been severed, together with ancestry and the mysteries of conception, then there is nothing left but the subject who can go back and sever them all over again whenever he likes. In a speculative act of denial and negation that serves to affirm his autonomy. By means of a verb (to think) that, as if by chance - or is it necessity? - can do without an object if need be, can also be predicated as an absolute, though at a price of some austerity, some effort of will. Speculation is 'pure', and as intransitive in its process as 'to live' or 'to be'.104
The universalizing claim of this solipsism partly derives from the process of self-affectation of the subject, his 'dream of potentiality alone in [his] chamber', but is constantly confirmed by his denigration of corporeal being.
The cogito's characteristic is to determine itself as here and now, and to put all into doubt, except for its own thought processes. The 'thinking tissue' being very significantly constituted by the other, all thought is reflected thanks to a screen; for Western thought, the privileged specular place is the woman's body: 'that all-powerful mirror denied and neglected in the self-sufficiency of the (self) thinking subject, her "body" henceforward specularized through and through'.105
Wholly reflected by the looking glass of the female body, the thinking subject no longer sees his mirror; nor does he see that his thought, all thought, rests on a fiction, this illusion of himself as a totality. Where does the cogito draw its absolute certainty from? From the fact that it confers existence on itself, purified of all sensory or passionate confusions. Alone at last, T think, therefore T have being: 'Therefore I am. Alone at last, the copula. I-me together in an embrace that begins over and over again.'106
This is a solipsistic dream which is played out at the expense of the woman's body, matter, and the corporeal roots of the human intellect. 'The "I" thinks, therefore this thing, this body that is also nature, that is still the mother, becomes an extension at the "I" 's disposal for analytical investigations, scientific projections, the regulated exercise of the imaginary, the utilitarian practice of technique.'107
God himself is not an infinite Being for the T has accorded him this essence and his existence, according to the order of Reason. 'Speculative' philosophy is characterized by its desire to impose itself on matter and therefore on woman as creative principle: the supremacy of the intelligible over the sensory, idea over body. And although philosophical thought depends on the male sexed body, the male embodied subject is precisely that great non-said of Western philosophy.
Using psychoanalysis to dislocate philosophy's discourse of truth, Irigaray adopts a double strategy: according to a process of mimesis (which I shall explicate further, shortly), she accepts the materiality which defines woman; but when she asks 'But what if this matter began to speak?, she radically subverts the specular relation which allows discursive production to feed symbolically and materially on the female body.
Reduced to unconsciousness (that is, to the negative of masculine consciousness), to the matter which upholds the masculine system of representation, woman incarnates the oblivion whence flows the forget-ting of all matter, which alone makes possible the solipsistic dream of the philosophical subject. As soon as woman-matter begins to speak, the whole edifice of Western Reason begins to crumble.
The 'masculine' is not prepared to share the initiative of discourse. It prefers to experiment with speaking, writing, enjoying 'woman' rather than leaving to that other any right to intervene, to 'act' in her own interests. What remains the most completely prohibited to woman, of course, is that she should express something of her own sexual pleasure. This latter is supposed to remain a 'realm' of discourse, produced by men. For in fact feminine pleasure signifies the greatest threat of all to masculine discourse, represents its most irreducible exteriority, or 'exterritoriality' .108
We saw earlier how psychoanalytic presuppositions explain the confinement of woman to an extra-territoriality which in turn makes her manipulable as the prop for all theoretical scenes, the copula of the Western logos. In other words, adds Irigaray, the subject has become a masculine fact and women, the object of a constant exercise of power.
She denounces the privileged role of discourse, which regulates the canons of all theory, thereby affirming that this dogmatic function makes philosophy the ideal place to exercise a critique of the logos. Although psychoanalysis and philosophy constitute the principal terms of reference of this argumentation, Irigaray does not stay within the limits imposed by these disciplines but rather uses their conceptual premises to subvert their own foundations. Irigaray does not so much censure them as take up their arguments to support and demonstrate her critique of the subject and his representations.
Women's silence has always been interpreted as a threat to the masculine logos', coupling the theoretical with the symbolic, Irigaray reintegrates the female voice in all its subversiveness. On the basis of the feminist premise that the exchange of women structures our society's political and discursive economy, Irigaray affirms that women's speech is a political act whose consequences are enormous. An important question dominates her reflection: can the feminine come into being within our culture's sexually neuter system? What would be the modalities of this becoming?
Faithful to her first intuition, she remains convinced that our cultural order acknowledges only one sex, that only masculine sexuality is recognized as a source of signification. Consequently, Irigaray concentrates on putting into action, empowering sexual difference, that is, women's irreducibility to the models imposed by the masculine logos.
To do this, she defends a tactic of mimesis which consists of recognizing and accepting most of the patriarchal presuppositions, the better to subvert them. Like Adrienne Rich amongst others, she emphasizes that the radical rejection of matter, the corporeal, the maternal, allows the systematic exercise of reason. The matter-mind conflict, which she reads as a sexed opposition, acts as the basis for her critique of classical dualism and subtends her questioning of the architectonic structure of theoretical Reason.
In her deconstructive acting-out of the mirror-stage which allows the logos to be a reflection upon/of the other, Irigaray analyses the specular economy of Rationality. She explains her stance as follows:
It means to resubmit herself - inasmuch as she is on the side of the 'perceptible', of 'matter' - to 'ideas', in particular to ideas about herself, that are elaborated in/by a masculine logic, but so as to make 'visible', by an effect of playful repetition, what was supposed to remain invisible: the cover-up of a possible operation of the feminine in language. It also means 'to unveil' the fact that, if women are such good mimics, it is because they are not simply reabsorbed into this function. They also remain elsewhere.109
This game of ludic repetition is deliberately set up against the seriousness of rationality's meaning, and it evokes women's 'difference'. If they remain 'elsewhere', it is because their jouissance and their discourse are in fact irreducible to language, cannot be articulated by it. Difference is affirmed here as a positive value; but, more importantly still, it is practised, put in the conditional and not future mode of women's becoming. Rather than suggesting a counter-theory of the feminine and of women, Irigaray works from existing concepts; thus she unveils the process of conceptualization of women, with a view to developing an other discursive economy which, beyond the traditional polarities, arrives at 'a possibility of non-hierarchical articulation of this difference'.110 More precisely:
The issue is not one of elaborating a new theory of which woman would be the subject or the object, but of jamming the theoretical machinery itself, of suspending its pretension to the production of a truth and a meaning that are excessively univocal. Which presupposes that women do not aspire simply to be men's equals in knowledge.111
To mime. Mimesis. A mimetism which is offered to us as a means of reversing the mirror-games, the projective identifications, the specular economy which supports the masculine logos by setting its outer boundaries and therefore also the dividing lines between self and 'other'. This strategy is a radical unveiling through repetition of the oppressive logic of this economy - and at the same time justifies Irigaray's demand for an 'other' space for the feminine, somewhere other than in masculine spaces:
In other words, we could not speak of (a) woman 'entering into' any theory whatsoever unless the theory in question were to become an 'enactment' of the copula, and not an appropriation of/by being. But then we would no longer be dealing either with entrances or with theories.112
Having defined the feminine as eccentric in relation to masculine discourse, Irigaray articulates a veritable metaphysical subversion at the heart of the discursive order. Against psychoanalytic arguments which construct women’s desire as lack, and against the radical currents of modern philosophy for which all desire is mechanical flux, excessive fulness, and so on, she affirms the specificity of women’s desire, which completely surmounts these schemas and the association between desire and death which sustains them.
Beneath the veils and masks that our culture attributes to women, a feminine exists, in a position of excess in relation to phallocratic rationality. In other words, the feminine is plural, multiple, resists all assimilation, as too does feminine jouissance. For the specificity that Irigaray claims for women resides, precisely, in the matter of our embodied selves, the morphology which shapes the syntax of our desire. The ruling image is that of the half-open sex whose close lips continually kissing each other symbolize the multiple-as-one. The image is chosen for its subversive metaphorical value which responds to the Lacanian image of the black hole. Every woman is therefore already symbolically multiple, and as such resists unilinear phallic representation: 'Therefore woman has not one sex. She has at least two, which cannot be identified as one. She has many more besides. Her sexuality, always at least double, is yet more plural.'113
In psychoanalytically orthodox feminist discourse, such as that of Kristeva, woman is presumed not to be One, since she has no alternative than to accept her symbolic castration and establish herself as a subject ’manque'. In Cixous's case the new woman is a-centred and multi-centred. For Irigaray, on the one hand, woman is not One because she is always multiple, as the image of the two lips suggests. More importantly, however, Irigaray thinks that the main task here and now is to provide the conditions of material possibility for this new subjectivity to start being operational. And whereas the post-Marxist feminists, like Plaza, Delphy and Wittig explain all difference in terms of socio-cultural phenomena, Irigaray is very wary of the limitations of a purely sociological approach to the question of the subject. Commenting on sociology, Irigaray states that it 'describes what already exists without inventing a new subjectivity which I don't believe can be reduced to a neat social effect. This is what certain men (and women) call my 'ontological' side, most often without a clue as to what that means.'114
The more ontological aspect of Irigaray's work involves precisely questions about the structures of subjectivity in relation to the symbolic system and to the discourses and practices that express it: knowledge, especially philosophy, psychoanalysis, the divine. By emphasizing the importance of starting from the body, Irigaray is not, as Plaza suggests, falling into biological reductivism. The 'body' in question is clearly not a biological construct, rather the libidinal surface which allows for the construction of subjectivity through the complex interplay of identifica-
tions, and consequently language and alterity.115
Irigaray posits, simply, an absolute, irreducible difference. Irigarayan difference is neither a more nor a less - rather, it marks a mobile limit, the displacement of which allows the emergence of women's singularity. That the woman has a sexual morphology, an unconscious and a jouissance of her own, distinct from the man's, is the central assumption of Irigaray's project.
To affirm and practise difference amounts to depriving men of the right to legislate over women, to speak in their name, to define them; which amounts to a right to self-determination. It is with this in mind that Irigaray states, as opposed to the idea that woman is not, the idea that she is not yet; just as no language yet exists which is capable of affirming the multiplicity of the feminine.
Far from supplying a counter-theory of feminity, Irigaray is a party to women's specific political struggles, which she translates into a quest for and an analysis of some characteristics of what might be women's language. Her work consists in opening out conditions of possibility for difference to become enacted. In this respect her texts are sites of empowerment of the 'female feminine' whose language is still young. Traces of this 'difference' are: a privileged relation to play and laughter (rather than seriousness of meaning), to what is 'near', to tactile apprehension (rather than the gaze), to touch, and especially the caress (rather than take) and to resistance to normative unification. We have seen that the search for a specifically feminine language, politics, and writing moves from and through the revaluation of feminine sexuality and political support to women's struggles. One of the most inspring moments in this work is her approach to the mother-daughter relation.
The dark continent of the dark continent, this relation remains uncomprehended or mystified and constitutes the potentially explosive nucleus of the problem of the subjedification and also the subjection of women. The site of origin and also of differentiation, beyond symbolization and therefore productive of never-ending mystifications, the mother-daughter relation is set up by Irigaray as the prototype of the conflict as well as the passionate bond that connects women to each other. Rivalry and envy as well as passion and recognition are part and parcel of female identity and they all bear on the mother-daughter bond. Taking up radical feminism's fundamental idea that it is the father who makes us slaves and not the child, Irigaray describes a new mother-daughter relation, which revolutionizes the status of women, for it is the prototype of a new kind of relation between women, women who have become the active subjects of their own history.
Exceeding the divisions which have been historically assigned them through a new relation to the mother, women may be able to discover new forms of communication with each other. To prompt and to address one's mother as a woman is already to leap over an ancestral fence erected by the patriarchal system, and therefore to affirm the existence
of a community of women beyond the barriers of age and family roles.
It is a revaluation of female homosexuality and also, by guaranteeing its positive and creative side, a response to the psychoanalytic theory which condemns the mother-daughter relation to failure by reducing it to rivalry, resentment, and jealousy. According to Oedipal logic, all daughters are meant to abandon their mothers, renouncing them in order to at last be admitted into the domain of the Law of the Father. But for Irigaray this repudiation, which is presented as being necessary, cannot work, for it rests on a double mistake: firstly, psychoanalytic theory is misleading in that the daughter can never be fully 'admitted' or 'recognized' by the Father anyway, and must therefore accept herself as a failed, castrated being.
Secondly, the break with the mother is emotionally and physically impossible for a daughter, since both, whether they recognize it as a strength or not, are first and foremost women. And each woman, whether she likes it or not, only exists in her culture as a potential mother. This shared reproductive capacity, which has been turned into a source of universal oppression of women, means that the mother-daughter relation can never really be broken. In the worst cases, rather, the oppression will be infinitely reproduced, in an infernal circle of division of women from each other, which serves the best interest of the masters.
In the light of this analysis Irigaray then argues that the only revolutionary possibility remains for mothers and daughters to seize the oppressive logic which imprisons them and reject it; which implies that they finish with the game of mutual blame and resentment regulated by the father/boss's desire to dominate. Analysed in these terms, the revolt of women, mothers and daughters united as women, works for what Adrienne Rich calls the end of the kingdom of the father. This revaluation of emotional bonds between women is not only an apology for female homosexuality, but also and mostly a radical subversion of the relation to the other. Recognizing the otherness of the person of the same sex is a gesture of receptivity that subverts the women-to-woman relationship.
In the course of her prolific career, Irigaray has turned the mother-daughter couple into the image which will inspire fundamental shifts in women's relationship to the symbolic. Recognizing the originary, structuring importance of the relationship to the mother is, for Irigaray, the first step in the new 'vertical' relationship that women can develop among themselves. Verticality means qualitative distinction, as opposed to the horizontal, quantitative way of seeing all women as being the 'same'. How to think the differences among women, the differences within this sameness, is Irigaray's new focus. She connects it to the quest for a new ethics where sexual difference as the emblem of all differences will pave the way for a new bond among women. This process of acquiring a new subjectivity in the love of our own sex is also
defined as a process of 'becoming-divine' by women.
The ethical foundation of the project of sexual difference is the recognition that differences among women need not lead to the state of disaggregation and hostility that has always played into the hands of patriarchy. Margaret Whitford makes this point very strongly.116 What is also interesting about Irigaray's tactic is that her ethics of sexual difference also calls for a redefinition of heterosexual ethics, that is to say for a new recognition of the equal worth of the two sexes on the symbolic plane.
An interesting way of making this point is by comparing the chapter on Descartes from Speculum, which I have briefly commented on already, with the Descartes section of Ethique de la difference sexuelle.117 In the latter, Irigaray stresses the positive force of the Cartesian notion of 'admiration', in the sense of receptivity and openness to the other. While emphasizing Descartes's lack of awareness of sexual difference, she suggests that we adopt his stance as a way of reconstructing heterosexuality, that is, as a way of approaching the other as other.118
How to reformulate the contract between the sexes, how to renegotiate the heterosexual contract, is a major concern of Irigaray, whose idea of 'community' starts from the assertion of the need for women to acquire a positive identification with their own sex, before they can move on to being the 'equal' of the other sex. The idea of community as nurturing space has been extremely influential in contemporary feminist theory.
In Europe, it seems to me that the Italian women's movement has been the most affected by the politics of the symbolic revolution such as Irigaray postulates it. Particular mention should be made here of the work of Luisa Muraro, Adriana Cavarero and the philosophers' group 'Diotima', from the University of Verona, who have elaborated Irigaray's theories in a very innovative manner.119 Irigaray's recent work, both Parler n'est jamais neutre, and, in particular, he Temps de la difference, stresses quite clearly the importance of her relationship to Italian feminism. Considering the almost simultaneous speed with which Irigaray's texts are published in Italian, as opposed to the fact the Speculum took ten years to appear in English, I think we should keep in mind that, in the field of the philosophy of sexual difference, the conceptual alliance of Irigaray with the Italian women is going to be one of the most exciting sites of theoretical production of this end of century.
The notion of feminine 'genealogy' is crucial to the idea of verticality and the community; built on the basis of her previous work on the mother/daughter couple, and elaborated through texts like Amante Marine, in the sense of a rewriting of the main philosophical and mythical representations of the love for the mother, the 'feminine genealogy' is central to Irigaray's project. Arguing that the logocentric culture has destroyed feminine genealogies in order to assert its own myths and representations, Irigaray states:
To make an ethics of sexual difference once again possible, the links with feminine genealogies must be renewed ... If History's rationality comes down to reminding us what has happened and recording it, we must make a place within History for the forgetting of feminine genealogies and devise their economy once more.120
Irigaray's defence of feminine genealogies, and of all the myths of mother-daughter love, such as Demeter and Kore-Persephone, is a mimetic technique of reappropriation of images that logocentrism has twisted to its ends. As a political theorist, Irigaray accepts the rules and codes the better to subvert them and dares to venture towards the snares of theoretical reason in order to disarm it and to open up other possibilities for women's thought and action.
However, this tactic, her choosing to situate herself at the very heart of masculine logic, to speak from there, may seem ambiguous: is it men's forked tongue she speaks, or is it women's ancestral silence? And how can one make silence speak? We have already tackled this question, which is crucial for post-structuralist philosophy, in relation to Foucault and Derrida. With Irigaray, as with Cixous, we can at long last genderize this question: can women's silence be spoken? This silence which has historically been associated with other exclusions: madness, absolute negativity, precisely because it evaded masculine univocal logic.
Irigaray responds to this question indirectly when she says that the introduction of the multiple at the heart of the One cannot and must not be reduced to an affirmation of the One as multiple. It has nothing to do with a feminist counter-theory, reminiscent of Mary Daly's gynocentr-ism, which would only be the reverse of phallocentrism; in other words, fluidity, multiplicity, and so on, are not the components of a new feminine essence. Rather, they are ideas put forward as future possibilities, suggestions for feminist revolutionary labour.
It is in this sense that Marcelle Marini supports Irigaray's work, considering it to be an essential theoretical opening for women. Far from being comparable to a will to colonize women's silence, Irigaray views her work as a plea that the exchange of women will cease, on all levels, symbolic and economic, and suggests a new metaphorical system, and uses it as such:
How difficult it is to escape from the solipsistic dream of phallocratism which seems to wish that the 'defeat of women' in 'the proto-historical period' had made them totally disappear from history! They would re-emerge as if from the void or through the logic of the system itself. Haven't they been inscribed in it all along as being oppressed, accomplices to their oppression, or resistant? Can we not think that a 'culture' has subsisted, has sustained itself and transformed itself in the course of the centuries: dispersed, fragmented beneath the pressure of the dominant culture, but living: although often illegible, it is
inscribed in our heritage. And this enables women today to struggle (to be) 'subjects', even if this term escapes its received definition.151
A rationality based on the multiple, a difference which would render the other a non-dialectizable possibility; the resistance to the tyranny of the Same, the constant recreation of a new ecriture-femme, the effort of the theoretical imagination to re-present the female feminine differently, are among the most significant steps in a work whose depth and influence are only beginning to be appreciated.
Towards an-other Materialism, or: The Politics of Location Revisited
Having reviewed some of the most prominent examples of French feminist theories of a new embodied female subject, I do not intend to pursue this discussion in the direction of a comparison, or a confrontation, between the more Lacanian and therefore French-oriented school of the embodiment of the subject with the allegedly more pragmatic 'Anglo-American' school. I think too much feminist theoretical energy over the last ten years has been wasted in this sort of senseless comparison. Much more important in my eyes is the way in which, through different cultural and theoretical traditions, a general direction of thought is emerging in feminist theory, that situates the embodied nature of the subject, and consequently the question of alternatively sexual difference or gender, at the heart of the matter.
Judith Butler develops this point in a most enlightening paper.122 In what ultimately turns out to be a powerful rereading of Beauvoir in the light of post-structuralist deconstructions of bodily essentialism, Butler distinguishes the issue of the wilful choice of gender roles from the ontological and founding function of sexuality as a pillar of identity. On these grounds, Butler calls for a redefinition of gender as a philosophy of embodiment that is radically non-Cartesian in its rejection of dualism. She asks: 'How are we to find the body that pre-exists its cultural interpretation? If gender is the corporealization of choice, and the acculturation of the corporeal, then what is left of nature, and what has become of sex?'123
Far from concluding that the whole idea of gender is made anachronistic by the philosophy of embodiment, Butler calls for a new cultural definition of gender, defined as 'the impulsive and yet mindful process of interpreting a cultural reality laden with sanctions, taboos and prescriptions ... Less a radical act of creation, gender is a tacit project to renew a cultural history in one's own corporeal terms.'124
On the grounds of this definition, Butler seems to me to be agreeing with the question that all theoreticians of difference ask: how can we
bring about a new definition of female subjectivity? Her answer, however, takes the form of a critique of the more biological deterministic edges of some aspects of French theories of difference, to call for an active becoming of women: To conceive her in the metaphysical order of becoming is to invent possibility into her experience, including the possibility of never becoming a substantive, self-identical "woman." ,125
The term employed is 'gender', but the content of the project is, at least in my view, perfectly compatible with that of 'sexual difference': is this just a cultural difference in definitions? Whether it goes under the heading of 'gender', or of 'sexual difference', the common project that is emerging is the radical redefinition of female subjectivity from a feminist standpoint. Unlike their more liberal-minded colleagues, radical feminist philosophers do not argue for the implicitly moral value of the feminist standpoint; nor do they argue for the moral superiority of women on the grounds of their maternal and reproductive function.126 The feminist ethics is based rather on the revendication of sexual difference as a value-free notion, not submitted to a hierarchical system of values: it is the positivity of otherness.
Adrienne Rich bases her reflections on the same arguments: women must attempt to create a symbolic world adequately suited to their perception of reality. This emphasis on women's corpor(e)ality amounts to revalorizing the bodily roots of all subjectivity, although it acquires a sharper edge in feminist politics. It results in the formulation of a new body-politic, that is the stake of specific struggles (contraceptive and abortion rights, campaigns against sexual violence and rape, and so on). It also opens the possibility, however, of redefining bodily space as a site of representation and definition of identity. This results in the formulation of a new theoretical corpus which cannot be merely translated in terms of the patriarchal systems of thought, nor can it be reduced to a replacement of the previous system. It is precisely the call for radical transformations in the structures of subjectivity that distinguishes this trend of feminist theory.
The feminist philosophical position of difference has the double merit not only of denouncing the injustice accomplished against women, but also of shaking up the power-foundations of this model of knowledge by disclosing it as a sex-biased system. The eminently philosophical interest of this position rests on the fact that it highlights the technologies of power through which a system simultaneously produces a mystifying discourse about women and denies them the entitlement to subjectivity.
This leads to a radical rereading of materialism, away from its strictly Marxist definition. We have seen that for most theorists of difference the theoretical and political importance of the idea of the embodiment of the subject is that it allows for a critique of dualism as a form of violence. Dualism is a mode of thinking that conceptualizes boundaries as fixed barriers, in a confrontational mode such as the dividing lines that separate sexuality from society, the private from the public. To uphold
the rigid differentiation of the two poles of the dichotomous opposition is to perpetuate an ancient form of violence, an oppositional vision of thought that associates the work of reason to a sort of psychic warfare.
In the English-speaking world Nancy C. M. Hartsock has also used the notion of the embodiment to throw open the discussion about materialism.127 She links together the issue of identity, with the analysis of the patterns of identification and separation that produce masculine and feminine positions, with very concrete problems of social and political subjectivity, particularly with reference to the sexual division of labour. She argues that:
Masculinity must be attained by means of opposition to the concrete world of daily life, by escaping from contact with the female world of the household into the masculine world of public life. This experience of two worlds: one valuable, if abstract and deeply unattainable, the other useless and demeaning, if concrete and necessary, lies at the heart of a series of dualisms - abstract/concrete, mind/body, culture/ nature, ideal/real, stasis/change. And these dualisms are overlaid by gender: only the first of each pair is associated with the male.128
Arguing that these dualisms operate just as effectively in discourse and in the production of knowledge, she concludes that 'abstract masculinity'129 has structured both the social relations and the modes of thought that we have learnt to call 'normal' conceptual behaviour. Not unlike the other radical thinkers I have been describing in this section, Hartsock does not aim to reverse the balance of power and offer a counter-notion of 'abstract femininity' in replacement of the previous one. The aim is rather to expose the partiality of the whole dualistic approach on the grounds of its implications for 'the proper evaluation of human activity'.130
It is precisely in this respect that the radical feminism of difference takes its distance from the classical theories of liberation proposed by Marxists, arguing that Marxist ideologies are no less narrow-minded than the bourgeois in upholding the distinction between the private and the public, thereby ignoring the impact of the feminist politics of subjectivity.
I have also attempted to show that theorists of a new female feminist subjectivity take their distance from the earlier forms of feminist materialism, still too dependent on Marxist sociology. Thus, in the never-ending polemic that opposes Delphy, Plaza and, to a certain extent, Wittig, to Cixous and Irigaray, I have tried to introduce the idea that notions of embodiment, the technology of the self and the power/ knowledge process - notions that have been produced by the poststructuralists - are rich in implications for feminists. The neomaterialism of Foucault, the new materiality proposed by Deleuze are,
as I argued at the end of chapter 5, a point of non-return for feminist theory.
It seems to me that a certain section of the English-speaking feminist movement has accepted this. Thus as J. Scott pointed out in her recent paper about post-structuralism, feminism will greatly benefit from taking seriously the politics of the production of knowledge and of the constitution of the subject which contemporary French theory has put on the map for us.131 Scott rightly emphasizes the usefulness of notions such as 'discourse' and 'subjectivity' in redefining the feminist analysis of 'power'. In wondering why a position such as Scott's has not emerged in contemporary France, readers may want to bear in mind the situation which I outlined briefly at the beginning of this book: the mixture of positivist reaction and nihilistic gloom into which much of what is left of the structuralist generation has collapsed is hardly conducive to innovative thoughts.
The question that is interesting is not whether the equality-oriented approach is 'better' than the 'difference'-oriented one, but rather: what is the feminist theorists' assessment of the crisis of modernity? Are they closet humanists, wanting to rescue what is left of the Enlightenment vision of the historical progress of humanity through rationality? Or are they radical epistemologists refusing one right access to truth, knowledge, progress? It seems to me that right across the spectrum of positions I have outlined so far, the radical epistemology approach is predominant, and it leads to a positive assessment of the crisis, totally rid of the apocalyptic tone that marks some of the male writings on the subject.
To make this point clearer, let me test it by looking at some examples of feminist theorists trained in the German rather than the French school of critical theory. Although there are significant differences between these two mainstream schools of thought, they both constitute discourses about and reaction to the crisis; as such they provide a good background against which to assess the specificity of the feminist positions they have respectively engendered.
For instance, Jessica Benjamin has developed a theory of the bodily space in a study of the formation of the subject which is both psychoanalytic and philosophical. Influenced by the German critical theory school and especially Adorno, Benjamin also works with the theories of Winnicott. On the basis of an argument central to modern feminism, namely that the development of all human subjects is rooted in the mother-child relationship, she suggests that the process of individuation of human beings depends closely on their differentiation from the mother, a process which contains both separation and recognition. She further argues that the male and female child take very different positions in their game of distanciation from the mother. Feminists have in fact used this psychoanalytic theory as a political key; the primacy of the mother-child relationship on which they insist becomes the pro-
totype of a privileged relation specific to women. As Carla Lonzi puts it, 'It is the father, not the child, that enslaves us to motherhood.'13^ Several feminists, whom I mentioned earlier on, arrive at the same conclusions: they stress the need for a relation of filiation which is affirmed as such and which simultaneously rejects this other pillar of patriarchy that is the classical concept of maternity, and results in a new role for women, a role which doubtless has never been played before.
This sort of stance relies on acknowledgement of the notion that male and female identify with, or distance themselves from the mother in very different patterns. While psychoanalysis reduces the process of distanciation to the Oedipal schema, which adds to the woman's lack, her being less and other than, in relation to the man, Jessica Benjamin sees a rational violence in the way in which the man separates from the mother's body as site of origin. For the male, the logic of individuation by way of a separation from the mother entails denial of and contempt for the other. The masculine subject's self-affirmation rests on a split, a veritable rupture with the maternal body, which excludes all reciprocity. This form of violent rationalization is inherent in the idea of reason in our culture, and as such it plays a vital role in the constitution of the sado-masochistic basis of sexual relations.
As if the Hegelian scheme opposing master and slave translated an unconscious tendency, the triumph of the same is the foundation of the power of reason. This dialectical movement postulates both that everyone desires the other's recognition and that this reciprocal recognition is impossible. This contradiction posits negation as the crucial moment in the constitution of individual consciousness. The bipolarization of the subject in terms of reciprocity and negation is indispensable to the dialectical sequence, given that being can only be affirmed in the tension or contradiction between these two poles.
The Sartre-Beauvoir version, which is entirely based on the antagonism between the vital need for communication with the other and the impossibility of it, reveals the violence implicit in the Hegelian schema. The Sartrean subject, torn between the necessity to affirm his existence and the desire that it be recognized by the other, acts in a closed world in which two subjects confront each other as in a duel, in a mortal game whose only outcome is the One's assimilation of the Other.
Jessica Benjamin links this theoretical violence with the first of all rejections, that of the mother's body, and emphasizes that it is through the necessary - 'normal' - confrontation between men that women have been definitively deprived of the status of rational subject:
To be a woman means to be excluded from this rational individualism, due to being treated as an object or considered a threat to the established order. To be a man does not simply mean to recognize oneself as the masculine pole of the opposition, valorized in order to establish the supremacy of the rational subject, but rather, that one
insists on maintaining the dualism, the rupture and the frontier separating masculine and feminine.133
Rationality is not just being analysed here as synonymous with masculinity and power; it is also being perceived as a symptom of the rule which consecrates the practice of one sex's domination of the other. Rationality can therefore only be brutal in its treatment of the feminine; it functions according to a logic of aggressive rationality, whose privileged target is the maternal body, signifier of a 'feminine' the rejection of which is the necessary precondition of the formation of the subject.
In this feminist reading, the mind-body dualism is an expression of the male subject's inability to cope with separation from the womb, from the nourishing body of the mother and from nature, in terms other than separation, severing and denial. It is through this lack of mutuality and receptivity to the other that a subject can claim to be the subject of Knowledge. Masculinity thus defined is the model for an allegedly normal pattern of development; it stands for certain ethical values that are better suited to the male pattern of psychic development. Benjamin's critical analysis here confirms one of the early insights of the radical feminist stance. Adrienne Rich, for instance, had stressed the complicity between masculinity and the dominant ideas about subjectivity:
Any deviance from a quality valued by that [dominant male] culture can be dismissed as negative: where 'rationality' is posited as sanity, legitimate method, 'real thinking', any alternative, intuitive, supersen-sory, or poetic knowledge is labelled 'irrational'.134
Accordingly, the radical feminist critique of dualism rests on two levels of critique: theoretically, dualism is seen as leading to a reductive vision of human thought, which devalues the imagination in favour of the pursuit of scientific 'truth', defined as the objective, detached and neutral possession of nature's secrets. It mutilates the creative power of thought and, as Deleuze argues, gives an impoverished and inhibiting image of what it means to think. Politically, it implies the submission of women to a model of development and a scale of values concerning truth and knowledge which are not suited to the female mode of psychic development and more especially the female pattern of differentiation from the mother's body.
The rejection of dualism, of the positive-negative polarities between which most of our intellectual training has taken place, has been an undercurrent of feminist thought. And, rejecting them, we reaffirm the existence of all those who have through the centuries been negatively defined: not only women, but the 'untouchable', the 'unmanly', the 'nonwhite', the 'illiterate': the 'invisible'. Which forces us to confront the problem of the essential dichotomy: power/ powerlessness.135
The characteristic familiar to all the oppressed is: to be evaluated in relation to the norm, the standard of those in power; to be deprived, as a result, of the right to name oneself, to define oneself: "Each colonized people is defined by its conqueror as weak, feminine, incapable of self-governing, ignorant, uncultured, effete, irrational, in need of civilizing.'136
In a recent article Benjamin expands some of the ideas of her earlier work.137 On the basis of Winnicott's notion of 'transitional space' she argues on the one hand for the inextricable unity of self and other and on the other hand for the specificity of the female pattern of formation of the self. The two sets of ideas: that subjectivity is relational, a matter of mutual and reciprocal receptivity of self to other, and that women have a specific sense of receptivity as a mode of relation to the other, lead Benjamin to rethink the question of boundaries and separation.
The very notion of a transitional space marks an interface, something that sets both the proximity and the distance between two individuals; in Benjamin's words, it is 'something that both forms a boundary and opens up into endless possibility'.138 This intersubjective space requires receptivity and mutuality as the precondition for defining the self. The body thus becomes, in her reading, 'a metaphor of transitional fantasy. The interior of the body and the space between bodies form an elusive pattern, a plane whose edge is ever-shifting.'139
The notion of space is understood by Benjamin as a continuum between the interior and the exterior of the body, that is to say between self and other. Hence the importance she attaches to the idea of receptivity, as the epistemological and ethical equivalent of the notion of transitional space. Benjamin then goes further and argues that female subjectivity must be redefined on the basis of this founding notion: female desire as a transitional space. 'What is experientially female is the association of desire with a space, a place within the self, from which this force can emerge. This space is in turn connected to the space between self and the other.'140
Because of the specific female patterns of differentiation from the mother, Benjamin argues that female subjectivity is more prone to receptivity to otherness than the male one. Sexual difference is therefore taken as the basis for a redefinition of subjectivity in terms of infra- or inter-spaces between embodied selves. This produces a reading of sexuality that is not organ-fixated, but rather interested in the structures of the self; accordingly, by redefining the bodily space this way, Benjamin lays the foundations for an alternative representation of female subjectivity.
Another very interesting postmodernist thinker in the German tradition is Jane Flax. She also bases her defence of a new female subjectivity on Winnicott, as well as using some aspects of German critical theory.141 Starting from the insight of developmental psychology, Flax traces the genesis of the process of psychic dualism back to the male inability to
munication and community: 'Situated knowledges are about communities. The only way to find a larger vision is to be somewhere in particular.'149
As a way of concluding, I want to suggest that the various examples I have pointed out in this chapter amount, in my view, to a new theoretical position, critical feminist theory or epistemology. For a definition of epistemology, let me refer you to Teresa de Lauretis's path-breaking work on the constitution of the female feminist subject. In Technologies of Gender she defines as epistemological the project of simultaneous redefinition of knowledge and subjectivity, as terms in a process that encompasses the social field and therefore includes relations of power. De Lauretis criticizes the definition of gender as sexual difference on the grounds that it keeps women's thought imprisoned within the conceptual frame of patriarchal oppositions, that take the masculine as the standard norm. This results in constraining feminist critical thought and reducing it to patriarchal presuppositions.
As opposed to this one-way theoretical street, de Lauretis defends the idea of 'technology' of subjectivity, explicitly referring to Foucault. De Lauretis sees in the Foucauldian method a way of unravelling 'the mutual containment of gender and sexual difference',150 by putting forward the notion of gender as a form of representation, that is to say, as the effect of various social technologies of power and knowledge. De Lauretis immediately clarifies her position:
To think of gender as the product and the process of a number of social technologies, of techno-social or bio-medical apparatuses, is to have already gone beyond Foucault, for his critical understanding of the technology of sex did not take into account its different solicitation of male and female subjects, and by ignoring the conflicting investments of men and women in the discourses and practices of sexuality, Foucault's theory in fact excludes, though it does not preclude, the consideration of gender.151
De Lauretis sees gender as 'the representation of a relation, that of belonging to a class, a group, a category'.152 Just like Haraway, de Lauretis defines the social field as a system of semiotic and material representations that construct gender relations as one of the terms in the process. The notion of Woman', as the idealized projection of male expectations, is the ideologically dominant form of representation to which)women are subjected. De Lauretis, however, argues that the production of gender goes on also within feminist theory, thus concluding that 'we cannot resolve or dispel the uncomfortable condition of being at once inside and outside gender either by desexualizing it (making gender a metaphor, a question of 'difference', of purely discursive effects) or by androgynizing it (claiming the same experience
of material conditions for both genders in a given class, race, or culture)'; de Lauretis stresses the potentially conservative impact of the notion of sexual difference as limiting all differences to the sexual, that is, to the difference between men and women. Relying nevertheless on the work of French theorists Althusser and Foucault, de Lauretis warns against the anti-feminist effects of generalized theories of difference, while holding onto some of the main tenets of post-structuralist thought.
The latter is to be understood, in this context, as the definition of the subject as a simultaneously semiotic and material agent. This raises the possibility and even the desirability of a revision of what it means to be a knowing subject, and it leads to accepting that differences - differences between the sexes, differences among men and women, and differences within the self - are a fundamental category of thought. It is in this respect that the feminists I have pointed out in this section seem to me to have invented, and produced collectively, one of the most exciting chapters of contemporary theory.
It is in this sense that I have defended radical feminist thought as being a new form of critical theory. By critical theory, I do not mean the classical understanding of the term153, but rather the new inflexion given to it by the theorists who take the idea of sexual difference seriously.
The question now is, have they been heard?
Conclusion
In three millennia's time, the well-hidden oil would spring from this sand: the present was opening up gigantic prospects for a new present. Meanwhile, I was living with the silence of all that, three millennia from now, eroded and rebuilt, would become once again staircases, people and buildings. I was living the prehistory of a future. Like a woman who has never had children, but will have them three millennia from now, I was living today off the oil that will spring in three millennia's time. Lispector1
Six Memos for the Next Millennium:
1	Lightness
2	Quickness
3	Exactitude
4	Visibility
5	Multiplicity
6	Consistency Calvino2
The theoretical input of the feminist philosophers I have been defending as critical theorists of sexual difference has obviously not been heard. Not only is it a fact, as I argued in the first half of this work, that the masters of post-structuralism do not pay any serious attention to the texts of the feminist theorists in general and especially of the poststructuralists, but they also perpetuate the ancient mental habit that consists in metaphorizing and therefore de-sexualizing, if not disembodying, theoretical practice. Through such hasty de-sexualizations or de-constructions of subjectivity, they end up undermining the very theoretical foundations of feminism. As a counter-point, I hope to have shown in the last few chapters the breadth and depth of the feminist work in the field of contemporary philosophy, and to have pointed out the ways in which it both pursues and, in some cases, goes beyond the insight of the post-structuralists, by taking notions such as embodiment and sexual difference rigorously.
In my estimate, the post-poststructuralist intellectual climate is, if anything, even less open to and aware of the relevance and theoretical interest of the feminist work on sexual difference. As an example let me quote a few significant cases: Francois Laruelle in Les philosophies de la difference3 provides a broad and extremely well-documented overview of French theories of difference: not a single reference is made to the specific elaboration of difference from within the feminist tradition. Every single aspect of the idea of 'difference' is minutely analysed, but the fact of the differences between the sexes is simply not given any signification and thus is not taken into account. Closer to the English-speaking world, Charles E. Scott in The Language of Difference4 faithfully analyses the evolution and the implications of the thought of Deleuze and Derrida, paying all due attention to the Heideggerian and Nietz-schean roots of their problematic: not a single reference is made to the work of female theorists, let alone to the existence of a field known as feminist theory.
Manfred Frank, in Qu'est-ce que le neo-structuralisme5 presents in a series of highly articulate lessons the basic principles of what I would call post- (and not 'neo') structuralism: no reference to a single woman theorist; no mention of feminism; no serious development of the variable of sexual difference. As far as sexual difference is concerned, the greatest classicism reigns in the post-poststructuralist mind. Closer to home, Peter Dews in Logics of Disintegration6, an interesting crossreading of the French and German traditions, deserves an honourable mention by referring to two women: Jessica Benjamin and the Italian historian Gianna Pomata. Although the former is only quoted in terms of her work on the family, the fact of her being mentioned at all acquires the status of a small event, considering the systematic oblivion to which women theorists are confined. The top prize must go, however, to Hal Foster who, in The Anti-Aesthetics7 not only raises the issue of feminism, but allows a feminist woman, Alice Jardine, to write on the issue. This approach constitutes a unique event and it remains unmatched, for the time being.
And yet women do think. Think they do and think they have from time immemorial. Since the advent of feminism they not only think, but also think about what they are thinking; in other words they theorize, in the meta-discursive way that Jane Flax defends as being also the specific style of postmodernist philosophy. When one reads the male poststructuralist corpus alongside the female feminist one, however, one cannot help being struck by the asymmetrical position of the two. The asymmetry is clear on several levels: to begin with, the feminist texts refer to and explicitly comment upon the post-structuralist philosophical ideas. The sheer wealth of publications by feminists is evidence enough of the women's awareness of and interest in this movement of thought. The male texts, however, either ignore or minimize the importance of the feminist theoretical work.8
The corpus of feminist theory shows that women have taken into account very seriously the crisis of metaphysics and some have also learnt the lesson of post-structuralism. Evidence of reciprocity on this point, however, is scarce: male theorists have, with a few exceptions, failed to take feminist theory into account in their assessment of the crisis of modernity. Asymmetry here signifies lack of reciprocity in recognizing each other's theoretical intelligence.
This asymmetry, however, also takes on a more conceptual sense. I started off this work by asking: what exactly is modern about us? In the various readings I proposed of the thought of modernity I emphasized respectively the nihilistic, apocalyptic tendencies of some, the feminization-trend followed by others, and the general emphasis being placed on the embodied nature of the subject. I raised serious questions about the seeming 'coincidence' between the discourse of the crisis and the emergence of both the feminization trend and a strong feminist theoretical tradition.
Following the latter, I hope to have shown that one cannot ask the question of the crisis of modernity without raising the issue of sexual difference, or of gender. Modernity and sexual difference contain each other as two sides of the same coin. The female feminist subjects of the historical era of post-metaphysical uncertainty are the subjects of enunciation of the question of sexual difference.
This point, which I see as central to feminist theory, does not however receive nearly enough attention in contemporary philosophical deconstructions, critiques and reconstructions of the knowing subject. Although I have been defending right through this work the new bodily materialism of the Foucauldian-Deleuzian tradition, as opposed to the disembodied deconstructivism of Derrida, as providing useful theoretical tools for feminist reflection, I have also been arguing for a fundamental lack of symmetry between the mainstream and the feminist readings of the crisis of modernity. Whereas for the former the 'crisis' stands for loss and decline, for the feminists it marks the opening-out of unexplored possibilities.
The melancholia of the former contrasts sharply with the energy and vision of the latter. This difference of approach, coupled with the fact that the feminist theorists know and comment upon mainstream poststructuralist thought, while the latter ignores and misrepresents their works, produces two very different intellectual styles.
Thus, I agree with de Lauretis's statement that 'Feminism differs from philosophical antihumanism in that it remains very much a politics of everyday life.'9 I also think, however, that feminist epistemology preposes a radically different vision of subjectivity as embodied, sexually differentiated, multiple and relational. In more general terms, whereas the decline of the Enlightenment ideals may appear to mainstream philosophy as a crisis of values, it is rather perceived by some feminist
theoreticians as the starting point for a new conceptual and political scheme of thought.
In the work cited earlier, Nostalgia and Sexual Difference, Doane and Hodges defend the interconnections between feminism and postmodernism while they criticize the nostalgic, regressive tendencies of a great deal of contemporary thought. Although they do see a great deal of the French theories of difference as proposing yet more stereotypical representations of Woman, they rely on de Lauretis's critiques of difference to revitalize the political and conceptual potential of this notion.
Thus, although feminism and post-structuralism are contemporaries on the scene of knowledge, they differ considerably. I have chosen the term 'dissonance' to refer to the diverging routes that these two currents of thought have taken, while they moved towards the seemingly common goal of redefining the subject. The anguished quest for a redefinition of the knowing subject tends to get mixed up with issues surrounding male identity in this end-of-century and end-of-millennium. The same queries receive quite a different treatment in a feminist framework. The answer to the question 'What are we in the process of becoming?' is, as N. Miller puts it, 'I hope we are becoming feminists'10, or rather, female feminist subjects. Subject of an other his/her-story.
Dissonance. Radical a-symmetry between the sexes. Considering how they differ about their respective differences, how shall mainstream and feminist theories of subjectivity ever be reconciled?
A New Nomadism
In Speculum I wrote that in order to re-establish a political ethics, a double dialectic was necessary: one dialectic for the masculine subject, and one for the feminine. Today I would say that a triple dialectic is needed: the masculine subjects', the feminine's, and that of their relations as a couple or in community. Irigaray11
Feminist interventions in philosophy have untied the knot that used to bind together rationality and domination in a vision of consciousness where differences were conceived in a hierarchical scale. In their critiques, feminists have evolved towards a non-dialectical view of alterity, affirming positive differences so as to posit new parameters for the definition of female subjectivity. The examples of philosophical thought by women that I have presented show that feminist thought is after neither systematization nor orthodoxy. Its aim is not a grand final synthesis in which feminism and philosophy, reconciled at last, will live
together happily ever after. And so I shall not conclude this study with a theoretical happy ending.
Feminism thus defined has become a form of resistance to the One, against the vision of subjectivity that posits rationality as the dominant mode, in favour of the multiple, the plurality and multiplicity of women's discourse. I would want to argue that, while feminism is an extremely important reasoned critique of rationality, it is not just trying to establish philosophical counter-categories. What is at stake seems to me a complete redefinition of what it means to think, and how thought relates to theoretical reason.
The best way to show the profoundly ethical passion underlying feminist thought is to look carefully at the intellectual style it defends. Although the actual propositional content of the feminist critiques of philosophy is very high, I would like to emphasize the specific style, or tone of voice, that these women have invented. I would like to suggest that it is a new kind of nomadism, or a set of interrelated 'situated knowledges'.
Instead of developing reactive patterns, or ways of thinking against reason, against univocal meaning, a certain number of feminist theorists have developed ideas which enable them to undermine the fundamentally aggressive model of thought at work in phallologocentric structures.
We saw earlier that the radical feminist critique of logocentrism stresses not only its complicity with violence, but also the genderized nature of the latter: rationality, masculinity and war work together, also and especially in the philosophical field. According to this critique, philosophy defends an image of thought where rationality is like a besieged fortress that must be defended by a tactical arsenal of well-armed arguments so as to mark very clear frontiers in the domain of thought and to keep up boundaries or distinctions that function as frames of self-legitimation.
Philosophy has managed to disguise its inherent disciplinary violence by upholding a specific image of the human subject as a conscious, rational, self-transparent entity. The instigation of rationality as the founding myth of Western philosophy and regulating principle of human affairs entails this process of abstraction of violence. Philosophy, while playing a juridico-normative role, both disguises the power it exercises and makes it omnipresent. It is by pushing abstraction into violence, and thus diffusing it, that philosophy has played a fundamental role in the perpetuation of the hegemonic model of thought and human consciousness that is applied to many other theoretical disciplines. It has also fuelled so many real and symbolic disqualifications and murders of the many 'others' of reason, the memory of which is mixed with the origins of our 'rational' culture.
Modernity is the age in which philosophy has been made accountable for its role of hegemonic and dominating discourse. As soon as the
image of thought implicitly defended by philosophical reason comes under attack, it is possible to condemn philosophy's process of abstraction as a manoeuvre hiding the violence inherent in the discipline of philosophy, and perpetuated by it.
The philosophers who emphasize this violent exercise of reason and try to free theoretical thought from these despotic bonds are the post-Nietzschean demystifiers in whose footsteps the post-structuralists operate. As I have been arguing all along, their approach differs considerably from that proposed by many feminist theoreticians. While inscribing themselves in a more general movement of critique of rational violence, women have added a specific gender inflection, stressing the masculinity of this violence. Violence is a constant of power determined in function of three variables: the monetary, the military, and the masculine. All violence is sexed, that is to say, it reflects a power-system dominated by male subjects; this is also reflected on the discursive level. According to this view, violence is the protective enclosure of rationality, which can only impose itself by processes of exclusion and denial. Violent reason. Reasonable violence.
And so it seems inevitable that a feminist reading of the grand narrative of rationality should be articulated around its constitutive nucleus: the nucleus linking violence to the exercise of reason, in order to produce the juridico-discursive modalities necessary to the management of human society and its political and cultural order.
If we recognize this link, it becomes possible to explain, amongst other things, why many feminists have fallen out with the practice of philosophy and why they still have difficulty reconciling themselves to it. In the face of the great philosophical texts a feminist is in effect inevitably confronted by the logic of a system of domination which is exercised first and foremost on her own sense of self, on her embodied self. If there are still so few women philosophers it is also because this discipline, so deeply foreign, if not hostile, to the feminine, is the condensation and crystallization of mechanisms of disqualification that are central to the phenomenon of oppression.
As radical alternative to all this, the image of thought that these feminists give is that of ideas as ruses and mobile, specific strategies, which are resistant to systematization, detached from the subtext of war and conquest that sustains the classical philosophical discourse. Women embark on both a reading of the classical narrative of philosophy and a labour of constant creation, in order to develop multiple, transverse ways of thinking women's becoming.
The feminist theorists I have been defending here have developed patterns of thought that throw open new routes for reflection and enable us to escape from global syntheses and doctrinaire ideologies alike. They explode the mirage of the royal road to Revolution, or to Liberation; consequently, they do not conceptualize the feminist position as that of the 'guerrillera' fighting a holy war. In so doing, they
restore to discursive practice and to thought a freedom of movement and a vital power such as they have rarely known; they give back to ideas their freedom of movement, their vital force, and their beauty besides.
As Kate Millett has said, the idea of revolutionary armed violence rests on the notion that there are two sorts of being in the world: them and us; and between the two, a battlefield. Transformations or change are not possible, unless the vicious circle of dialectical violence is completely broken. The condemnation of the matrix of blood and terror which feeds the discursive and warrior function, and links them to masculine supremacy, is one of the central feminist axes of critique of power as knowledge and the material force of seemingly abstract idea. That the discursive field be traversed by the same paradigms of power as the battlefield is a truth that most women have experienced, at their own expense.
When compared to all this, one aspect of contemporary feminist reflection which I find particularly striking is the element of risk that these thinkers introduce into intellectual activity. Theirs is a more daring, risky form of intelligence; their approach to enunciation and to discursive practice is freer and more disrespectful than the established norms. Veritable adventuresses into the field of theory - as I have described them, they reveal remarkable acrobatic talents as they trace mental routes across the void, without falling victim to gravity.
In fact it seems to me that through their discursive and political practice, many feminists imply that thought is not a matter of theory, but rather a way of being. It is a mode of existence which expresses the human being's creative, positive power. Therefore if thought is viewed as expressing the highest form of intensity and thus asserting the vital power of the subject, it follows that any attempt to alienate thought from this creative force, to submit the activity of thought to negative impulses, constitutes, for the post-structuralist feminists, a mutilation of the human spirit. Here we rediscover Deleuze's Spinozan message: thought must be put to the service of creation, of liberty, against the phantoms of negativity. Therefore philosophy ought to strive to think life on a higher level of creative activity. This presupposes a resistance to the doctrinaire tendencies implicit in 'theory', and the rejection of the hegemonic model of intellection.
As a result, criticism - the 'reactive' moment of reading and textual commentary - and creation - the 'active' moment of production - are inextricably linked, and finally reconciled. The distinction between the two genres disappears and it becomes impossible to say where fiction starts and 'pure theory' stops. It is in this sense that this feminist reflection restores the aesthetic value of thought, restores its beauty: the category boundaries crumble away and writing and thought are conjugated together in a new relational mode.
The theoretical style of these feminist redefinitions of the knowing
subject expresses and supports the central notion that a new image both of knowledge as power and of subjectivity has become historically necessary. This new image does not, however, work in a unitary, one-way sense. On the contrary: by proposing that 'we are one', feminist women present themselves on the discursive level as a plural subject, a general category, multiple in its very singularity. What is at stake in feminist reflection is less to redefine a 'new' feminine subjectivity, an alternative set of images of women, than to make it possible by creating the very conditions of its possibility. In its socio-political programmes and in its discourse, feminist thought opens up possible trajectories, while positing their dependence on the collective efforts of women themselves.
As T. de Lauretis puts it: 'What is emerging in feminist writings is ... the concept of a multiple, shifting, and often self-contradictory identity, a subject that is not divided in, but rather at odds with language; an identity made up of heterogeneous and heteronomous representations of gender, race and class, and often indeed across languages and cultures; an identity that one decides to reclaim from a history of multiple assimilations, and that one insists on as a strategy.'12 This redefinition of the subject implies and develops the implications of the gendered nature of subjectivity.
To formulate a new feminine essence, even a revolutionary one, through a series of algebraic equations between attribute and substance, cause and effect, surface and depth, appearance and being, alterity and negativity, would be neither necessary nor sufficient to the task of making women's theoretical intelligence emerge and thus of strengthening feminism's philosophical contribution. The new subjectivity will be one of interconnected nomadism.
As I have argued,13 the starting point for this redefinition of the female feminist subject is the notion of the asymmetry between the sexes, which results in the political and epistemological project of asserting difference in a non-hierarchical manner, refusing to disembody and therefore to desexualize the vision of the subject. The question then becomes: how to reconcile the recognition of the problematic nature of the construction of subjectivity with the political necessity of asserting women as the subjects of another story?
In outlining some of the solutions that feminist theorists propose to this query, that I see as coextensive with the question of philosophical modernity, I have been arguing that what is at stake in the feminist project is to rethink the unity of the subject at a time in history when the rationalistic naturalistic certainty has been lost. In this respect the new insight feminists have brought to our collective understanding of the notion of 'materialism' seems to me an essential contribution to the post-Marxist debate on the reintegration of mind and body, history and the unconscious, in a discontinuous pattern of unity. As in postmodernism, the conceptual challenge consists in upholding the idea of the
subject as a dazzling collection of integrated fragments, while also defending the specificity of the female subject as a theoretical, libidinal, ethical and political agent.
Defined in these terms, the notion of sexual difference as marking a profound lack of symmetry between the sexes emphasizes the ethical passions of the feminist project. It raises the question of women in terms of the transformations and values that they can bring to a culture in crisis. It stresses the paradox of implication and exteriority of women with regard to the phallologocentric structures that they are fighting, thus emphasizing the complex question of women's involvement and even complicity with a system which actively discriminates against them.
By defending female feminist specificity in terms of a new, relational mode of thought, feminism is seeking reconnection while accepting non-complementarity and multiplicity. In revalorizing the lived experience and the embodied nature of the subject it gives a positive value to the embodied self as a material-symbolic agent of change.
The body as site of interaction of material and symbolic forces is the threshold of subjectivity; it is not a biological notion, but marks, rather, the non-coincidence of the subject with his/her consciousness and the non-coincidence of anatomy with sexuality. Seen in this light, the body, far from being an essentialist notion, is situated at the intersection of the biological and the symbolic; as such it marks a metaphysical surface of integrated material and symbolic elements that defy separation.
The most striking aspect of the asymmetrical relationship existing between feminism and post-structuralist thought is the way in which the former is actively seeking a redefinition of the community bond, and consequently the heterosexual social contract, as opposed to the mole-cularization and the exacerbated individualism of the latter. In the previous chapter I pointed out on several occasions the theoretical efforts women are putting into a redefinition of the terms of the heterosexual contract. However critical their assessment of this may be, the sheer fact that they are rethinking it is significant as an expression of the longterm feminist goals.
No such reconnection is being sought in post-structuralist thought, at least not along the genderized lines that would take seriously the need for a new heterosexual social contract, so as to develop its political and ethical implications. The notion of the 'community' has radically different implications in the two traditions of thought. Without falling into facile celebrations of the ways in which women are 'man's future', I would like to emphasize the quest for reconnection as a major feminist theme, the scale and generosity of which contrast with the melancholic disaggregated universe depicted by the masters of post-structuralism.
This is why I thought it appropriate to conclude this study with the juxtaposition, side by side, of the two visions of the future upheld respectively by Clarice Lispector and Italo Calvino quoted at the
beginning of this chapter. All other differences left aside, there is a visionary, life-giving force in Lispector, which could be described as the blueprint of 'a new present', a new civilization the a priori conditions for which are being laid down today. By comparison, the perfectly post-Euclidian universe of Calvino strikes me as being already beyond any quest for a new community: it is as if that particular question had to be left behind in order to gain access to the multiplicity, speed and lightness of the postmodern subjectivity.
While resisting the identification of multiplicity with disaggregation and molecularization of the self, as in the nihilistic reading of modernity that I criticized earlier on, the temptation is strong to assimilate this loss of a community bond and of relatedness to the male death-drive, following the analysis of feminist psychoanalysts such as J. Benjamin. It would be tempting indeed to conclude by stressing that the male death-wish is proving to be the greatest enemy of today's civilization, and that by comparison with this destructive drive, feminism is shaping up as the one possible new ethical system of postmodernism.
That shall not, however, be said. Not until feminism has proved its ethical passions and their constructive nature. Not until new forms of connections are negotiated in social and political terms. Until we take the time to implement these changes, history will continue its one-way race. Until changes are beginning to become apparent on a collective scale, I shall not abandon myself to lyrical celebrations of female positivity. In keeping with the rigour of the feminist defence of sexual difference, I maintain that this positivity needs to be constructed and enacted, and that such a project is the historical task of the female feminist subjects. As long as the positive empowerment of difference remains unaccomplished, utopias are mere commonplaces.
Till then, I shall leave the readers with a different image, drawn from Calvino's wonderful depiction of our 'post-post-post-post... ist' condition. In the chapter called 'Lightness', Calvino draws a new cartography for change and transformation. Describing lightness through the metaphor of metamorphosis, that is to say, the speed of change, Calvino defines it as the multiple force of all living beings, capable of never-ending shifts, adaptations and connectedness, like a semiotic fluid that webs together our multi-layered context.
In his quest for an image to describe our modern predicament, the author goes back to Boccaccio's portrait of the Italian Renaissance poet-philosopher Cavalcanti. This homo universalis is described as meditating quietly while walking among the ruins of his day's 'past civilization'. Suddenly, he gets attacked by a gang of the Renaissance equivalent of young punks who make fun of his seriousness, his meditative habits, the intensity of his thinking. Riding their nervous horses, much as their modern equivalents would roar the engines of their Hondas, they threaten the poet-philosopher physically.
Stop for one minute and put the feminist thinker in his place: it is the
perfect scenario for a rape of the material and symbolic kind. How does Cavalcanti, that is to say Boccaccio, that is to say Calvino, however, get out of this spot? By gently leaning on one of the ruins lying near-by, the thinker jumps ever so lightly over to the other side of the fence, disappearing ever so lightly around the corner, leaving his interlocutors aghast. Ever so lightly, the unbearable lightness of his or her being contrasts with the noisy vulgarity of the everyday violence of the times, of all times.
I am deeply struck by the mixture of elegance and basic strategy with which the thinker confronts the challenges and difficulties of his times. I would like to translate this image into feminist terms and formulate a hope that is also a programme: I hope that we, the post-structuralist generation of female feminists, can just as easily make the transition towards the new. Maybe we did not have a Renaissance, but I hope we make it through to the next millennium. I hope we will be able to netotiate the change in speed that such a jump would require, while coping with the challenges of our changing times. In the post-humanist era of dissolving subjectivities and crumbling certainties I hope that we, the female feminist subjects, assert the positivity of the difference that feminism makes, while recognizing the fragility of what is commonly called 'civilization'; a network of multiply-differentiated and therefore interrelating subjects, functioning on a consensual basis.
I hope we can reconcile the lightness of the new era with the heaviness of a female genealogy which produces the uncomfortable awareness that, however molecular, this is still a man's world. I hope we shall be able to think multiplicity and lightness, speed and difference but also to carry the burden of our luggage: on the one hand the historical memory of oppression, on the other the weight of feminist epistemology, feminist ethics, feminist politics. Most of all, I hope the female feminists can carry this historical burden and still make the conceptual jump to the next millennium. Like the acrobats we have had to become, may we jump long and jump high, and still land on our own two feet.