Medializing the generic. A path out of the technological and economical excesses in contemporary architecture. A book on research and education in architecture and information technology, conceived of as philosophical interplay between two species similar in kind: neither of them is in the least disciplinal, both affect everything, and both are arts of structuring.The one 2,500 years old and dignified, the other just fifty years of age and impatient.
Eidgenössische Technische Hochschule Zürich Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Zurich
This book shifts the frame of reference for today’s network- and structure-oriented discussions from the applied computational tools of the twentieth century back to the abstractness of nineteenth-century mathematics. It rereads George Boole, Richard Dedekind, Hermann Grassmann, and Bernhard Riemann in a surprising manner. EigenArchitecture argues for a literacy of the digital, displacing the role of geometrical craftsmanship.
The book comprises a programmatic text on the role of technology in architecture, a philosophical text on the generic and on algebraic articulation, and seven exemplary projects by postgraduate students in 2012 at the Chair for Computer Aided Architectural Design at ETH Zurich, Switzerland.
ISSN 2196-3118 ISBN 978-3-99043-626-4
9
783990 436264
ambra- verlag .at
>m
ZD
0»
<r
me
>o
mm
o*
II
i<
iüj
z>
o
H
ou>
°2
mö
7) <
ma
coh
c
>
H
<
©
APPLIED VIRTUALITY BOOK SERIES
EDITORS
LUDGER HOVESTADT ANDVERA BÜHLMANN
Eigen
Architecture
Computability
007 LUDGER HOVESTADT
Cultivating the generic
OIO MIRO ROMAN
FOUR CHAIRS AND ALL THE OTHERS
028 STANISLAVA PREDOJEVIC
HARD-BOILED WORLD WIDE WEB AND THE END OF DISTANCE
042 EKATERINA AGEEVA
HYBRIDITY AS AN URBAN SPECULATION
MELINA MEZARI AND 072 STELIOS PSALTIS
GENERIC
VILLA
058 BOJANA MISKELJIN
EIGENWINDOW AS A
REFLECTION OF SINGAPOREANS’ CULTURAL DIVERSITY
088 DIANA ALVAREZ
EXILED TO THE VIRTUAL WORLD OR THE INCONSISTENCY OF THE REAL
069 VERA BÜHLMANN
Articulating a thing entirely in its own terms
108 MAURICIO RODRIGUEZ
A HOUSE OF THINGS
(y) AMBRA |V
9783990436264
APPLIED VIRTUALITY BOOK SERIES
EDITORS
LUDGER HOVESTADT AND VERA BÜHLMANN
Eigen
Architecture
Computability as Literacy
AMBRA |v
Ludger Hovestadt
Cultivating the generic
A mathematically inspired pathway for architects
007
009	The Selection, the Body, the Play
009 Introduction
009 ON EDUCATION IN ARCHITECTURE AND COMPUTING 009 This Book
009	On Tradition and Architectural Education
010	The Beauty of Information Technology
010	Howto Read This Text Oil ARCHITECTURAL MACHINES
011	Everybody an Expert. 1948: Cybernetics
014	1989: From Expansion to Connectivity
016 THE GENERIC ANDTHE DEADLOCK
018	The Skeleton
019	SOCIAL MEDIA 021 ABOUTTHEORY
024	ABOUT MASTERSHIP
025	ABOUT LEARNING
026	THE CENTERED VOID
027	CULTIVATING THE PARADOX
028	WHERE WE ARE TODAY 028 Dialectics
030	Structuralism
031	Post-Structuralism 032 TYRANNICAL NATURES
034 Grasshopper
036 Processing and Logo
038 More...
039 The Body
039 OSCILLATIONS
041	THE NAME, 3RD C. BCE—(N)C
041 THE WORD, 3RD C. CE—(C)N
041	THE PROJECT, 16TH C.—(N)C
042	PROJECTIVITY OR THE CENTERED VOID, 17TH C.—(N)C
043	PRODUCT OR SYSTEM, 18TH C.—(C)N
044	PRODUCTIVITY, 19TH C.—(C)N
045	THE ARTICLE, 20TH C.—(N)C
048	It’s Not Simple
049	Objective Knowledge 052 QUANTUM, 20TH C.—(N)C
052 The Double-Slit Experiment
and the Dimensionality of Time
055	INFRASTRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONALISM 055 Shape Grammars
055	Parametrism
056	The Play
056 SELF-FICTITIOUS THINGS OF RATIONAL TALKS, 19TH C.
056	PCA, the Eigenvector, or Who Am I?
056 Matrix, or How to Talk?
058	Riemann, or What to Look Like?
059 EVOCATIVE TALK OF FICTITIOUS THINGS, 20TH C.
059	Morphogenesis
065	Markov
066	Self-Organizing Map
1 Vitruvius, The Ten Books on Architecture, trans. Morris Hickey Morgan (New York: Dover, 1960), bk. 1, chaps. 1-3, pp.5-17.
The Selection, the Body, the Play
On education, architectural machines, the generic and the deadlock, social media, about theory, about mastership, about learning, the centered void, cultivating the paradox, where we are today, oscillations, the name, the word, the project, projectivity, the product, productivity, the article, the guantum, infrastructures and functionalism, eigen-vector, matrix, Riemann,Turing, morphogenesis, simulation, brain, chaos, Markov, self-organizing map.
Introduction
ON EDUCATION IN ARCHITECTURE AND COMPUTING This Book
This is a book about research and education in architecture and information technology—an interplay between two species similar in kind, neither of them being in the least disciplinal: both affect everything, both are arts of gathering things. The one, 2,500 years old and dignified, and the other, just fifty years of age and impatient. You will acguaint yourself with that interplay at our chair at the department of architecture at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH Zurich. While we teach both the bachelor and master curricula here, the one most interesting, challenging, and of particular promise is our post-graduate program, a Master of Advanced Studies in Architecture and Information—a full-time one-year class of about sixteen students. We embarked upon this program in 2000.Thusthis book introduces it, and presentsthe research completed by the class of 2012.
Overthe pasttwelve years, we looked intoa broad array of IT applications, and ways of using it in architecture. We were scanning for new ideas of what might be done, being always already curious for the next thing. We were impatient, fast, and did not concentrate much on any particular application, nortake any to maturity. That was lefttoseveral spin-off companies. In-house we were constantly given to roaming this wide new field of research—explorations summed up in Beyond the Grid: Architecture and Information Technology; Applications of a Digital Architectonic (Hovestadt, 2009).
About five years ago, we ran into a substantial problem: everybody had begun using computers.The wide and open field was increasingly getting populated. Since the advent of social networks in particular, everybody was now feeling an expert, and our comprehensive and fundamental work guickly found itself out of date, and engulfed in a flood of rough and easy sketches. While the past had been about comfortably explaining to an interested few how computers might work for architecture, we abruptly ended up exhaustingly expounding to the uninterested many that were busy with computing in architecture that there were much better ways of doing things than the ones they stuck to. Very unsatistactory. Many ot my colleagues escaped into highly specialized research in far-off lands. As for us, we chose to go into abstraction, into thinking about the principles of architecture and those of information technology.
This book now presents that new complexion of our outfit, and a harvest of the first promising results by our students.
On Tradition and Architectural Education
In a disciplinary world compartmentalized into education and research, we do often torget what architecture is about.Therefore it may be well to recall—disregarding it is a cliche-that, according to Vitruvius, architecture’s foremost reference, the well-educated architect should be “skilful with the pencil, instructed in geometry, know much history, have followed the philosophers with attention, understand music, have some knowledge of medicine, know the opinions of the jurists, and be familiar with astronomy and the theory of the heavens.” And even as it is not possible for an architect to bean expert in all these various disciplines, it is nevertheless desirable that he or she be acguainted with them all; for all these studies “have a common bond of union and intercourse with one another,” and “a liberal education forms, as it were, a single body made up of these members.”1 Today, an architect will find it difficult not to be treated as an expert, and to escape disciplinarity. And yet, architecture is, along with philosophy, one of the very few professions that were never disciplinal ... are there any others? It is worth remembering that today’s disciplines, along with the experts, made their appearance in the nineteenth century. And that, ever since, experts always know better. Lest they be no experts. They are great knowers of whatever is around. But do they know where to go? Arethey capable of engendering universal bodies ofthinking (BoTs)? Not bodies inthe congealed sense of “corpus,” but universal bodies that are alive, guick, and motional?
The Beauty of Information Technology
Computers seem to be as universal as architecture, at least as long as they are thought of as abstract machines. But if, due to an improper notion of abstraction, they are pen ceived as mere—albeit fast—machines, they are frightening, having by now become superfast: just listen, e. g., to Paul Viril io in his War and Cinema (1989), Speed and Politics (1986), or The information Bomb (2000), and you cannot help get scared. Or to Jean Baud ri I lard in Carnival and Cannibal, or the Play of Global Antagonisms (2010), or asking Why Hasn’t E very thing Already Disappeared? (2009). Why not, i nd eed ? Try i ng t o s I o w t he m down? Not a chance. Isthat a satisfying scenario, one we'd want to play in? Or are we, conversely, not so much scared as fascinated by the power of computers as machines (i.e. not as abstract machines) and desirous to use that power for our projects? Then we are in for trouble: from resources, and from rnachinically driven competition by projects of the same kind. Once more there will be serious struggles about scarcities on a planet grown too small for us. How then to overcome such deadlock as seemingly beset sour ways with cornputers?The simple answer is: by discovering that the beauty of computers lies precisely in their being not just machines. They are abstract machines. As architects, as masters of architectonics, i.e. the art of putting things together, we therefore ask: What then are these new things, these computers, like? How are t hey t al k i ng t o one anot he r? H ow are they talking to us?
MIRO ROMAN
How to Read This Text
This text is fast, sketchy, and a bit intricate. However, we find it suitable to communicate our ideas in this form, today, rather than to shelve them until some fully fledged book, possibly a few years hence. Yet, sketchiness does not mean simplification, or stripping the topic; rather than being exhaustive, we mean to convey a reasonably complete overview of what—from our vantage point today—the future of architecture and information technology might look like. The text should be both challenging and promising, It does not lend itself to being "understood" in a classical sense, nor is it, in that sense, "consistent," It lacks an explicitly coherent storyline. It is not a detailed analysis. And what might surprise: it is not, in the traditional sense, an authority-claiming doctrine ortheory. It does not adduce other texts. All that would prove inadequately slow for its scope. The text does not explain, does not follow a solid historical line. But it does try to be a masterly articulated house of indexes. It is a contemporary piece of architecture-curn-philosophy, If you enter it, be welcome!
Read the text Sudoku-fash ion. In the beg i nn i ng, t he re wi 11 be f e w a nch o r po i nts f o r you t o u nd erst and. T he re w i 11 be a fie Id of interdependent indexes. But that, we promise, will provide you some stability in the overwhelming amount of data around. Much better than solid in-depth analysis might do. You will comprehend much of the specific power of symbolic algebra, and its bearing. The power and speed that information technology is made of, It is super-abstract. This text is an evocative
FOUR CHAIRS AND ALL THE OTHERS
A THREE-DIMENSIONAL NARRATIVE
The EigenChair project ponders strategies and concepts of designing by using i n format ion tec h nolog ies. What are t he potent ialsofdata-dr iven des ig n ? How canwethinkaboutobjectsoncetheir materiality isd iff used into indexical sets of datathat need to be articulated in ordertotake on a manifest reality? How ca n we engage wit h object s once their mod els ta ke an abstract ly mod u I ar for m that is open for infinite manipulation and endowmentwith capacities? For such an understanding of design, the emphasis is no longer on the creation of physical objects, buton conceiving meta-objects in the possibility space of abstract symbolicforms,andinplacingthemwithin narratives.Furthermore,data-driven design enables usto manipulate an abstract object’s “resolution” rendered as an entire population of its instances. We no longer have to deal with one ideal objectthat isthought to represent, as pure typicality, itsown original specificity. Yet howdo we get such systems of abstraction to relate tothe real world? Information technologies have opened up a number of new ways of thinking about the world and the object, and these novel ways of thinking have by far surpassedtheformallysimplified or parodied manner of expression in modern and postmodern design and architecture. Based on the intellectual heritage of history and culture in its symbolic richness, design by information technologies can exploreatwenty-first-century notion of the object by instigating new circulations within this intellectual heritage, and by accumulating newways of animating the “building blocks” of that with which we have grown familiar as a stale and common basis in the past.
talk. Therefore it is abstaining from reasoned judgments seeking consensus. It lays no cl aims to what ever truths, But you rnayfind following its indexes attractive, as pointers into the wide world of architecture, philosophy, and information technologies. It tries to make you sense the beauty of a certain BoT.
If you are out for something similar in scope and gesture but with more detail, try the 2,000 or so pages of Eric MoegeWn's Order and History, or, if you are looking for maximum contrast, the 1,500 pages of Manuel Castell's The Information Age.
ARCHITECTURAL MACHINES
Everybody an Expert. 1948: Cybernetics
Let us start by indexing computing's origin around the end of World War II, e.g., Norbert Wiener's Cybernetics: or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine (1948) or C laude Shannon's A Mathematical Theory of Communication (1948), There was cybernetics, claimed to be the "study of systems, such as mechanical, physical, biological, cognitive, and social systems," as by the MACY conferences, intended to lay the foundations for a general science of the workings of the human mind (1946-53), or as
per Norbert Wiener, God A. Golem, Inc,: A Commenton Certain Points Where Cybernetics Impinges on Religion (1963); or, escalating it a bit, by offerings with slightly uninhibited names such as World-Systems Analysis (Immanuel Wallerstein, 1987). There was alsothe military defense system called Semi-Automatic Ground Environment (SAGE, 1958), as the first network, and its civilian successor or counterpart ARPANET (1969), opening up ontothe Internet, which in turn hoststheWWW(I990)today ... All this may be read up on elsewhere. We especially suggest a look at Lutz Darnrnbeck's film Das Netz (2004), about the origin of the Internet, andthestory of Theodore ("Ted") John Kaczynski, the so-called Unabornber, infamous, and one of the film's lead protagonists.
To us architects, it may seem of interest to confront two contrasting attitudes taken vis-a-vis these developments, On the one side there is, e.g,, Nicholas Negro-ponte's Architecture Machine: Toward a More Human Environment (1973), especially the experiment SEEK, a cybernetic habitat for gerbils, arranged and controlled by a robot through simple feedback loops. That setup's architectural elements are simple blocks, their configuration controlled by simple rules, executed by the robot.The architecture is controlled as both to form and structure, internally and externally. This we
The project Four Chairs and all the others opens up the possibility of an alternative understanding of design. Rather than offering yet another thesis in support of linear design development, itemphasizesdesign’s polysemantic nature by understanding its processes in terms of an open field of possibilities. Design processes not only explore physical limitations of space, but also react to contemporary social and cultural phenomena. In order to explain the idea, specific techniques are used to replace simple design concepts with a series of parallel narratives, thus provoking new and unexpected situations. The primary interest of this project is to explore the intersection of different domains of human insight especially regarding architecture, culture, and information sciences.
EigenChair is a concept that results from the effortto design a chair that continues the genealogical orders of designed chairs, and yet is carrying as a potentiality also all the chairs that might once be created in fhefuture [FIGURES 01,02). EigenChair is not an ideal chai r in the sen se of pureness or prototypicality. Itis rea/fand not ideal in the sense that it has a history, it originates and becomes, it must be regarded in the context of populations of chairsf rom which it evolves, and in the sense that it can be modeled by empirical experimentation by observing and testing). Soitisarea/ chair, and yet it is an abstract chair! The project Four Chairs and all the others - EigenChair invents an i nvestigati ve design process that proceeds by what might best be called “a partial summation of the reality-contents of ideas-as-models.”
The prefix Eigen is commonly used in linear algebra, in compounds such as eigenfunction, eigenstate, eigenvector. It comes from the German word eigen which means “one’s own, proper.” The basic tool for the design of the population of chairs to be investigated in such away—i.e. “all the others"—i s fhe Principa I Component A nal-ys/salgorithm (Abdi and Williams, 2010). It is a standard tool for contemporary data analysis that has been adapted in various applications according to diverse needs,
00« Rendering to reality 3-D printed choir
01	EigenChair seen from an electronic microscope
02	EigenChair in the Vifra Design Museum Gallery
call a tyrannical setup, with no escape. And the gerbils, indeed, died soon of stress, and needed frequent replacement. We shall symbolize this constellation, of an internal necessity embedded in an external necessity, by (N)N,
On the other side, a little left out these days, the pedagogics of Itten, Kandinsky, or Klee, at the Bauhaus in the 1920s, which also uses few elements but opens them up to free negotiation; a constellation of internal necessity embedded in external contingency, to be symbolized by (N)C. We find this combination in the LEGO system (1949)—rather kitsthan system, because system creation happens subsequently based on the kits—or in the first electronic version of a kit, called Lectron by braun | Egger in 1967. As will be seen later, these kits are inversions of the Frobel Gifts, designed before1850, which throw open individual contingence, within afrarneworkof external necessities(C)N, and thattoday, correctly and interestingly, ought to be called a system rather than a gift. But more of these discussions about the contingencies-and-necessities interplay later on. Suffice it for now to grasp a fundamental difference of approach toward systems, as in Architecture Machine on the one hand, and in the Bauhaus, LEGO, or Lectron on the other hand.
from neuroscience to computer graphics, and begins now to be applied in the field of design (Sirovich and Kirby, 1987; Turk and Pentland, 1991). Principal Component A nalysis reduces a given data set to a set of principal components, i.e. eigenvectors. The key feature of this algori Ihm is fhe intersection and interconnection of all data, whose result adapts and changes according to the required point of view, i.e. according to interpretation attributed to fhe problem.
The interest of this project is to show strategiesandconceptsfordesigningwiththe useof information technologies. My research questions involve: how can we engage with objectsoncethey take an abstractly modular form, and their manifest materiality is diffused into a set of data? Whatare fhe potentials of data-driven design?
ALTERNATIVE UNDERSTANDING OF DESIGN
DESIGN APPROACH
Radical views of the world and of society are today mediated through advanced technological systems. Thanks to—or perhaps due to—such circumstances, design seeks new ways of thinking and conceptualizing, as well as of producing objects and inciting feasibility. The “informationalization” of societal orders and the scope of applicabil-i ty of computer-aided design tool s are opening up a whole range of new manners of how to perceive fhe temporality and spatiality we inhabit Algorithmic design is based on new parameters: design of ideas, narratives, procedures, populations, digital production, and new understandings of materiality. Generative design methods drive us to create and modify rules and systems, such that we are generati ng abstract machines: the products of such industriousness are notitems of a set but instances of a population that are one in kind, that of an abstractobject The designer
therefore does not manipul ate the “ar tif act" itself, but rather the rules and systems that allow for generating and producing it The emphasi si sno longer on the creation of physical objects, buton conceiving meta-objects in the possibility space of symbolic forms.
RECYCLING INFORMATION The postmodern condition equips us with a set of critical, strategic, and discursive practiceswhich, as their main tools, use concepts such as difference, repetition, simulacrum, and hyperrealityin order to destabilize modernist concepts such as identity, linear progress of history, or unamhiguity (Ayles-worth, 2013). In contrast to such a reactive point of view, an emerging condition which we call “pre-specific” ceases to focus on the representation or identification of existing “truths,” and instead guides its interest to the filtration of attractive and promising approaches out of the plenitude of information. In order to avoid postmodernist tautological nihilism, the “pre-specific” paradigm approaches the abundance of i nformation i n an active manner. This paradigm also operates within the field of design. But it puts no longer the object into the focus of its investigation and research, but an object’s characteristics, features, relations, ratios, structures, and its indexical context The information age enables a redefinition of postmodern techniques such as collage, assemblage, or hricolage, all of which define an object by col lecting and reassembling va r-ious aspects and fractal components. The newly created abstractobjecti s now af usion of different objects’ constitutive data, butit is also completely unique and independentin the forms i t can take from any one object in particular. Thepto\ectFourChairsandallthe others- EigenChair is an example of digital recycling: itbrings information and data of chairs into newmanners of circulating, accu-mulating, integrating. [FIGURE 03)
ELITISM AND EXCEPTIONALISM OF SINGULAR OBJECT VS. INDIVIDUAL POPULISM OF GENERIC OBJECTS So far, design understood its practices as dealing with individual objects, their
typicality, their specificity. Design was interested in the paradoxical invention of “ideal objects,” which are to beoriginal, and yet specific. Such an approach was closely related to the modernist paradigm. Today, however, the emphasis is moving from designing ideal objects to designing the ideality of real objects—the ideality in reference to which an object can be designed as singular and generic instead of original and specific. The newparadigm changes the designer’s rel ation to a n ideal ly static reference for his objects that are to be original, by putting an emphasis on conceptualization, interaction of the components, systems, and processes within the referential framework of an object’s ideality. What was once the design of a perfect, unique object featuring specific materiality is today the design of a population of objects featuring (potentially) any materiality. Instead of a specific object, the designer creates an algorithm. Elitism and exceptionalism asso-d ated wi th the idea of an object’s originali ty is replaced by “individual populisms” associated with the reality of generic objects, and the attractiveness they are capable of unfolding. The key role in design is taken over by generative systems (syntaxes and grammars)thatofferevaluablemethodolo-gies and theoretical worldviews (the “contents” of ideologies—li teral ly the “logics of ideas”) as frameworks that instigate dynamisms that distribute processes by multi -plication, rather than by unification. The design process becomes an abstract definition of algorithms. Hence in this project, the focus was not on designing a “perfect” chair, buton engendering a whole population of chairs. Instead of creating a parametric master model, indexes of all objects are correlated to a framework of a possibility space—to a Pre-specific mode.
IMPOSED MATERIALITY In generative object design, the particular materiality of an object is not a precondition for its final manifestation. The choice of materia I sto work with h as so far served asthe basis fordetermining the design process, defining the expected execution of
1989: From Expansion to Connectivity
Cybernetics expansion reached itsglobal limits, and ended withthe derniseoftheSoviet Union and the end of the Cold War (1939). Arguably, information technology found new bearings in the wake of the so-called dotcom bubble in 2000. From then on, computers were no longer understood as "symbolic machines" but increasingly as an infrastructure for applications, called the "global network." Mobile computing, services, and social networks emerged, combining toward a new basic order.
There isa very illustrative metaphor of the change undergone bythe notion of technics and our look upon our world. In 1969, Apollo 11 gave us the first picture of our planet seen from another planet, the moon. The total world within one technical picture. A one-shot reflection of the complete world, from an outside perspective. An internal and external necessity (N)N. In contrast to that, only forty years later, in 2009 the lot of us are rendering our world: using Google Earth. The single Apollo picture is replaced by a symbolic surface of trillions of indexes for all things used for explicating our world. The 1969 single outside reflection produced by one man, in 2009 gets replaced by an inside projection produced by everyone. And today's Google-perspective-induced question
2 Vera Bühl mann, inhabiting Madia. Annäherungen an would be: isthere still an internal aswell as external necessity, aswasthe case with
Syjo/OTso'fefer >Vc/i/teA*vi A <PhD di ss.. 2009), fhe Apollo view? An (N)N? Or may we abstract from our Apollo view, and cultivate the
published online: http://edoc.umbas.ch/1354/.	1	'	'	’	1	.
ground prepared by Google, in a tree and open way, by negotiating the contingencies inan(N)C setup?
Indeed. Following the break marked bythe advent of social media, we are drastically shown how everybody and everything feel themselves experts. Which is great, because we do need political articulations, identities that take responsibilities, dealing competently withthecontingencies of ourworld. But sympathy toward all co-experts in social media still does not mean everyone is indeed navigating the depth of serious applications. Or playing masterly. Whereasour own subject is in-depth cultivation of the new symbolic ground. Or, put figuratively, and quite down architects' alley: How to settle down? Or: How to inhabit media?2
With such queries in our mind, there arises the question about the actual state of mainstream computing in architecture. We would say, tentatively, it is at least twenty years behind times—which is something every generation might throw at the younger generation. We ourselves were caught up in that phenomenon: as researchers in 1990,
03	Four Chairs and their fusions
04	Four Chairs and all the others
we were up against the mainstream-architecture bias alleging that to us computers were machines. They were not; we worked on abstract ions, but that's how we were perceived. Today the coin has flipped: in 1990 architecture denied computers were machines, today it vehemently affirms they are, Therefore our diagnosis is: even as the new field of architecture-curn-cornputing is so built-over today, the same, unchanged absence of abstraction still prevails, the same lack of basic insight into the "nature" of computers, which then makes cultivating the "Google planet" difficult, as it does staying out of the functionalistic game of implementing the necessities-driven global economical infrastructures.
THE GENERIC ANDTHE DEADLOCK
Backtothe architectural discourse. As one of a very few, Rem Koolhaas acknowledges this situation (1995): "The great originality of the Generic City is simply to abandon what doesn't work—what has out lived its use—to break up the blacktop of idealism with the jackhammers of realism, and to accept whatever grows in its place. In that sense, the Generic City accommodates both the primordial and the futuristic—in fact only these
two. The Generic City is all that remains of what used to be the city. The Generic City is the post-city being, prepared on the site of the ex-city." Far from throwing up atheory, or claiming to have a way out, Koolhaas is dealing with the paradoxical situation where things are made worse by trying to make them better, or by thinking up well-intended projects, doing deficit analyzing, letting oneself be guided by empathy, and carefully avoiding making mistakes, Yet, that does not mean that acting less, not at all, or even mistakenly might be more helpful, let alone be a way out of the paradox. Some jam. Koolhaas's tone is sarcastic, but he owns up to the problem like no other prominent architect. The planet gets balanced, entropic, generic ...with necessities-inforrned global economical infrastructures, (N)N.
That's it, within the Generic City, we might say. And as you are stepping out, you step into anot her game, The way out of it is abstract ion. Simply start to cultivate t he Generic City, Junk Space or—less sarcastically—the natural order, and begin to negotiate our cultural sediments, celebrate contingency, and engage in politics. We should refrain from thinking of ourselves as living in some given nature. Rather, instead of gathering beneath some overarching absolute world spirit, some Weltgeist, or indeed Nature, i.e.,
details, connections, and textures. Today, generative system design enables the imposition of materiality toeach instance of an abstract object The form, no longer complementary to certain materials, can now be attached to itby mere use of intellectual control. Therefore, the objects, previously described by fixe (/geometries, can now be variously described by relative geometries that can be rendered into reality in any materiality. If one wishesto fully automate the entire production chain, the abstract object can materialize through 3-D printing.
DESIGNING NARRATIVES By rethinking the notion of “good design,” one comes to the conclusion that design i s justa tangiblefragment of reali ty, which narrates one of the many stories that surround us. Design never appears in silence. Whatwe cal I “good design” nowadays i s imbued with a series of narratives constructed by different discourses: formal, ideological, psychological, and theoretical. Itisonly one part of the design process thatis constituted by the object’s material and formal aspects, while most of it is built upon stories that describe the object, and upon the individuals who transfer the stories or identify with them. Therefore, besides designing an object, it is also necessary to design a narrative that defines the object’s ambition i n terms of how it will become meaningful.
The research focus of the project Four Chairs and alt the of hers is the design of a chair that does not carry on the heritage of originally iconic or functional pieces of furniture, buta generic heritage that cultivates information about“all chairs ever created". For this, the term EigenChair is used—to describe partial summations of the embodied realities of ideas-as-models, i.e. the “realities” of particular chair designs that are elected asactorsin the design narrative.The algorithm databasecontainsa largeamount of “other chairs."Theirf usions enable an inti -nite variety of possible results. In order to achieve a certain control over the results, out of “al I other chairs” we havechosen four par-ticular chairs thatwill provide the basis of
recognizability in the dramatization of the objectin the particular narrations. Fusionsof characteristic par tsof those four chai rs with all the others are defined by user-made maps thatdefine the transformations, upgrade the performance of the Principal Component Analysistod, and enable the control of the result [ FI G U RE 04]. The project Four Chairs and ait the others has elected four iconic chairs: Thonet's Chair No.14, Wire Chair by Charles and Ray Eames, Panton Chair, and Ghery’s Wiggle Side Chair (Vegesack etal., 1996). Their main mutual link is specificity and uniqueness of the materials, and the respective technological innovation in the context of which they had been designed. It is the richness of meaning and historical references of these examplesthat are responsible for enabling us the further creation of analogies, stories, and narratives, which, in turn, fertilize the viewer’s active participation in the process of visual representation [FIGURE 051.
MULTI-
DIMENSIONAL
VECTOR
TECHNICAL APPROACH
The project Four Chairs and alt the others deals with options of manipulating data, and thereby engenders new objects. It takes a whole library of chairs as its starting point; that is, their geometric and spatial characteristics along with their historical importance and their narratives. By using open-source 3-D models of chairs from the Google warehouse, their geometry is appropriated through a set of algorithms, on which the Principal Component Analysis algorithm is applied to cal cul ate fusions, mergings, and manipulations from the input information, from which new objects can be generated and produced. The result is a population of objects that are over-coding cultural and historical space-time relations
unde r t he pr i rn ac y of s pace and t i rn e, we fi nd ou rse I ves expe 11 ed, and t h rown to the primacy of our intellect—in circumstances symmetrical, but in abstract ion toward, those of the likewise expelled Greeks, or the Renaissance man. As they did, we also step out onto a new stage, the one of generic infrastructures. Rather than dwelling in generic cit ies, we can now perform new, abstract, masterly plays on our new stage.
Thus flips our self-perception. We no longer ask, as does Koolhaas: "What is left after ident ity-stripping?The generic?" Rather, we see ourselves as intellectuals, as beings bored after three days. Which isjust the opposite of the emptiness of Natalini & Toraldo di Francia's Superstudio, or Kubrick's Ocjyssey. We suddenly awake in a jungle of primary intellectual abundance, with the whole wealth of all the masterpieces of our ancestors around to engage with.
The Skeleton
Thistext argues in a mathematically inspired algebraic way. We do know that we are not able fully to comprehend the rnasterworks of the world around us. On principle,
HIGH-RESOLUTION ISOSURFACE MESH	LOW-RESOLUTION	ISO	SU	RFACE	MESH
LOW-RESOLUTION VOXEL MESH
sizeOfVoxels	-4.5	sizeOfVoxels	-30	sizeOfVoxels	-30
numberOfVoxelsX	-125	numberOfVoxelsX	-18	numberOfVoxelsX	-18
numberOfVoxelsY	-111	numberOfVoxelsY	-16	numberOfVoxelsY	-16
numberOfVoxelsZ	-201	numberOfVoxelsZ	-30	numberOfVoxelsZ	-30
numberOfVoxels	-2788875	numberOfVoxels	-8640	numberOfVoxels	-8640
05	<( EigenChair in Alice in Wonderland—Tim Burton's
movie (2010)
06	EigenChairpotential for geometrical manipulation
we are convinced we can't, And we know there are lots of such rnasterworks, of all times, and of all cultures. Thus, instead of analyzing just one, or a few of them, in depth, we try to establish our own skeleton of thinking, by working out axes of symmetry between masterpieces. Thereby we can find invariances, and gain stabilities for our BoT, from nothing but the masterpieces themselves. Stability no longer depends on any external reference. Such external references, and their use as anchor points, would perforce entail a certain blindness. With the help of our skeleton, however, we are free to move within the richness of our world. Algebra lets us create the identity of our own BoT, and thus unshackle ourselves from the constraining logic imposed by some allegedly natural order. So let us slowly work out how a skeleton may be built.
SOCIAL MEDIA
First some introductory remarks, using again Google as an example, because it has a lot to do with the approach we mean to establish. As may be inferred from the introductory argumentation, this implies first rnedia-izing, and then cultivating the social media. So,
HIGH-RESOLUTION VOXEL MESH
through the imposition of logistic networks. The final objects are entirely a product of mathematical and logical thinking, designated according to a particular aesthetic sensibility (mine). The identity of the object is engendered by pure intellect and contingently rooted in historical and cultural legacies. The main algorithm, which technical ly organi zesthe whole project, i sthe Principa I Component Analysis algorithm.
LOGICAL STEPS
The initial step was to normalize and prepare the data of all the chairs. In this case study, due to computational limitations, a total of twelve chairs were used as a testing data set All data had to fit in the same bounding box, and mesh vertices were equally distributed throughout the mesh.
The whole procedure consists of three main parts. The first part is the Algorithm forVoxelizing Polygon Meshes. This algorithm transforms each mesh into a voxel-based object defined by a one-dimensional numerical array lis^ i.e. a multidimensional vector. In case of the highest resolution, each chair i s represented by2,788,875values. Each value marksthe di stance between the given voxel and the closest mesh vertex. Values for each chair are exported as separate txt til es, in orderto reduce computing time of the main application.
sizeOfVoxels	-4.5
numberOfVoxelsX -125 numberOfVoxelsY -111 numberOfVoxelsZ -201
numberOfVoxels -2788875
The second part is the Algorithm for Morphing Chairs. The base of this algorithm consists in the multidimensional vectors generated by the Principal Component Analysis. The goals of Principal Component Analysis are (1) to extract the most important informational aspects from the data set, (2) to compressthe si ze of the data set by keeping on ly the important informa -tional aspects, (3) to simplify the description of the data set, and (4) to analyze the structure of the observations and the van -ables. In orderto achieve these goals, Principal Component Analysis computes new variables, called principal components or Eigenvectors, which are obtained as linear combinations of the origi na I variables. The first principal component'! s requi red to have
the I argest possible variance. The second component is computed under the constraint of being orthogonal to the firstcom -ponent, and thus needs to have the second I argest possible variance. The other com -ponents are computed likewise. [FIGURE06I
According to the size of the initial bounding box, a voxel-based space is created. Each voxel receives values from txt tiles exported in the first step. With the use of Principal Component Analysis we can represent each chair by using only a set of so-called eigenweights, e.g. (-5673, -85184, 50, -25533,31594). By changing the values of the principal components, i.e., the eigen-weigh ts, we are ableto achieve linear transformations between all the chairs.
The third partis the Algorithm for Mapped Morphing. Itisan upgradefrom linear Principal Component A nalys/stransformations to mappings of nonlinear transformations. An RGB map, in which each color represents a particul ar chair, i s projected onto the voxel -based space. Thi s enables us to define and control the nonlinear transformations and fusions of three different chairs into a new one. Thus created, chairs can be used again asinputchairsforthesecond step, and achieve a new nonlinear variability.
The rest of the algorithms served to prepare the data for Principal Component Analysis and to help with theirfinal visualization. Furthermore, an important role was pi ayed by a sen es of open-source I i bra ri es, especially the Marching Cubes Algorithm (Lorensen and Cline, 1987), responsible for generating watertight mesh objects ready for 3-D printing. All codes were written in the Java programming language.
Bearing in mind the thoughts presented in an earlier part of this text regarding ref-erentiality and recycling, it is important to notethatthe algorithms used in the project e. g., the Principal Component Analysis algorithm and Marching Cubes Algorithm, are already and widely in practice. They are thoroughly adapted, functionally redirected, recycled, to fit the needs of design in this particular project [figure 07]
how does Google work? It's about how to get onto one single screen the world's complete knowledge relating to any particular question. The principle for doing it is strikingly radical and simple, and may be explained in a rather elegant but—we must warn you—s I ig ht I y u n us ual way
1.	Defer understanding it all, The established dichotomy of signifierand signified doesn't wash. Indexes are pointers without significance. Forget about content. Indexes are what you care about, and through them you deal with whatever content. Content is with the questioner.
2.	Renounce answering questions. Just tender indexes surrounding that question, It's up to the questioner to work out the answer to his question. He has the content, whatever it is. He must compete with the masterships, articulating is up to him, whatever it is. And the simplest and most sketchy way of articulating the answer is by selecting a certain index. Or the questioner goes fishing by throwing out some circumscribing indexes. Google recognizes these answers, and shifts its whole world of indexes a little in their direction.
ARTICULATING
INDEXES
THEORETICAL APPROACH
INFORMATION
The key term that best describes and corresponds to what characterizes, overall, contemporary society and science is information. Information technologies are entering all spheres of society: from the ways in which we organize our everyday life, to the ways in which we think about natural sciences and humanities. This view suggests the inadequacy of understanding human environments in predominantly material terms and physical relations between energy and matter; in order to create a more comprehensive worldview, analysis must take into consideration also information as a quasi -material category. Atthe sametime, being surrounded by excessive amounts of information, any analysis requires a stable environment, which enables its observations and uses.
REFLECTIONS ON THE REAL It is impossible to comprehend or examine exhaustively what is to be considered as “real,” because such consideration depends upon the quanti zation and formal -ization of ideas. Hierarchies and the relations between originals and their copies, which isthe key concern of materially oriented societies, have become almostcom-pletely irrelevant in an age in which virtual realities dominate human lives. Depending on the ways of our understanding and capacities of accepting the “unfamiliar,” we comprehend and legitimize what is to be considered as real. Brian Massumi is perceptive to this in a multifaceted way, by comparing Baudrillard’s interpretation of the reality-simulation, in which there is no di vision between the real and the virtual, with Deleuzeand Guattari's negation of the I i near approach to the real. Such a non - lin -ear approach to reality is supported by the vanishing of boundaries, and the influence of the virtual on the real.
“Baudrillard sidesteps the question of whether simulation replaces a real that did indeed exist, or if simulation is all there has ever been. Deleuzeand Guattari say yesto both. The alternative i s a f al se one because simulation is a process that produces the real, or, more precisely, more real (a more-than-real) on the basis of the real. ‘Itcar-riesthe real beyond its principle to the point where it i s effectively produced.’ Every sim -ulation takes as its point of departure a regularized world comprising apparently stable identities or territories. Butthese ‘real’ entities are in fact undercover simulacra that have consented to feign being copies.” MASSUMI, 1987
ABSTRACTION
The “Internetage" is exactly such a condition, in which immaterial information is part of what we call reality. In other words, there is a peculiar reality proper to models, even if they are, necessarily, idealizations. In such a condition, the only way of dealing with information is abstraction, and it can be adequately used only by those who are, in a mass of information, able to definetheir contexts as flexible, adjustable fields of possibilities with polyvalent, and ultimately undecidable, meaningful ness. The project Four Chairs and alt the others considers the creation of abstractions of objectsto a degreethat multipl iesthe manners in which objects can be manipulated beyond any definite bounds, and by this, it considers how new meanings can be provoked from the abundance of information. If objects—chairs, or entire populations of objects—are assigned an abstract expression, as multidimensional vectors (i.e. as a series of numbers in a line, as indexes to what can be linearized) they become very potentand can be manipulated in manifold manners. Such abstractobjects, which consist of nothing elsebutindexes, are placed in a meta-space that contains the summation of the potential s of a 11 the objects which are constitutive for this meta-space. (FIGURE 081 Governed by the Principal Component A nalysis algori tti m, meta-space is able to correlate indexes of all objects, creating
In this step-by-step way, social media build the contentless index of the world's content, It is all about infinity, inversion, and negation, and so the BoT characterized by signifying and functioning isshed, and one of indexing and operating is being taken on. Idem with Wikipedia. Of course! Let'sgive it a try: a Wiki presents indexes around questions, instead of answers, And instead of selecting, as in the case of Google, you will write, encirclingthe answer, The answer, on principle, it not there. That's it, No meaning. No answer. Therefore Wiki contains anything, instead of everything, You are complaining about insufficient or faulty content? Great! Be welcome! Contribute! That's the game. Today, in 2013, one might—pushing it perhapsa bit—characterize Wikipedia as the "consensus" of the second league in its attempt to understand the first league, the masters, who in principle elude full explication. Which is great! But in clear contrast to the encyclopedists, who "defined" the first league of their time, in the eighteenth century.
ABOUT THEORY
So, let usgive it atry with Wikipedia, on a question aboutthe meaning of theory. According tothe English Wikipedia (en.wikipedia.org, June2013), "Theory is a contemplative
and rational type of abstract or generalizing thinking, or the results of such thinking. Depending on the context, the results might for example include generalized explanations of how nature works"—or even how divine or metaphysical matters are thought toworkin philosophy and theology, Wow! A "generalized explanation of how nature works." Theory as a manual for putting together a toolbox useful even on metaphysical stuff, Among those toolbox appliances, generalization seems to be of particular interest, It is prominently used three times in the introductory paragraph, and obviously triesto reduce the contrast to one of our most important concepts: abstraction. Our algebraic approach rnaintainsthat abstraction refersto that which is common to several entitieswithout being part of any, asopposedto "general," meaning partsthat are common to some entities, To sum it up, English Wikipediatriesto keep the notion of "something that has no common parts" out of the game of theory, byjurnbling it t oget her w it h g enera I i z at i on,
Hereafter comes German Wikipedia, presenting a striking contrast: "Eine Theorie ist ein System von Aussagen, das dazu dient, Ausschnitte der Realität zu beschreiben, beziehungsweise zu erklären und Prognosen über die Zukunft zu erstellen." In this case,
"a theory is a system of propositions, which serves to describe or explain clips of reality, and to build predictions about the future." Theory is not thought of as a toolbox, but as an environment for negotiations.
Thecontrast couldn't be greater: generalization of partsof things vs, part less abstraction of things. The "English" theory evolves around an inner necessity, the "German" one within an environmental orexternal necessity. In physics, the English notion of theory may be found, e.g., with Newton, the German one, e.g., with Lagrange. Mechanics and Dynamics.
Our approach is aimed at applying abstraction to the "English" and inversion tot he "German" theory concept. Whatever it may be. To start with, that's what we think cultivation of the global generic infrastructures turns upon. That approach encompasses generalization in a manner the "German" theory notion is blind to, as it does abstraction, whichthe "English" notion taboo-izes, Ratherthan mechanical or dynamical lines, well follow quanta, or points of probabilities (more about this later).
It is important to remember that our object is not establishing a new definition of theory. It isthe working out of contrasts, and learning from what such contrasts
thus an open logistic network, an abstract possibility space. This marks the level of how heterogeneous objects mightbe articulated as an abstractly engendered kind, and it allows forthe generation of entire populations of singul arly particu lar objects which all belong to the same generic “kind.” By looking at objects through the levels of their abstractions, we realize the potency of information (i n meaning and shapes, wi th which we can work), butat the same time we realize the sheer emptinessthati s proper to abstraction, when we regard iton the symbolical level of indexes alone.
MEANING, CONTEXT, AND NARRATIVE Post-traditional societies (societies that embrace modernization) offer new perspectives on old concepts to which new meanings are attributed, or which are judge critically, by negotiating their discursive contexts. The mass of information shapes our world: text, visual representation, music, money. However, the idea offered by the information-theory pioneer Claude Shannon, namely that “information does not itselfcarry meaning hut transmits messages," has become rather liberating in the academic discourse: in carrying no meaning, information offers unlimited freedom of manipulation. It i s important to emphasize thatcontextualization and the successive creation of narrativesinevitably “fill in” the void of information (its constitutive meaninglessness). Contextualization and narration gain power by carefully gathering evidence (real data) for what they are meant to comprehend. Atthe same time, they take care that the larger contextual!zations and stories in which they claim to be embedded rely on the collective reality and memory of culture and history. It is also important to note that in the process of contextualizing generic instances, by composing their proper narratives before they are actually generated and produced, there is a whole world of possibilities from which one actualizes only afr action. Yet the effects of such “reductionism” arenotto impoverish, butto maintain open the potential for novelty and for the unexpected.This project shows that
design is able to manipulate predetermined potentials, while tilling them, atthe same time, with narratives. Design isnota part of the endless evolutionary process aimed at creating the nextnew ideal object, butapart of a defined context with chosen references, and their respective genealogies. (FIG URE 09]
EIGENCHAIR:
DATA-DRIVEN
DESIGN
By using information manipulation and various spatial conceptions, algorithmic design approaches an object in a completely abstract manner, distancing it thus from its own immediate “reality”. In making the object extremely flexible for different interpretations and contextual! zations, algorithmic design also contributes to the instability of itsdesign process: lackingthe resistance of material constraints, designing an object could easily be reduced to a formalistic geometry exercise. Therefore, a key feature of such an understanding of design is not only the definition of algorithms, butalsothe construction of parallel narratives around the object Itseems therefore inviting to re/turn to the postulates of the pre-Socratic philosopher Empedocles, who claimed that “nothing comes out of nothing and nothing disappears into nothing.” Such philosophical re/turn marks an effort to observe context and processes as more important factors for defining fhe object than those implicit in the Objectivism (Terzidis, 2012). The advantage of procedural design in our contemporary world is its ability to refer to partial summations of global knowledge, and to use it effectively.
Thisprojecttriesto show—by conceiving and shaping the idea of a chair forthe early twenty-first century—the necessity of perceiving design through three equally important interdependent aspect s: design, theory, and technology. Design is now data driven. [FIGURE 10)
07	« EigenChait in meta-space—possibility of
interconnection and interrelation of all active data
08	EigenChair in Apollo 11 Mission (1969)—Aldrin unpacks experiments
09	Rendering to reality—3-D printed chai r—si m u lating decompose ti on
10» EigenChairv/Hh Super studio (1966)
i
may tel I us. There is no dearth of other interesting language games comparing theory definitions in different sciences, for sure. But these two shall suffice for our present purpose.
ABOUT MASTERSHIP
In a similar vein, we shall now address the concept of technics. Well then discover it presents an interesting morphological turnabout: with the pre-Socratics of the fifth century BCE, technites relates to the mastery of the craftsman; with the near-contemporaneous sophists tektainornai relates to mastery of convincing talk. Plato, in the 4th c., oriented the game toward techne—which addresses the skills around the purposes of an object—in a predominantly theoretical sense. And Aristotle, in the 3rd c., uncouples the rnethodos, the controlled procedure, from the techne, the ability to create an artifact, What interests us is the inversion from—putting it succinctly—the "mastership in creating objects" (5th c.) to "objects presenting mastership" (3rd c.). In the 5th c., "mastership" is necessary and objectsare contingent, whereas in the3rd c., "good objects" are necessary and mastership is contingent, which we would symbolize as: (C)N vs. (N)C.
Comparing that with thedittering definitions ot theory between English and German Wikipedia, one tends to assume that the "German" BoT is more comfortable with the 5th-c. notion of technics, and the English BoT more so with the 3rd-c. one. One directly finds this confirmed when, e.g., the English Wikipedia states that techne "was not concerned with the necessity and eternal a-priori truths of the cosmos, nor with the a-posteriori contingencies and exigencies of ethics and politics. ... Moreover, this was a kind of knowledge associated with people who were bound to necessity. That is, techne was chiefly operative in the dornesticsphere, in farming and slavery, and not in the free realm of the Greek polis." And here we are, avant/a/ettre, in the middle of the Koolhaasian JunkSpace. Perhaps we can go along with the second part of the quote, but we take strict exception to the first: technics, theory, intellect are affine to the cosmos; technics plays its own part in the game of contingencies and politics, but it is not a reductionist, romantic story about freedom and slavery, as is associated with a criticism of techne. Techne 's playground must be elevated to a more abstract league, if we areto cultivatethe JunkSpace, Such are the reduct ion is ms we mean to oppose, The exemplary inversion from the pre-Socratics to Aristotle should not be read, as is usually done, as a progress story,
REFERENCES
Abdi, Herve find Lynne J. Williams. “Principal Component Analysis.” Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Computational Statistics 2, no. 4(2010): 433-59.
Aylesworth, Gayle. “Postmodernism.” In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2010 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. Article published September 30, 2005. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2010/ entries/postmodernism/.
Lorensen, William E. and Harvey E. Cline. “Marching Cubes: A High Resolution 3D Surface Construction Algorithm.” SIGGRAPH Comput. Graph, 21, no. 4 (July 1987): 163-69.
Massumi, Brian. “ RealerThan Real: The Simulacrum According to Deleuze and Guattari.” Copyright, no. 1 (1987): 90-97.
Sirovich, L. andM. Kirby. “Low-Dimensional Procedure for the Characterization of Human Faces.” JOSAAA, no. 3(1987): 519-24.
Terzidis, Kostas. Algorithmic Architecture. Oxford:
Taylor & Francis, 2012.
Turk, Matthew and Alex Pentland. “Eigenfaces for Recognition.” Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 3, no. 1(1991): 71-86.
Vegesack, Alexander von, Peter Dunas, and Mathias Schwartz-Clauss, eds. 100 Masterpieces from the Vitra Design Museum Collection. Weil am Rhein: Vitra Design Museum, 1996.
where one content of a concept is replaced by a better one. It should be read asa rotation, inclusion, and inversion, by which both the "mastership of the craftsman" and the "talk of good objects" and the "convincing method" are indexed by the algebraic symmetries, aforementioned. Just indexing; no need for deciding, no need forjudging. All we do need is stability, and with algebra's help we can preserve the richness.
ABOUT LEARNING
Now, do you find all this unnecessarily complicated? It can't be otherwise, really: because people always were clever, because they always included the whole into their masterpieces, and because they always wanted to measure themselves against the masterpieces around. Indeed, the wide-spread fantasy of, and yearning for, a simple, easy-to-understand description of our world strikes us asa bit astonishing. In developing our masterships, we struggle, contend, and measure ourselves against the masterpieces of our species. Simplicity is for beginners.
So, what is a masterpiece? Masterpieces are achievement s t hat are beyond what oneself, or oneself's environment, is capable of—achievements of which one doesn't know what it is that makes them better, or how that was accomplished. Thus no matter what the field, or what level your own mastership, in relation to that of others there is always blindness involved, There is no common reference nor common denominator, But how to go about learning, then?There is an "art of learning"—it's called rnathematic(s). Mathematic(s) is not primarily about complicated forms, numbers, and formulas. Mathematic(s) articulates most explicitly what BoTs and what mastership are about.
For our purpose, it is interesting that there is a distinct ion in rnathernatic(s) between geometry and arithmetic on the one hand, and another between logic and algebra on the other hand, Geometry is investigation of forms. Which may be seen as the primacy of things in how they can be perceived, over the question of what they are. Arithmetic is "calculation with numbers," which is an investigation "behind the scenes" where the question of "what things are" is primary, and supersedes their actual formal expression. So we may further stabilize our symmetry: geometry is on the (N)C side, arithmetic on the (C)N side. Any masterpiece needsat once geometry and arithmetic, whereby at times stability is on the geometric side, and at other times on the arithmetic one, With Euclid, e.g., stability is centered upon geometry—we are in the 3rd c. BCE—and the concept of t e c h n i cs, e. g., i s one we d isc usse d f or Ar ist of I e. We findthe same set upinthe16th-17th c. CE, just as we did, in a preceding chapter, in today's English Wikipedia, Stability centered upon arithmetic is found in pre-Socratic thinking relative totechnftnes, around the 5th c. BCE, with a corresponding appearance in the 18th-19th c. CE, or in t oday 's G e r rn an Wi kipedia.
All this sounds rather speculative, but let us take it one step further: logic is investigation of correct conclusions, while algebra is resolution of balances, or indeed "solution of equations." Whereas logic may be assimilated to geometry of self-reference, algebra may so be to arithrnet ic of self- reference. Geornet ry and arit hrnetic are on t he root level, logic and algebra on the transcendental level, of understanding masterpieces,
This manner of putting it is just ours, and most of today's history-of-rnathematics experts will contend that it is picking a wrong schema, and then oversimplifying it, to boot,This may be countered by the argument that most of today's pertinent literature is geometrical and logical, and has achieved an enormous diversity and complexity. Particularly in the 20th c. Whereas, by contrast, our game as presented here is geometrical and algebraic. While admittedly not compiled by a mathematician, it draws great compactness and elegance from bringing in algebra. We'll see what it will let us do.
Our question was, how can we learn from masterpieces around us, while acting from within our specific 21st-c, setup. As our discussion of the generic showed, there is no explicating foreign masterpieces through geometry and logics. Nor isthere, our answer goes, through algebra and geometry, But algebraic self-reference can be used for stepping out of today's geometrical general isms, out of what Koolhaas called Generic City and Junk Space. And there is the hopefully reassuring observation that this situation is anything but new. Similar configurations prevailed around the 16th c. CE, and during the 5th-3rd c. BCE, and contrary ones did in the 18th c. CE, and the 3rd c. BCE
This is your wherewithal to learning from our masters,
THE CENTERED VOID
Abstraction is one of our key concepts. Some idea of its power may be gained from a look at a simple object, the Pythagorean triangle, along with one at howtheGreeks around 500 BCE managed to uncouple planestrorn objects, and turned planes, in lieu of objects, intotheir primary entity, Or, figuratively speaking, how they managed to retrieve the triangle from the pyramid solid as a new source of stability and truth.
Let us start with the primacy of objects, and the assumption that in Egypt, or in the Mesopotamian world, numbers reflect series of things (the meaning of which shall be explained later). On its strength, we think of the three lines of a right-angled triangle as "numbers reflecting the series of I ines-of-the-triangle things." This is working fine with the catheti of the triangle. It does not workwith the hypotenuse, which can be reflected bywhole numbers only in very few constellations (so-called primitive triples): ifthe legs are, e.g., 3 and 4, the hypotenuse is 5. In most other cases the hypotenuse is between whole numbers. If, e.g,, the legs are 1 and 1, the hypotenuse is somewhere between 1 and 2. The hypotenuse, having no whole number, has—according to our hypothesis—no name and no identity. It is not a series of things. It isa not athing.
The Greeks around 500 BCE, developed a new kind of thinking for this problem. How did they do it? As usual: by giving the established BoT an infinite dimension, and then symbolizing the negation of this infinity. Where the old notion of numbers refects a series of things, the new number does not. The new number notion is a self-refection of not alltheother series of things.
On this assumption, two t hings are identical if they share the same self-reflection. Whereby they sharethe same number or the same name (for more details about t his BoT, cf, t he Organon of Aristot le). To st ress the cont rast: prior to t his new way of thinking, things had been identical if they were refections of the same series of things. Nowthings drop out of this equation. If two of these new nurnbersor names appear on stage, they are not reflecting all the other series of things, which means they project
A
their relation. A square then isa self-projection uncoupled from anything, and no longer a refection of this series of things.
[figure A] And now watch this Pythagorean stage play: take the self-projection of one cathetus of a right-angled triangle, add the self-projection of the opposed leg, and there appears directly the self-projection of the hypotenuse: the hypotenuse has acquired a very interesting new stability, unneedful of any particular series of things for an anchor. The stability in describing the world is no longer provided by a series of things to be refected, but by a stage play of projective selves symbolized by a new notion of names and numbers, In this example, these are, on the one hand, anchored through primitive triples (like 3, 4, 5), while on the other hand working with all the other triples as well. This particular stage play, this new notion of names and numbers as projective selves, is called Euclidean geometry; it opened up a whole new cosmos of thinking. The characteristic of this thinking is, as the right-angled-triangle act shows, the play around a centered void, projecting a series of things to be refected. In that stage play, the hypotenuse is still a challenging character, but it is not a no-thing any longer, it is just an irrational self, interplaying with rational selves in a syllogistic stage play. But remember—and this is very important for what follows—the Pythagorean triangle as a plane is not as real athing as the pyramid is a thing. The actors of the Euclidean geometry are self-reflected voids, constituted by a syllogistic interplay of projected planes organized to reflect a pyramid which is not there. And this now is how we would introduce the concept of media: an agent of the stabilities of the world left behind, as a new BoT is being acquired. Asexernplified bythe Euclidean geometry rnedia-izing the mythical stabilities of the Egyptian pyramids,
CULTIVATING THE PARADOX
Pythagoras is a jumping board here, not a bedrock. There are plenty of similar BoTs around. Each of them packs the intellectuality of people of a specific time and region. And people, of anytime and place, have always been our equals in intelligence. Needless to say that today we are living inaBoT different from the Greeks', and we should not even think ourselves successors to their thinking, The thinking in historicity, and in predecessions and successions, is19th-c, BoT, and might be characterized as arithmetic. In the 21st c. we are fitted with another, geometric constitution, with inverse implications. More about dealing with inversions later on.
But again, howto learn, in our 21st c. constitution, from an extraneous BoT? We argued for shifting from logical geometry to algebraic geometry in order to be able to step out of the generic. Western thought holds a prominent invariance, potentially helpful in establishing an algebraic symmetry across BoTs, and known as Diodorus Cronus's (4th-3rd c. BCE) master argument. It consists of three statements about future contingents:
1.	every past truth must be necessary
2.	an impossibility does not follow from a possibility
3.	something is possible which neither is nor will be true.
These statements' fascination is that, taken singly, each of them looks reasonable, but any pair of them combined logically always contradicts the third. All major Western thinkers struggled with this paradox, trying to give different weight to this or that argument, but none was able to find a satisfactory solution. JulesVui lie min gives a thorough discussion of the argument's evolution in Necessity or Contingency: The Master Argument (1996). The master argument therefore is a useful access point to foreign BoTs, and an axisalong which different BoTs can talkto one another.
Let us name and symbolize these arguments, so as to be able to work with them:
-	The first argument is about necessities - N
-	the second about contingencies - C
-	and thethird, we would say, about self-reference-S
This master argument shall be our principle on which to seat the algebraic build of our skeleton of thinking. Solet'stake itfrorn here, establish the symmetries between the BoTs belonging to prominent masterpieces, and checkthe kinetics of ours.
To that end, we associate geometry with the necessity N of the first argument, arithrne-t ic wit h t he cont i ngency C of t he second, and algebra and logic wit h t he self-ref erence S of the third argument.
Applying that to our Pythagorean-triangle discussion, the rational catheti may be associated with N, the irrational hypotenuse with C, and the interplay itself, the triangle, or centered void, with S.
Now things are growing powerful. But the question arises, how are the paradox components brought into balance in our Pythagoras example? In his argumentation, Pythagoras starts with Nand asksforC: in our parlance (N)C, Another question relates to the weight of self-reference within the correlation betweenCand N. Regarding Pythagoras, it might be said that to him self-reference is prior to the positive constellation of C and N; proof and establishment of self-reference are primary: in his case, the expression would be (N)CL. (For Aristotle, afew hundred years later, this type of thinking was established, and his main focus was therefore on explicating it in all applications. The corresponding expression would be (N)CA.)
That now establishes algebraic vectors as a skeleton, af rarneworkfor BoTs. Let us then take it one step further: an (N)C setup irnpliesa BoTthat is geometrically expressive while arithmetically impressed, A (C)N setup implies a BoT that is arithmetically expressive and geometrically impressed. An (N)CL one implies a logical geometrical expression, while a (S)CA one does an algebraic geometrical expression, and so forth,
The summarizing of the changes in the concept of technics, introduced above, will illustrate the power of these symbolizations: in the 3rd-c.-BCE view, of technics as a controlled procedure, or rnethodics, uncoupled from the object, in abstraction to the object (energe/a) and prior to it (dynarnis), there is internal necessity and external contingency:
(N)C, In the 6th-c.-BCE "mastership of the craftsman," trust is put into the craftsman, and the artifact left to negotiation: (C)N. And so forth: other times, other concepts. As we see, with these skeletons thinking becomes capable of increasingly higher speed.
STANISLAVA PREDOJEVIC
HARD-BOILED WORLD WIDE WEB AND
THE END OF DISTANCE
And nowjust irnaginethe boosttoour thinking from ingesting the following statement: Within one same period and region, masterpieces of whatever discipline are of one and the same Bo T.
With this, we are going to find attractive and challenging symmetries everywhere. Our world will get fast, rich, and interesting,
WHERE WE ARE TODAY Dialectics
Let's get our hands on such a BoT, and play around a bit with the symmetries and invariances of which it consists, just to get the hang of it—by focusing on two important notions. What we are proposing is neither critiquing nor dialectic. The German Wiki: "In classical antiquity and the Middle Ages, dialectics denoted a method of discourse or argumentation, as well asthe areathat is called logic today." We directly see the symmetry to the 3rd-c.-BCE play: (N)C. And further: "Since the 18th c., a new signification of this word gained acceptance: the theory of contradictions in things, or ideas, and the identification
Hard-Boiled World Wide Web and the End of Distance is a conceptual and experimental design proposal for reading, mapping, and rearranging conditions and complexities of the city and our urban environment. This research is open for different media and strategies not only from architecture and urban design, but also from technology, literature, and philosophy.
The proposed design approach is provoked by the transform at ions of urban environments and interpersonal interactions within these environments we experience collectively today, but it is also driven by many personal choices, perceptions, and variously distinct points of view. All of thistogether initiates abroad spectrumof artistic, architectural, and socially re levant questions and tasks, and allows for an open-ended process which engages “form” and “content” within higher levels of decoupled independence, and hencewithin vaster spaces for interpretat ion and variation. The proposed design approach assumes that by radically multiplying the amount of predefined rules, it is possible to increase and differentiate also the power of critical stances toward questions that are related to the contemporary city transformation processes.
The proposed method works in terms of an abstract documentary, but at the same time also in a generative way by means of extracting many indexes for the invention of new concepts of organization. These indexes are meant to feed back—projectively—in the documentary side of the procedure.The proposed design approach proceeds within a self-referential space. Input information is always related to the given state, and to what we assume could be important in any one such state. In computational mappings, these states are clustered according to measures extracted from activities and physical properties. Such mapping and clustering afford to “manipulate” the information by interpreting it toward virtually any direction.
[of thesis and antithesis] and sublation [Aufhebung] of such contradictions," This corresponds to (C)N, is a strikingly straight inversion of the preceding setup, and symmetrical tothe pre-Socratic "crafts man's-mastery" play. As upheld by Marx(1845) talking about Feuerbach: "The question whether human thinking be possessed with concrete verity is not theoretical, but practical. It is in practice that man must prove verity, i.e. reality and power, materiality of his t hi nking. The dispute about reality or non-reality of thinking—as cut from practice—is purely scholastic in nature," This flies clearly in the face of the Aristotelian separation of theory and practice (which we symbolized by (N) C), and represents therefore a(C)N game, as introduced and symbolized earlier when talking of the "difference of things." Interestingly enough, Marx's piece is not about things-related (3rd-c.-BCE), but thinking-related (19th-c.) craftsmanship,
These quotes point up that Kant, Hegel, and Marx are performing a (C)N play on a stage inverse to Socrates's, Plato's, and Aristotle's (N)C stage. Today, in the 21st c., we'd argue that the play again takes place on the (N)C stage, as opposed to the 19th-c. (C)N one. Yet, our play, while on the same stage, unfolds on a different level of abstraction: in the 3rd c. BCEthingsturn upon "syllogistic," inthe15thc. upon "logic," and in our
time, in the 21st c., they revolve around "logistics," And once more: no reason for particular pride today; all these different BoTs are of equal richness, independently of their abstraction, because people, especially the masters of their epoch, were at all times as br i g ht as we think we are.
Structuralism
Having had a glance at the 19th c. with a (C)N setup, we now step onto the 20th-c, (N)C stage and give it acloser look, by entering "structuralism" into English Wikipedia: "Structuralism is a theoretical paradigm emphasizing that elernentsof culture must be understood in terms of their relationship to a larger, overarching system or structure." Or in German Wikipedia: "Structuralism is a collective term for interdisciplinary rnethodsand research prograrnsthat investigate structures and relation-shipswithin the mostly unconsciously functioning mechanisms of cultural symbolic systems," Once more there is symmetry with the 3rd-c.-BCE (N)C setup, but instead of playing with the syllogistic of object-names, we are doing so with the logistics of cultural elements.
Post-Structuralism
Our focus now turns upon the 1960s stage play (German Wikipedia, June 2013): "The term 'post-structuralism' denotes different scientific approaches in humanities and social sciences that originated first in France toward the late 1960s, and dealt in various ways with the relationship between performative language and social reality, Key tenet is the realization that language not only represents reality, but indeed creates it through categoriesand distinctions, Typically this perspective is accompanied bythe turning away from an object ivistic view of society that considers social facts as necessary; in its place, the varying possibilities (contingencies) of societal developments are being stressed," There is remarkably straight symmetry between the "craftsman's mastership" of the 6th c. BCE and the 1960s' "creation of varying realities," orthe "contradiction in things" (19th c.) and the 1960s' "contingency of societal developments," In the second half of the 20th c. there takes place an obvious inversion of the first half's setup. The first we associate with (N)C, the second with (C)N,
But, toour mind, structuralism, post-structural ism, and all the other -isms popu-latingthe 20thc. are not fully evolved BoTs. We would describethern as a diversity of
00	« Map of properties: different places, clusters of
information, activities, interests, perception
01	Hard-Boiled World Wide Web and the End of Distance
02	Geocoding. MappingTolcyo: orientation, choice making, relation to the environment, perception (Google Maps, processing)
ON READING THE CITY META-FORM
“The city is not a closed determined system of signs. Nevertheless, the urban has the ability to appropriate signs, to produce them. Reading space, then, is interpretative work that understands experience as a learning process. In this way, the city itself becomesa learning organiza tion." CFIGU RE 01)
CHRISTOPHER DELL, REPLAYCITY.
IMPROVISATION ALS URBANE PRAXIS
«BERLIN: JOVISVERLAG, 2011);
MY TRANSLATION.
Starting from the postulate that “the envi -ronmentas we perceive itis our invention” (H. v Forster, 1973), the projectsets outfrom personal experience. Experience, as a collection of our memories, is stored in symbols, personal maps of existing places, gathered, fragmented, rearranged, and re-puzzled by different sets of rules. Like this, experience can trigger reflections on the world’s unity, and such reflection produces a vivid sketch of momentary spaces, real and unreal at the same time; countless diversification of con -cepts, contexts, and desires. Mapping different moments of possibilities, playing with specific locations in terms of density, complexity, and topology on the one hand, and on the other with our perception and memories, we are able to create newarrangements of our experience depending on the “directions” we desire and chose to face.
Similar to the Situationists' interest in mapping cities in terms of experience—fragmented, subjective, temporal, and cultural—this project also assumes thatthe city is dynamic and changing, and that such maps would need to be updated and changed. This research proposes an open-ended design process for mapping, understanding, and cultivating “memory” and “experience” in relation to “the city.”
How do we understand and navigate space? Howto locate oneself? Regarding scale, what i s the smallest and what is the
biggest unit we deal with? Furthermore, what would be an appropriate reference allowing for comparison? Can artifacts help us in orientation? Artifacts embody our aesthetic and ethic criteria and our way of thinking about urbanized space—for instance, a building: any one we may have passed by, been in, seen, or engaged with in anyway.
TAG BUILDING
Letustakesuch a building as our semiotic “interpretant” (C. S. Peirce) of which we know that it contains within itself names, places, situations, fu 11 of immanent contra -dictoriness and complexity. Wemightbegin by asking, what is the function, shape, or role of this building? What are the actions incited and supported by it? We can encode this real, physical environmentwhich surrounds us and affects our senses, and use ittoconstructnewpossible scenarios, new waysto interpretdifferent layers of the city.
TOWARD PRODUCING "NEW MULTIPLICITY”
Self-organizing maps[SOMs] is an algorithmic procedure which offers a new manner for rendering complexify by mappings. It is capable of taking into account large amounts of multidimensional data and transforming it into easily graspable low-dimensional fields, each composed of multiple boundaries, constraints, and threshold s.The more intensely we make all vi rtual ly possible connections, bounda r i es, and di stances di sappear from the maps, the more we grow aware of the coexistence of al I these places in the same time. There are many ways of combining these fragmentary orders and to organize them locally. Maurice Merleau-Ponty has given a vivid description of the primacy of perception: “The object of perception is imma-nently tied to its background; to the link of meaningful relations among objects within the world; each objectreflectsthe other [...] much in the style of Leibniz’s monads. [...] Through involvement in the world—being in the world—the perceiver tacitly experi -ences all the perspectives upon that object
characters secondary to the lead one, the dominant BoT, an (N)C setup on the level of abstraction around "logistics," "points of probabilities," "quanta," or "indexes." In this logistical setup, structuralism would seem to index the (N)C stages of prior BoTs, while post-structuralisrn indexes their (C)N stages. Hence the different levels of the body-of-thinking setups, and one possible explanation of the inflation of -isms in the 20th c.
The whole of the 20th c. seems to be an (N)CL setup expressing logical geometry in an arithmetical environment. We met that setup around the 4th c. BCE, and again in the 1500s (Renaissance). Hypothetically, with the 21st c. we are entering an (N)CA setup: the introduction of geometrical algebra within an arithmetical environment, as seen in the 3rd c. BCE, and in the 17th c. (Baroque). More of this later.
TYRANNICAL NATURES
We are now going to take this argument to the health of BoTs, as it were. Like any body, a BoT has many organs, some good and some bad experiences, many moods, and reflects all of the diverse worlds of cultures and times—i.e. that a BoT, if said to
coming from all ihe surrounding things of its environment, as well as ihe potential perspectives that object has upon the beings around it Each object is a mirror of all others. [...] Our bodily involvementwith things is always provisional and indeterminate, we encounter meaningful things in a unified though ever open-ended world.”
MAURICE MERLEAU-PONTY, "ON CONSCIOUSNESS” IN THE PRIMACY OF PERCEPTION (1964),
In the maps produced by the SOM procedure, buildings are reconstituted into a new abstract entity which now consist not only of representations of concrete objects, but also of events, ideas, activities; they are discretized and rendered available to design new systems of networks, boundaries, borders, constraints. Playing with different levels of dependency, exploring relationships between physical objects and the flows around them, we are able to construct a new system of relations, a kind of new infrastructure.
With this approach using artifacts for orientation (in our case a building), one artifact can be considered as the smallest city unit (later we call it Basic Unit of Information, in short: BIT). But at the same time, this unit can contain—in its fragmentary scale with all the loose ends—entire networks of streets, roads, paths, squares, patterns of movements, usages of space, and all the information proper to experiencing cities. Such an artifact is to give orientation, while allowing for new heterogeneity in terms of scale, role, connections, or the character, the expression of the certain intensity of a personal experience.
DESIGN STEPS:
EXPOSE YOURSELF TO A RANGE OF POSSIBILITIES
The input data with which SOMs work are based on statistical, written, and visual sources, as well as, through the data selected, on personal impressions and memory. Mapping the experience of cities in the proposed manner implies to work with references, images, Google Maps, and Open Street Maps, and to morph them further in
Grasshopper, Rhino, Processing, Eclipse. We start with an image, as a symbol of our perception, which we take as an initial and undetermined variable. Then the process is run by several following steps, conceived and oriented around modes of sign production as Umberto Eco distinguishes them: recognition, ostension, replica, invention (U. Eco, 1978); to orientate our steps of the design process around these modes of sign production allows for emphasizing a state of impermanence, and makes roomfor “invention.” The link between experience, cognition, and computation is based on the reflection and learning from social relations and existing urban situations, and “the urban assublated, absolute form develops from actions, decisions, surface, volume” (H. v Förster, 1973). Thi s approach i s inspi red by Heinz von Forster’s question “what are the consequences of alt this in ethics and aesthetics," and ittakes his two maxims, oneforan ethical imperative: “toactalways so as to increase the number of choices,” and one for an aesthetic imperative: “if you desiretosee, learn howto act” (H. v Forster, 1973) as guidelines for further development of the proposed design process.
Hence the proposed procedure assumes: In order to increase the number of choices, followed by city rhythm, complexity, connections, and relations, there is an action to be taken and an experience to be articulated.To develop a theory of composition as an improvised choreography, we are asked by Forster’s two maxims to imagine an absence of gravity as the precondition for producing multiplicities out of formal arrangements, of existing places and common perception.
RECOGNITION: AN IMAGE
The first step of the design process is what Umberto Eco calls “recognition" and it should be related to fheimprints, symptoms, and clues to which we respond. I tstarts wi th the exposure of oneself to a range of possibilities in order to create an image as a symbol of our perception, which contains a whole set of not strictly related information regarding our interests. For example,
as an initial variable in the process of delineating a specific place and its geo-coordi-nateswe can use randomly picked images from Flickr, and presentthem together with the tag s of different activities that we have used as first search criteria.
OSTENSION: GEOCODING
The second step is geocoding. It is about choice making, orientation, and our relation to fhe environment The algorithm for converting fhe longitude and latitude values of fhe specific location into fhe city map and fhe corresponding street view i s scripted in J ava Processing. In this way, playing with Google Maps and purpose-made Processing scripts, we are able to project ourselves to any place in the world, instantaneously. We can also visit several places simultaneously, by choosing and combining different locations. The aim of this design step is to develop deeper understanding of the specific context and to engender a common perception imagebased on fhe extracted street views. (FIGURE 021
REPLICA: REDRAWING
Readings of a specific city, or of parts of a city, allow us to extract indices and transform the multidimensional data into the lowdimensional data list we can use for training our computational procedure to produce what we call “a Basic Unit of Information.” This “Basic Unit of Information”—in short: BIT—is to be treated as ihe artifact mentioned in ihe beginning, an artifactwhich is to help us orientate while navigating the maps of how we experience cities. The data list with which we train our BIT takes the form of a matrix, and itincludesdifferentrelations, vectors of transformation and combination. Thi sstep involves working with Open Street Maps, OSM XML files, Rhinoceros, Grasshopper, and ihe Elk plug-in.The various city layers are represented ihrough classical two-dimensional drawings, but every element, eiiher building, square, street, bridge, or part of the road, brings with it a set of information that is related to the specific location, area, perimeter, or ratio of physical properties, color, name, function, number of users, visitors, orpassersby. (FIGURE 03]
have an (N)C setup, orto be on acertain level of abstraction, does not necessarily and narrowly follow some set scheme. Rather, a BoT describes a certain focal point, and balances out some substance of great intellectual hybridity.
With this in mind, we would say that a healthy BoT manages to keep the N, C, and S paradox in fruitful openness, while an ailing BoT is unable to keep its balance, and sacrifices the openness of the paradox to giving priority to one or the other pair. This happens especially when levels of abstraction are getting mixed, or inversions disregarded.
Abstraction means, as per above, that we gain more freedom at negotiating contingencies, while controlling the necessities at the same time requires more effort. Thus an abstract C expends more energy in controlling N' than a less-abstract C does in controlling a less-abstract N. However, in the case of controlling an abstract C through aconcrete N, consistency will be lost, and a terroristic setup created, where everything is coerced into meaningless excitement, Conversely, when controlling aconcrete C with an abstract N', differentiation will be lost, and a tyrannical setup generated where everything isforced into meaningless entropy.
LONDON
03	Redrawing. Extracting layers of the city: city area, networks, paths, nodes, and constraints. Locations: Zurich, London, Tokyo
04	» An artifact: any buildi ng. Sequence of the catalogue
of buildings from Zurich, London, and Tokyo 05» Self-organized map: anew city plan. Location: ZurichLondonTolcyo(S0M, Eclipse)
Similarly disturbing results are to be expected from disregarding inversion, and treating it, e.g., as negation: trying to balance an external C, not against an internal (N) but straight against an external N (necessarily of less abstraction) results in ideological stagnation (C'N—political politics, a potentially interesting approach tofascisrn), whereas the reverse ends up in pragmatic hyper-activisrn ((N')(C)—economical economy, which might be called radical imperialism), This argumentation has a sketchy and somewhat brusque feel to it, relative to its scope, and admittedly we are still a bit uneasy in it, In this respect, however, two points ought to be borne in rnind concerning our method: we are very sure that it is always the whole we must deal with, which means we never know enough while we are still being held to articulating a position, even when the field is shifty. We are able to do that without recourse to sarcasm or fatalism, because we take the liberty not to judge.
Grasshopper
Now, without judging, let us look at artifacts in the field of architecture and computer science today.
Our BIT, which is to be engendered into an artifact—in this case, a building—is no longer only an object, a physical property, butratheran articulated symbol with both physical and not-physical properties, social relations and conditions. [FIGURE04)
INVENTION: EIGENPERCEPTION
As a final step, invention deals with the actions, actors, places, and their relations in real time.The SOM procedure, scripted in Java, Eclipse Juno, compares the artifacts with various sets of data and rearranges them in accordance with the prespecitied rules and differentcriteriafor choosing the Best Matching Unit (BM U) to compare and train whatistocountas our BIT. Such training is an open-end process, and itmakesuse of the input examples and the competitive process of vector weighting or vector quantization, feeding back on itself and including all the newly produced input vectors.
ZURICH
LONDON
TOKYO
The SOM procedure has the capability to produce numerous connections, to literally connect any aspect with any aspect The mappings of such connectivity show multiplicities out of formal arrangements and existing places, and they follow the aim of creating a new scenario, a scene behind the scene, as an enacted result of what we have seen and what we think we have seen: an image as a symbol of one’s Eigen Perception in existing places.
With the intention to describethe most diverse relations and approaches for mapping perceptions of an urban environment objectively, and yet in terms of personal impressions, our case starts with a few simple and general activities and “takes place” inthethree randomly chosen cities: Zurich, London, and Tokyo.
To move, to see, to search, to find, to disco ver... Th ese activitiescan lead u s anywhere, butcoupled wi th the rules and design methods mentioned above, it is possible to create a series of rearrangements of a projective, and virtually existing, urban environment Depending on whether our movement is linear or circular, or on the scope of our perception of the city, we are able to explore different reconfigurations of existing built structures, for instance in Tokyo.
The same set of criteria and design steps can be applied to a number of cities simultaneously, taking them into account atone and the same time; this latter option results in more personal maps of existing places, and they are more artistic and free in interpretation. [FIGURE 051
7b educate, to learn, to live, to work... these are the activities we followed in the context of Zurich. Considering the rearrangements of the ETH Centre and the ETH Hönggerberg Campus take into account, beside existing educational and residential facilities, also the identity of their specif) c location s. Such mappings allow us to investigate new urban scenarios in relation to the main ETH building, computed by the SOM as the best matching unit
To pray, to search, to choose, to believe, to rule... these arethe activitieswefollowed when considering contextual aspects from
"Grasshopper (2007) is a visual programming language ...which ... runs within the Rhinoceros 3D CAD application. Programs are created by dragging components onto a canvas. The out puts from these components are then connected to the inputs to subsequent components. Grasshopper is used mainly to build generative algorithms. ... Programs may also contain other disbalanced typesof algorithms including numeric, textual, audio-visual and haptic applications." Making use of our skeleton, we see the symbolic ability of structuring the environment (an abstract C) being reduced to the capacity of negotiation through Euclidean geometry: a less abstract C, which is easy to use due to the lack of abstraction, yet powerful at controlling (an abstract N'). Which adds up to a disbalanced structuralistic (see above) BoT. The endemic result is a "tyrannical" (N')C setup, euphorically presented as: "Popular among students and professionals, McNeel Associate's Rhino modelling tool isendernic inthe architectural design world. The new Grasshopp er environment provides an intuitive way to explore designs without having to learn to script" (English Wikipedia). Which is perfect for beginners, and an essential frustration-free first step toward computing in architecture. But for experts it is problematical, because negotiating results adequately is by
far not as easy and accessible. Consequently we increasingly risk churning out more and more meaningless entropic smooth lines, dross that smothers our heritages and intellectual negotiations underthe instant fascinations of surprising geometrical phenomena. If we don't care.
Processing; and Logo
With the programming languages Processing (2001) and its predecessor Logo (1967), we are faced with similar success and results but a contrary setup, "Processing is an open-source programming language, and integrated development environment (IDE) built for the electronic-arts and visual-design communities with the purpose of teaching the fundamentals of computer programming in a visual context, ... One of the stated aims of Processing is to act as a tool to get non-programmers started with programming, through the instant gratification of visual feedback." In this case the power of symbolic computing (N') is not controlled by Euclidean geometry, but by visual feedback from intuition. Intuition playsthe role of geometrical impression of outside necessity, on the 19th-c. stage, with a vector of (C)N. Combining 21st-c, computing power, asthe
history and culture in broad terms. Seeking manifestations of a common understanding of power, this map considers the areas and the churches of Zurich around Stadthausquai and Limmatquai, St Paul's in London, and Imperial Palace in Tokyo. The resulting maps of our rearrangements are projectively placed in the context of London. [FIGURE06)
THE END OF DISTANCE
This research proposes to investigate a number of strategies by using real-time data, and to organize this data into appropriate groups based on a predefined set of criteria. Such organization of data offers unlimited choices and combinations of dif-ferentconcepts and contexts. We can regard itasakind of “speech” or“orality” that can be “voiced” by computational languages. Such “speech” articulates “the present” asthe medium of ever-changing city conditions. Atthe same time, i ttreats such ar ticu -lation as an expression of individual appropriation and interpretation. By choosing and formulating activities and locations to project ourselves into, we can keep asking aboutwhatkind of atmosphere and identity we are actually participating in. (FIGURE 07)
06	Self-organizing maps rearrangement. Locations: Stadthausquai and Limmatquai Zurich, St, Paul's London, Imperial Garden Toltyo.(SOM, Eclipse)
07	Self-organized map: A new city plan. Rearrangement of the parts ofthree differentcities, Zurich, London, and Tokyo in the context of London. (SOM, Eclipse)
08	Self-organized map: Sequence of the new city plan. Location: ZurichLondonTokyo. (SOM, Eclipse)
internal necessity, with 19th-c, external necessity produces a (N')N setup, which we called "tyrannical," We are mindful that Processing, like Grasshopper, very successfully opens up information technology to architecture, thanksto its impressive learning curve, And, unlike Grasshopper, Processing even shows a path toward the full-fledged programming language JAVA—which allows coding of whatever iscodeable—thus leaving the pathway to digital literacy unobstructed. Still, we observe that major imbalances and attendant difficulties exist in acquiring expertise, not only at creating results with Processing, but at negotiating them, Thus we'd tend to diagnose Processing as a case of ignorance of inversion, and Grasshopper as one of lack in abstraction. One can find the same constellation with the processor Logo, which "is a multi-paradigm computer programming language used in education. ... It was originally conceived and written as afunctional programming language, and drove a mechanical turtle as an output device, ,,, Logo was created in 1967f or educational use, indeed for constructivist teaching, by Daniel G. Bobrow." Which lands ussrnack in the field of cybernetics, and aggressive inf antilization, and naturalization of information technology in the second half of the 20th c.
More ...
Some more indexes pointing tosyrnptornsof such "tyrannical" talksthat are crowding our field today: "I am not finished yet," Nobody will ever be finished. Infinity is always part of it, and is no excuse for not adjusting the vectors of aBoT. Insufficiency of technology isthe C in the balance. Ignoring the C by saying "I know, but I am not finished yet" is propagating a tyrannical dominance of N. Nor may one say, "I am on the other side, I am on the good side," or "I don't want this or that." Even while negating N, you are still on the control side, not on the contingency side. Nor isthere "I am concentrating on thissmall part, and will do this tiny thing well. The whole is too complex for me." Or as a popular German nursery song goes, "I am little, and pure of heart." Every serious cultural articulation, every masterpiece addresses anything. So does architecture, so does whatever technology. Self-reference is part of it. Especially radical constructivism and its fancy chaotic artifacts are mere renderings of structuralistic self-reference into Euclidean geometry, and therefore no major contribution to the actual cultural status quo.
Using randomization means establishing a mechanical version of a19th-c. external control mechanism, a sprinkling of nature onto artifacts, with some direct entropic
I
impact upon intellectuality. Random is not opening up, it is always obturating. The same goes for the aesthetic argument of the "creative architect." It amounts to just saying good-bye toone'sthinking, and handing control over to machines.
The Body
OSCILLATIONS
1.	A body ot thinking (BoT) isacultural constitution indicating how relations between necessity, contingency, and self-reference are being maintained.
2.	BoTsare not disciplinal.
3.	BoTsare articulated by masterpieces,
4.	The masterpieces of a certain time and region engender and articulate, evocatively one same BoT
5.	Masterpieces cannot be fully explicated or perfectly reproduced.
REFERENCES
Dell, Christopher. RepfayCity. Improvisation als uthane Praxis. Berlin: Jovis Verlag, 2011
Eco, Umberto. A Theory of Semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1976.
Förster, Heinz von. “Über das Konstruieren von Möglichkeiten” (1973). In Wissen und Gewissen. Versuch einer Brüche. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp 1991, 25-47.
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. “On Consciousness.” In The Prim acy of Perception: A nd Other Es says on Phenomenological Psychology, the Philosophy of Art, History, and Politics. Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press, 1964.
6.	An imperfect reproduction of a masterpiece is an expression of its articulation,
7.	Mathematic is the most explicit means of articulating a BoT.
8.	BoTsare either expel led or gathered.
9.	In an expelled BoT, geometry isthe expression of necessities and the impression of contingencies(N)C,
10.	In agathered BoT, geometry isthe expression of contingencies and the impression of necessities(C)N,
11.	In an expelled BoT, arithmetic is the impression of necessities and the expression of contingencies,
12.	In a gathered BoT, arithmetic is the impression of contingencies and the expression of necessities,
13.	Architectonic isthe interplay between geometry and arithmetic.
14.	Logic as t he "invest igat ion of con-elusions" isthe explication of self-reference
15.	Algebra as t he" resol ut i on of bala nee" isthe implication of self-reference.
16.	As corporeal entities, BoTs oscillate between expulsion and gathering.
17.	As intellectual entities, BoTs oscillate between logic and algebra.
18.	Corporeal and intellectual oscillations of a BoT are mutually orthogonal.
19.	Corporeal oscillations result in an inversion of BoTs.
20.	Intellectual oscillations result in an abstraction of BoTs.
21.	Architectonic incorporates the interplay between logic and algebra.
A remark about this schema. Ivlathe-rnatics, and especially geometry and logic, are not to betaken as referential constitutions, but as operational ones. We hoi d t he i de a t hat—u nf am i I -iar as it may seem—there are a lot of geometries, arithmetics, logics, and algebras around. They are cultural articulations, they are masterpieces in their own right. They are not natural
phenomena, predetermined, pre-existent, innate, to be uncovered, it is just us: through our self-reflection within our masterpieces. And in each of these masterpieces we perceive a certain manifestation of the constellation of geometry, arithmetic, logic, algebra, whatever each of them be, So let us point out some symmetries of these constellations on the stage of temporality.
a)	That manifestation is invariant to ail masterpieces of ail disciplines, and manifests itself in a manner that is consistent across ail masterpieces within a given time and region (4, above),
Therefore, such invariance is available for mediating between masterpieces, On the strength of a relatively profound understanding of masterpieces in one field, e.g., medicine, one may be sure to encounter the same BoT at work in the masterpieces of architecture, economics, physics, etc., of that time. Such symmetry in the manifestations within atime and region, and across disciplines, is very helpful for achieving fast comprehension, and indeed a better understanding of our own original discipline, But it must be stressed that such symmetry mediates geometries, arithmetics, logics, and algebras, and there is no need for spelling out what each of those actually is. This text follows a self-reflective algebraic paradigm, not a projective or reflective logical one, such as they are popular these days.
Another symmetry mediates between time complexes:
b)	Overtimethe manifestation oscillates along an axis of necessity N and contingency C,
In the symbolization introduced above, overtime a series of BoTs shows up as: — (N)C
—	(C)N — (N)C — (C)N —.Again, this schema media-izes the notions of contingency and necessity, and is helpful in establishing the historicity (not history) of masterpieces, Cf. Eric Voegel in’s Order and History. (N)C might be related to his concept of the ecumenical age, and (C)Nto his cosmic age,
There is another symmetry that mediates overtime:
c)	Over time the manifestation oscillates along an axis of logic L and algebra A.
We can find such time series in how BoTs show up overtime, such as: — (L)A --- (A) L — (L)A — (A)L —. For this now, a strong reference exists: G. R. Hocke’s introducing, in 1957, a schema of cultural alternation between classical and manneristic phases, Hocke called the Renaissance (~16th c.) and Classicism (~18th c.) classical phases, and Baroque (~17th c.) and Romanticism (~19th c.) manneristic phases, going deep into details, Joining Hocke, we pursuethe line 16th c. --17th c. — 18th c. --19th c. as:	(L)A	-	(A)L	-	(L)A - (A)L
d)	The two symmetries mediating overtime are mutually orthogonal,
So we may write: — (N)C(L)A — (N)C(A)L — (C)N(A)L — (C)N(L)A— (N)C(L)A— (N)C(A)L
—	(C)N(A)L — (C)N(L)A --- (N)C(L)A— (N)C(A)L —, describing two and a half cycles that address roughly the following periods of Western culture: — 5th c. BCE — 3rd c. BCE
—	3rd c. CE —12th c. — 16th c. — 17th c. — 18th c. --- 19th c. — 20th c. --- 21st c.
Again: this schema does not describe recurrences, but cultural axes of symmetry. Moris it—in contrast to Hocke, but in line with Voegel in—meant as a periodization of history, which we would describe as an articulation of a certain BoT, especially the 18th-19th-c. (C)N setup. Furthermore, BoTs often falter, as e.g. in medieval Europe, Incidentally, a change between BoTs is by no means an undivided panacea, It is mostly attended by substantial crises and catastrophes, With good reason BoTs are therefore equipped with strong immune defenses against change, Hence, being careful is an ethical imperative, in the 21st-c. context we would actually say that, as one indeed may be “outraged,” one should definitely “not be engaged,” The machines and their power and potential are extant and provide a generic and common ground. Nothing to worry about in a positive sense, Thus, while being afraid is legitimate, there is one—only one—way of overcoming it: learning to keep up with the mastership of the others,
THE NAME, 3RD C. BCE—(N)C
Now more closely to the modern-age Western BoTs. With the retrieval of the triangle from the solid manifestation of the pyramid, we characterized the
Thomas Chantirnpre, De natura rerum, fol. 105, schematic representation of the "rnun-dus." Aldersbach, ca. 1295.
The computation of planetary orbits in Kepler's Rudolphine Tables (1627).
Pythagorean-Euclidean space, and its particular constellation between geometry, arithmetics, logics, and algebra, as the interplay of the self-reflection of a series of things, a talk of thingsrepresented by numbers, if you have a wider interest in this BoT, you will find that Michel Serres describes it very interestingly in his Hermes books (1968-80).
THE WORD, 3RD C.CE—(C)N
[figure B] An inversion of the Pythagorean-Euclidean BoT appears around the 3rd c. BCE,and lasts throughout the Middle Ages, where it evolves around the geocentric world view, as represented by the authorities articulating it, and where things are entities animated within the cosmic order. Whereas the Euclidean BoT was centered upon the talk of things, the cosmic order is centered upon the thing of talks again. From (taik)thing to (thing)taikto (talk)thing, yet now on anew level of abstraction: by the Euclidean inversion, we u nhooked the talk from the series of things and established a new BoT centered upon the thing as necessary, and the talk as contingent—(N)C. With the new inversion starting around the 3rd c,, we gathered or included ail talks into a thing, and established a new BoT centered upon the talk as necessary, and the thing as contingent. Or, if we expand the talk of things to talk of things (= not all the other talks), ending up with talk of things (= not all the other talks = (not all the other things)), the abstraction becomes directly apparent: things are found on two levels, Abstraction is not-all-the-others-implicatedof not-the-others-explicated. It is the thing expanded to the-whoie-worid-inciuded-in-one-thing.
This is the difference between an Xand its abstraction, to be symbolized asX’. Normally we use different concepts for the thinking of similar things on different levels of abstraction, Therefore we easily overlook the abstraction itself, and its double-inversion character. We switch for exam pie from syllogistic, via logic, to logistic. In our thinking, they are all stagings of the same invariance, on different levels of abstraction. Logic includes the whole syllogistic world, and logistic in turn does the whole logical one, Logic is syllogistic', logistic is syllogistic", Or from mystical order, through cosmic order, to natural order. Or from taikingthings, via animated things, to enlightenedthings, and from thing via object to article ... from naming, through calculating, to quantizing ... Such are the kinds of invariances we are looking for, and from which, in the various BoTs (which we cannot know, as not being ours), the meanings that make sense of them are unhinged, However, studying the permutations in the ways invariances manifest themselves in the different BoTs, is then a source of stability for our own BoT,
Another line of abstraction: Prior to the Pythagorean-Euclidean BoT, we observe that thinking proceeds in reflections of series of things. In the 5th c. BCE, a new concept of numbers is projected, and uncoupled from these series of things. In the 3rd c. CE, reflect ive thinking in series of numbers is established, As may be thus summarized:
1.	numbers are things
2.	series are indicators of a (C)N setup
3.	non-series are indicators of an (N)C setup,
And as architects we conclude:
4.	in a (C)N setup, the void indexed by series reflects a thing
5.	in an (N)C setup the things project avoid,
In our BoT, the geocentric world of the 3rd c. CE must be read along the vector of thing of talks, and on the level of abstraction together with animation and cosmic order.The geocentric world therefore is an articulation of entities animated in a cosmic order, Mathematically speaking, this order is articulated as series of numbers to be read as thing of talks, or number animated in cosmic order, as symbolized by (C)N,
THE PROJECT, 16TH C.—(N)C
[figure C] In Renaissance mathematics, this setup undergoes an inversion again: the establishment of “infinite series of numbers” (as, e.g., perViete), the interplay of not all the other series of numbers, or the interplay of the self-refection of numbers represented by a new number notion called rational number. Bodies of infinite series, and rational numbers, cease, geometrically, to be refections of the cosmic order inasmuch as single specific constellations; they now project all possible constellations to form a geometrical entity, elevating its meaning from being the instantiation of one specific animation, to a range of potential variations of modes of animating it, Which means that such entity is no longer pointing to an animated element, but
to a geometrical line of movement,Therefore, in the Renaissance BoT, geometrical element means not the other points of a movement, Similarly for the rational numbers: "not the other ratios."
Consequently the Keplerian heliocentric worldview is not just a replacement of the Earth by the sun as the center of the order, We are inthe presence of a whole new BoT, Renaissance man, rnetaphoricallyspeaking, managed to leave the stable Earth-centered cosmic order, managed to leave the geosphere by putting the lines of his own movements into his pockets, and, equipped with that knowledge, succeeded in entering the heliosphere, and moving around the sun, Thus becoming able to look at the cosmos with new, mechanical eyes, and to behold the self-projective interplayof moving entities. Heeven managed to detach himself from the centric circular movement, and to conceive of an elliptical movement based on a moving center. On stage, these interplays of lines of movements, or points-that-are-not-there, are able to project themselves as friends. This is how Kepler explains eclipses, this is how architectural geometrical models and perspective drawings emerged, e.g., Dürer's, or Palladio's. This is the mechanical worldview, on the same vector as, but in abstraction to the Euclidean geometry (N)C, and in clear inversion of the medieval cosmic order (C)N,
The church of San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane in Rome, by Francesco Borromini, 1636-40.
PROJECTIVITY OR THE CENTERED VOID, 17TH C.—(N)C
[figured] After detailed discussion, and pointing up the invariances and operations relating to BoTs, the pace will now quicken, leaving more ample details to hopefully coming publications.
In the 16th-c. BoT we are handling rational numbers as infinite series of numbers in a manner that treats them as finite series of numbers. T h is rnea ns t h at t he talk of things on t he 16th-c. stage is a finite talk of infinite things, to be called, as it were, an (N)C(L)Asetup—i.e. that in a geometrical constitution we negotiate contingencies by following straight logical lines. A setup that fits a phase where a new BoT is expanding and exploring its new plateaus, which are opened up by inverting N and C. Stability is achieved by importing the logic from the previous BoT. But with time, familiarity with the new plateaus within the logical limits increases, and thinking turns toward self-reflection, shifting from logicto algebra. This is what we observe in the 17th-c. setup, symbolized by (N)C(A)L. Within this new BoT, thinking is now directed at self-reflective infinite talks of infinite things, establishing the rational numbers as self-reflective infinite series of numbers, and demanding projection of the projective self.
How is this articulated architecturally? Inthe Baroque's overload of ta/ksof things which are not there we can observe the production of a centered void, projected by an overwhelming amount of things. Deleuze's The Fold (1988), about Leibniz and the Baroque, further develops this.
PRODUCT OR SYSTEM,
18TH C.—(C)N
[figure E] Leibniz is the first to symbolize prominently these centered voids,
EKATERINA AGEEVA
HYBRIDITY
AS AN URBAN SPECULATION
“We are no longer ourselves’’—but who are we, whom have we been, and what isour Welt? While humans are changingtheirown habitats and environments, h u ma n i ty is c h ang i ng as a s pecies. Let u s assu me t hat t h is process d id not start recently, but is ongoing since the beginning of time.This project talks about urban and social speculation through the prism of hybridity.
You will findfour possible scenarios, each telling stories based on different theories: one, the story of a creat ureofvariousracesandcultures; two, stor ies of mecha no-biological species; three, stories of hybrids in terms of gender and socialization; and four, stories of hybridity that unfolds acrossthe internality and externality of ourselves.
By parallel storytelling, similar ities and affinitiesamongdifferenttheories are projected into one single space. The scenarios are not to betaken as a prediction, but as a cloud of indexes that might expand, merge with others, or also dissolve. It is possible to extract from it unlimited sets of different combinations. Playing with combinations we are able to compose a perpetual puzzle, unstable col lagesthatwil I constantly change by means of feeding in new information, and by changing the characterizations of the actors.
In the contemporary urban condition, we are confronted with an indefin ite multitude of spaces, each one piled upon, or perhaps contained within, the next: geographica I, economic, demographic, sociological, ecological, political, commercial, national, continental, global. Doest he empowering of technical generalizations, which we are facing today, keep any creative potential next to its sheer productivity? Is there a “cultural” fertility proper to the generic masses that spring from the grounds all around the globe?Those questions areraisedinthechaptersofthis wor k. I n d if f ere nt act s of storyte II i ng it zooms in from theoretical abstract notions to the level of specific cities and everyday urban artifacts, stages them through abstract actors and activities in collage form, and “re-encodes” these collages into other arrangements of abstract interrelations.
A pattern of waves ä la Fourier.
establishing a new abstraction of arithmetic, or simply giving these voids new names, His monads are things that cannot be divided. One might say they are fictitious things of rational talks, series of rational numbers. They establish a new abstraction ofthe thing of talks, an abstraction of the animated thing of syllogistic talks pursuant to the 3rd c. Our BoT gets inverted fromprojectiveto reflective. Entitiesdon't any longer have one name, but series of names made up of polynomial terms, Fictitious names, as yet undetermined, to be negotiated byway of their interplay with other polynomial terms, producing projections of things that are not there. Products negotiated within systems of other products. Productivity of a system. Geometrical pragmatism under arithmetical control. (C)N.
We call itthe Cartesian space, and look at it as centered voids, as rational talks of arithmetic articulations for creating fictitious things. Those manifest themselves as stable points of an oscillating curve, or patterns of interfering waves: points of stability, balancing all the infinite movements of the elements around. There is no stability, no finding these points without integrating the total environment as a prerequisite to bringing them into balance—no finding stability without actually doing it.
However, there may be rational talk about these points, using arithmetics, without actually doing it, Such isthe new notion of models in analysis, reflection, and construction. It is a clear inversion of the model of projection, as discussed forthe 16th- and 17th-c. context.These dynamical models unfold the Baroque void, or infinite determinism, into specificity. This is analytical geometry, Surprisingly, we find that intuition is the specificity of the predetermined void.The necessary environment forthe contingent elements, (C)N. Political entities embedded in an economics environment.
PRODUCTIVITY, 19TH C.—(C)N
What happens if not merely a limited but an infinite number of polynomials is to be constituted? Or, howto reflect the reflected self? Complicated question. So let us follow our symmetries: the 18th c. created its new BoT by inverting C and N, and kept stability by retaining the algebraic kind of self-reflection (A) from the preced-ing17th-c, BoT (17th c.: (N)C(A)L— 18th c.: (C)N(a)l). Following the expansion to this new BoT, time had come for explicating the self-reference logically (18th c.: (C)N(a) l — 19th c.: (C)N(L)a).
By putting the question of reflection of the reflected self, the limits of 18th-c, Descartes or Leibniz analytical geometry are being challenged. In the 19th c. we observe, in an inversion of the 17th-c, setup, an emptiness of analysis surrounding a centered eve ry-t hing. The new thing as not all the analysis. The Eiffel Tower, e.g., as inverted, respectively as not the other objects and not the other functions. An abstraction of the 16th-c, object, and an inversion of the 18th-c, void of analytical objectivity. Which opens up ontothe 20th-c, Or, taking psychology as an example: the "Ich" started out in the 18th c. as the necessary counterpart of the contingent individual, and ended up, bythe late 19th/early20th c., as not all the analysis of the individual (18th c.: (C)N(A)L — 19th c.: (C)N(L),a — 20th c.: (N)C(L)a).
THE ARTICLE, 20TH C.—(N)C
You may feel this argumentation to be a bit far-fetched orconvoluted, Mostly it is unusual, It is an unusual algebraic-geometric approach, and we need it for finding stability against the logical-geometric BoT so pervasive today. By focusing on the specific setup of the20th-c. masterpieces, we hope to sharpen our understanding of the present-day power of information technology. And following our symmetries, we have to argue our reasoning is two-pronged:
00« HybridityArtifacts: perpetual infrastructure 01 Four scenarios: actors
A SHORT PLAN FORTHE PRESENT WORK
This work is an offer for furlher interpretation. Itis an excerptfrom an open-ended act of storytelling, based on my own sensibility and on contingent choices I made. The storytelling takes theoretical and abstract notions as its coordinating framework, and then zooms in to everyday concrete urban artifacts in order to explore how to possibly make sense of what we can see when viewed through the lenses offered by the abstract notions. The aim is to render these explorations into pictures that capture various kinds of spaces, on different scales, while being attentive to fhe modali ty of fheir “genesis,” and to the coexistence they all maintain within one single, comprehensive space.There are heroes (actors) i n my storytelling—hybrid creatures—butthey remain absent All I “know” about them is that they inhabit certain spaces and participate in certain activities thattake place in these spaces. Through indexical characterization of these actors, the scenarios attempt to participate in thei r perception. It comes in four chapters: (1) Actors, Activities, Space, (2) Cities, (3) City Grid, (4) Urban Artifacts.
The first chapter consists of four chosen scenariosthatarebased on notionsfrom different works by Rem Koolhaas (chapter#!: Stripped Identity), Henri Lefebvre (chapter #2: The Wild Edge of Society), from Donna Haraway’s text “A Cyborg Manifesto” (chapter #3: Cyborgian Emancipation) and from Michel Foucault’s writings on the notion of Heterotopia (chapter #4: Other ness). These theoretical positions arenottreated in a strictly para I lei manner, but rather as streams of ideas and thoughts that overflow from one chapter to another. The common background for all scenarios is a fundamentally new understanding of the relationships between humans and their milieus, and an articulation of this new understanding by seeing in the idea of
hybridization a possible path for thinking in terms of openly multilayered and multi-connection interrelations.
In fhe scenarios, my heroes (actors) are represented by the characters of either real personas or by media creatures, those that seemed to be most suitable for designating their proper nuances of hybridity. My work attempts to viewtheir theoretical stances by vir tue of staged encounters wi th the actors. With thisaim, the scenarios will personalize the stories, and suggest interpretations of the story lines that make explicit (by imagination) some of the individually implicated interpretations that are possible. Throughout the entire work, I follow a method that traces indexes of activities. I extractf rom the original textsof my actors entire li sts of acti vi ties and transitions their notions seem to undergo, and those lists are treated as indexes that are to be meaningful. In playing with indexes, in composing and exploring different combinationsof them, I seek to find similarities and affinities between theways in which different story lines can be staged in fhe different scenarios.
The contingently chosen activities are visualized in a collection of images. To get more stability in this work throughout the chapters, the relations of space and activities are treated on different urban scales: that of the city, that of city grids, and that of urban artifacts.
The second and the third chapters each area series of collages thatusetheimages of these acti vitiesf rom the firstchapter.The coll ages symbol ize how space can be en vi -sioned through activities, and imagineprac-tices related to these spaces. The series of collages are produced by “calculating” with the code of these images, a procedure that allows for creating an unlimited collection of collages. The chosen collages that are u sed hereasanillu st rati on cannotcountas final ones, indeed, there can 'tever be a final one. This i s my way to engage with space by attempting to departfromthe perception of a fl ux of phenomena.
The fourth chapter of this work is a seriesofartifactimageswherethe meaning of the illustrated artifacts is intentionally
first against taboo-izing abstraction as evidenced by direct use of 16th-c. concepts of thinking, and then against the discarding of inversion by directly using 19th-c, concepts. For we must embrace both abstraction and inversion if we are to cope politically [C] with the abstract and strong necessities [N] attaching to our artifacts, viz, the information technologies of our 20th-/21st-c. setup. We are arguing for a comparable component of contingencies [C] or politics in the 20th-c,-(N)C setup, We are afraid of tyrannical (N)N constitutions.
And now, let us do one last inversion, toward the 20th c.: information technology is, as any masterly artifact of the 20th c., an evocative talk of fictitious things, establishing a new abstraction of the talk of things, which we visited as rational ta/kof animated things in the 16th-c. context. We thus invert our BoT from 19th-c. reflection toward projection again. It must be stressed, as important for understanding the 20th-c. setup, that these new talks from the analytical void are neither fictitious nor results of intuition, but talks of any fictitious things (not one of every), of any story, and any intuition. Fictions are not there yet, they take form through ongoing negotiation. Objects have become pre-specific. Inchoate products, still to be specified. By articulations. They are articles. To be put into one's pocket, for creating one's production wherever it's wanted,That's what logistics is
hypertrophied.The everyday urban artifact is the small entity of a global process; they represent common activities and manifest claims for identity. They should be understood not only as physical objects in the city, butas making up a hi storical, economi -cal, political structure of the city. Historically, the individuality of urban artifacts comes from the qualifications they give to certain activities. Butwiththe process that generalizes di stinctcities into global urbanity, this historical richness is rather devaluated and a new approach is necessary for understanding them. As an attempt, the last set of collages seeksfor identity notthrough analyzing qualities in terms of quantities, but quantities in terms of abstractqualities.
SPACE
they know everything about you except who you are... ”
KOOLHAAS, 1995
“Like alt men in Babylon I have been a proconsul; like alt, a stave; I have also known omnipotence,opprobrium, jail." [FiGUREOi] BORGES, 1949
ACTORS,
ACTIVITIES
STRIPPED IDENTITY
FRACTAL SPACE
TOPOLOGICAL SPACE
Stripped Identity resides where we find no standardization or rational order. Driven by the chaos of contemporary globalization, the overabundance of materials and information, cultural cacophony, mankind adapts into previously unseen forms of alienation: amoral and pragmatic multicultural hybrids, which move by instinct from individual differences toward generic similarities. Convergence is possible only at the price of identity.
The scope of such spaces is ubiquitously recognizable and easy to explore; one is guided by understandable symbols, within identical spaces, among activities
02	Stripped Identity/activities: to guide by symbols, by space, by activities, by action/fractal space: endless repetition of the same simple pattern
03	Wild Edge of Society/activities: to break up subordination, anonymity, homeliness, alienation/ topological space; indefinite multitude and cross-section
04	Cyborgian Emancipation/activities: to extend milieu, capacity body, mind/incomplete space: velocity as a concrete condition
about (necessities anchored in abstract ground, in infrastructures, in the global system), and what const itutes the new necessit ies (N), able to articulate or negot iate the new(N)C,
Movies might be a good illustration to the kind of stabilities to be established when describing the actual cultural constitution of our BoT: to start with, Shakespeare's Renaissance theater unhooksthe play from the animated medieval humans, and stages them anywhere and anywhen as self-reflections, i.e. as project ions of animated, contemplated reflections. The observer's vantage point is necessarily outside of the animated, cosmic order of necessities. He is expelled from the medieval order, puts all the plays into his pocket, and projects himself as not the other plays. Explicates his play, creates a certain mask, takes on a personality, acts politically.
Today's cinema paradigm is symmetrical to Shakespeare's: the cinema records analytical reflections in the natural order, and stagesthern anywhere and anywhen as self-reflections, i.e., as projections of analytical reflections, The observer is positioned outsidethe natural order of necessities. He too is expelled, puts all th ere cordings into his pocket and projects himself as not the other recordings. Explicates his recordings, creates a certain brand, takes on an identity, acts politically.
INCOMPLETE SPACE
and designed actions that are commonly well known. Everywhere, we find the same repetition of simple movements and simple patterns. The space is endless and fractal, repeats itself on all scales. [FIGURE 02]
THE WILD EDGE OF SOCIETY
The Wild Edge of Society comprises anything and everything that undermines any and every schema of totality. By principle, it stages the opposite of what i s at stake, and presents a pi ace where whatconditions daily conducts and norms of behaving will be ignored, where hierarchical orders will break down, where by principle, minorities will get power, and where all depends upon questions of volition.
Such spaces constitutethe opposite of stability, and they feature asan end stageof any attemptto linearize socia I entropy processes. The political activism of minorities forms a new stream of activities which all aim to break up patterns of subordination, anonymity, homeliness, and alienation. The indefinite multitude that constitutes its spaces i s immeasurable, but it is possible to capture points of extremes that then allow mapping space in topological terms. [FIGURE03J
CYBORGIAN EMANCIPATION
The adaptations into new forms of alienation diverge in two directions, toward human “machinality” and human “animality.” In both directions, we are dealing with a question of social reality and emancipation that aims atbreaking up the structures of existing dualisms, binary oppositions, and their logic of domination. Hierarchies can be disempowered by actively exploring and mobilizing the blurring borders. We are notnatural or artificial, neither objects nor bodies, neither mental nor physical; we are an assemblage of all these factors, among many many others.
We are constantly extending our milieus, capacities, theagility of our bodies and minds.Thepermanenttechnical sustenance of our environments charges them with power, and we learn to cope with new velocities. This, we could understand as a
It’s Not Simple
None of this is simple. But why should becoming a master be simple? Simple things are for tyros, A master is a chap who surpasses what you are capable of, and whose ways of accomplishing that remain opaque to you—until you have yourself risen to his level of mastership. There is no external reference once we have stepped out of a framework and begin to act on a stage, such as today's (N)C setup. How then to decide whether a supposedly masterly performance is actually good or not? That's the C question of contingency. As it always has been. There is no certainty, nor right or wrong. There are certain ways of negotiating. But safety and control are on the N side of Diodorus's master argument. Therefore you need mastership for maintaining your balance on an appropriately high level of abstraction. Your thinking needs to become acrobatic.
Objective Knowledge
And at all that, we exert ourselves at making things simple, and controllable, rather than adequate. Take the popular 20th-c. concept of Karl Popper's objective knowledge for an example. Objective, in 16th-c. (N)C, stands in contrast to objectivity, which is
concrete condition. Such a notion of space is constantly in change and can’t ever be empty or full, t FIGURE 04)
OTHERNESS
Otherness is the external condition that is capable of giving freedom to qualities that appear to belong intrinsically to one thing or another. Thi s liberating freedom i s born in a space of primary perception and dreams, a space of otherness, some sacred and forbi dden zone. Yet beware—thi s zone is inhabited by stalkers, by the ones that are released from commonality and taboo, but who come back and participate in everyday routines. Such spaces form a diffuse and promiscuous condition of borders and “i n-betweens”: where do we draw the line between sacral and profane, between legitimate and forbidden, between public and private?
The profanation of spaces (or practices) opens up an Otherness that is inevitably belongs to hierarchical regimes. The heterogeneous space that consists from gaps, discontinuity, and fragments hosts more values than any discreet zone that i s clearly divided according totime or actuality. [FIGURE 051
CITIES
IVe shape cities that shape us.
(PARAPHRASINGEDWARD SOJA)
METACITY
What can be gained by projecting “cityness,” the notion that contains any subsequent information and any multi-scalar ideas of “a city,” onto one meta-level, the Meta City? N otin order tofind an ideal ity of the city as a reference, nor its generic quality in any referential terms. But as a domain that were to host any abstract potential we can attribute to cities, as a kind of platform for speculation. The scenarios in this chapter take the sophisticated logistic urban infrastructures as they are expanding today, seemingly beyond bounds, as a
starting point onto which we can render time-space fields of “specific” cities from whatweknow. (FIGURE06]
The second chapter suggests a list of such “abstracted potentials” of cities we “know” (Singapore, Venice, Generic Venice, the Digital City, Jerusalem). They are explored and projecfi vely staged in terms of their capability of providing releva ntstages for our actors, or of developing into new actors, depending on our contextualization and perception of them. The staged projections of those cities are meant as “points i n a moment,” as extrusions from the cityness potentiality of whatwe call the Meta City. They are meantto be interpreted in terms of bi-uni vocal units (in short bits), relevantto each other as well as to a projective imagi -nation of cityness at large.
SINGAPORE
Singapore i s a ci ty that i s completely regu -lated by the state, planned and builtalmost a Itogether f rom scratch. Asa resul t of such a tabula rasa approach, almost all of its colonial and precolonial history has been erased. Si ngapore lends itselfforastudyof a political systemthat is altogether different from whatwe are used to treating as “natu -ral,” those political systems we call nation states. In Singapore, “There is remarkably little thatisnotthe result of [...] carefully deliberated social policy” (Koolhaas 1995). By making use of the legacy of “Western” modernity, yetfamiliarity with itshistorical con text—i tseems—the state of Sing apore has produced a new kind of city-creature, which seems to grow and develop as the heir of sheer “nothingness": “ But the ci ty i s not sterile—ithas a style—the generic—which can counton ahuge support Artificiality of Singapore is more and more accepted by Western cities” (Koolhaas1995). Singapore seems to act as a kind of semantic laboratory, where the perplexing i ssues that define ourage—such asracial coexistence of heterogeneous origins—can be tested in different modalities, before they are imported to Europe, and to other places in the world. Paradoxically, undifferentiatedness is the genuine essence of the city that liveson in a
HETEROGENEOUS SPACE
05	The Otherness/activities: to desacralize observance, time, actuality, hierarchy/heterogeneous space discontinuity, gaps, fragments
06	MetaCity/Cifes
an ISth-c. (C)N concept. Knowledge isthe (C)N explication of mastership, asopposed to the concept of creativity as an (N)C implication of mastership. So, according our hypothesis, while being in a20th-c. (N)C setup, objective knowledge is an interesting concept—lifted from the 16th-c, level of abstraction straight ontothe 20th-c. level. As illustrated by this very typical—and for me as an architect and engineer rather astonishing—quote: "But the Fifth Symphony as such just does not exist; although, admiK tedly, we often use language in such a way that we speak of the Fifth Symphony as if it were one ofthe existing things" (Karl Popper, Three Worlds, 1978, p. 147). Hullo, what is this? Putting it very friendly, we'd say that from a20th-c. (N)C perspective he intentionally, strictly, and correctly argues by using 16th-c, (N)C logic, which of course is blind tolSth-c. (C)N duetolackof inversion and abstraction. Consequently he fights 18th-c, (C)N, shunting ourselves to 16th-c. (N)C as a reference, while himself remaining on the 20th-c. (N)C position. Asfor himself, he holdsontothe powerful 20th-c.-(N)C-"master of-logistics" position, demoting usto, and controlling us as subordinated 16th-c,-(N)C "masters of logic". And what's even worse: by blocking the accessto 18th-c.-(C)N enlightenment, he eliminates contingency from the 16th-c. paradigm, and traps us in
constant cultural gray zone, importing citi-zensfrom abroad to sustain its own continuation. A lack of differentiation overpowers the entire environment, and isan outcome of industrial processes too vast and dynamic to be structured. Singapore constitutes a kind of space that is produced by duplicable instruments, which in turn were designed for duplication: repetitive space as a result of repetitive action. It remains resistant to the traditional toolsfor urban planning: ‘The most dangerous and most exhilarating discovery is that planning makes no difference whatsoever.” (KOOLHAAS, 1995)
VENICE
Let us say that Venice is the city that has been created by nature, and produced by society. Nature itself doesn’t actually pro-duce anything, butitaffords meansfor production. Society usesthosemeansto make a final product Nature creates, but it does not labor. Production is human, based on intention and purpose. In the case ofVen-ice, nature provided a unique area, a set of sma 11 i sland s. The city ofVenice did not just appearfrom nowhere, it was rationalized into being—by people. Through collaborations among a collective. Venice was able to erectwaterwaysto enable business, and consequently, to enablethe city to progress. The conquest of land from water was both a “top-down” and a “bottom-up” process. The desires ofthe Doge ofVenice, and those ofthe city’s aristocracy more largely, coincided with the rest ofthe aspirations by the Venetian society to achieve benefits from the seaborne trade. Humans, as social beings, produce their own life, collective consciousness, including its political, religious, artistic, and philosophical artifacts. The production of spaces cannot be traced back to some specific events or objects. Rather, it results from a multiplicity of various works, and from a diversity of forms. Social space is notafhing among other things, norisitaproductamong other products: itsubsumesthingsproduced, and interrelations established, in their coexistence and simultaneity—their relative order and/or relative disorder.
GENERICCITY	SOCIAL PRODUCTION CITY
0PENS0URCECITY HETEROTOPIA CITY
a16th-c.-(N)N, pure-logic BoT, something he explicitly called "Third World" in 1978. That's what "objective knowledge" and "open society" actually seem to be about. To some, such argumentation may seem artless, summary, or unkind, It might be, if looked at from aforrnal 16th-c. or an analytical 18th-c, viewpoint, which iswhat Popper would want ustoadhereto. Uncomplyingly, however, we are busy establishing a 20th-c, algebraic argumentation, which rneanswe are staying awayfrom eithertruth-clairning, or any kind of judging. All we do is articulating positions liable to engender mastership, which in the eyesof "objective knowledge" and "open society" is obnoxiousand must be combated,
Popper does not stand alone. He is representative of the BoT of the 1950-80 period at least. Lewis Murnford and his influential views on architecture andtechnol-ogy provide another example, such asfrorn The Cultureof Cities (p. 142): "Versailles essentially was a chi Id's toy, precisely astheir dynastic politics was, realistically considered, child's play." And p. 338: "If one can do without the others, it's the country, not the city; the farmer, not the burgher." Then p, 391: "Versailles, beheld on a large distance, is no more formidable than a horizontal factory unit," (The retort of course
3 "Would you rather be the mayor of Detroit or Paris?" "Detroit Detroit I have zero doubt Paris is almost perfect—I am joking now. Don't take it too literally. No, Detroit. You know, we have a sort of one thi ng, what is happening is, European artists are coming to Detroit, because there is a lot of space. It i s a littl e I i ke East Berli n, you know, after the wall came down, where artists just went and you just squatted i n a bui Idi ng. Detroit has enormous potenti al: urban agri -cultureof course is a big one for Detroit—I smile, because it was an irony, but it is interesting. So I would rather be the mayor of Detroit." Lift Conference Marseille, July 6-8,2011, http://www.youtube, com/watch?v=Ww4pYjLViFE 21:36ff.
being, referring to Ledoux, that factories were palaces in their time, and opened up society). All this is incredibly and aggressively ignorant of mastership, and hardly understandable to whomever likes craftsmanship, likes music, likes engineering, likes science, likes thinking. Or take Saskia Sassen who, when recently asked, at a conference in France, whether shewould prefer to bethe mayor of Paris or rather Detroit, she off-the-cuff answered, with a smile: Detroit, because in Paris everything is perfect, whereas Detroit is where European artists are flocking to, and Urban Farming is a big thing.3
This BoT, this projection of actual logistical phenomena onto proportions, this tying of intuition back to Euclidean geometry, empathy, aesthetics, being friendly, being polite, being correct, optimizing, making no mistake, finds itsexpression in Koolhaas's Generic City and is unable to cope with 21st-c. developments, It is not the solution, it is the problem, With what we propose in this text, we do care for the mastership in making croissants, we don't forthe generalization in turning out hotdogs. Only mastership will be capable of coping with the slums of our rnegacities. What else would? Certainly not generalization, which demands just to be trusted, and left alone about details.
GENERIC VENICE
If we imagine the existence of a megadatabase, consisting of all the present city typologies, we can try to redraw existing singular cities, for example Venice. Itis interesting to see which parts or city elements will be recognized as the authentic, and which oneswill be replaced bytheanal-ogous. Can the parts that would be up for replacement be read as less significant in terms of a city’s identity? What if the sensitivity for recognizing will be reduced, as the redrawn appearances offered by one such transformation, for example a “Singaporean” transformation of Venice, will increase/intensify how we will see?This very abstract experiment can help to map and visualize, a further development, a process of temporal change, and mark crucial moments of shifting perspective from the age of a city with its strong local identity, toward the potential genericness it hosts, or vice versa: from its genericness to a kind of “super identity,” if such transformations ever were possible.
DIGITAL CITY
With the idea of a digital city, the city metaphor is used to stage an ideal space of knowledge, reason, meanttoconstitutethe technological “location” of an ideal social order, the so-called virtual community. The regimes of classification and categorization, structuring the abstract and infinite data space into visible and sharp units, turn non-territorial data space into highly contested social places, as a kind of ter-ritorialization of thought The implementation of information and communication technology was once(orstill is) supposed to revitalize the democratic system. “‘Cyher-democracy’ or ‘electronic democracy’are the new tubes which should transform the stale democracy of passive spectators into an active and participatory democracy. At the same time, it creates a global public sphere" (Legge wie 1997). The whole structure must be explicit and transparent i n order to be visible for the digita I ly eman -dpated “Netizen.” Butlike a tradi tional city, the Digital City has a military origin. On one
07	Cities/Paris, New York, Barcelona/Grid: 0.5 irregular/0.5 regular
08	Cities/Grid: 0.7 irregular/0.3 regular
09	Cities/Grid: 0.3irregular/0.7regular
hand, new media technologies have become more accessible and easy to use; on the other hand, access to information that is generated by users is largely controlled by just a few companies/institutions. Could it be possible that the form of a “network society” turns out to host yet another, ever more powerful, society of control? (This paragraph is no literal citation, butitdraws a lot from Apprich 2008).
JERUSALEM
The celestial and profane Jerusalem. Jerusalem is a city of ethnic and religious heterogeneity, and needs to be attributed greatcu I -tural significance. The city’s actual spaces bear testimony to its “layered” history, asits plateau in the Judean Mountains, on which it is built, has been carved by conquests, colonizations, and occupations. The layers of history reveal in different parts of the city instances of coexistence and conflict in afragile, torn, violated, and instrumental-ized context in the manner of a collage. The terrain consists almost entirely of borders, and immaterial residuals of invested hope. Otherness, hope, and violence almostfall togetherin thiscarved-upand disintegrated, militarized cityscape, especially as the impenetrable cease-fire line runs through the heart of it Jerusalem, with its temples and walls, has a celestial importance for all Abrahamic religions. For Christianity it manifests the city as a physical reconstruction on divine recreation, as the N ew Jerusa-lem.The Ear then Jerusalem juxtaposes i n a single real place, asthe Holy City, the entire regulation of a totality of “cityness,” aspiring to manifest the opposite of the chaotic disorder of nature. In its legacy, cities hold the promise of salvation. In all this, despite everything, Jerusalem offers, somehow, sal -vation. Pilgrimage and religious tourism can been seen as a collective, or rather collectively individual, experience of otherness, an event-space of Heterotopias.
QUANTUM, 20TH C.—(N)C
If the reflections presented in this text happen to go against the—to some degree— common-sense concepts of "open society" and "objective knowledge," why should youthen trust our argumentation above others? For it is optimistic, which is not trendy these days, It is challenging, which is offensive today, It is not consensus seeking, which is unusual. Indeed, a lot may be said against it, but surprising as it may seem, it is not new. The BoT which we offer an entry to, is a 150-year-old lady, a lady of elegance, holding artifacts that live on in electricity, information technology, and quantum theory, Let's pick out quantum theory, which may best help underpin her trustworthiness,
The Double-Slit Experiment and the Dimensionality of Time
[figure F] The famous double-slit experiment, which illustrates impressively the difference between particles and waves, may serve as an introduction to quantum theory, If particles are randomly projected onto a maskwith two slits, a screen behind the maskwill show particles in a pattern inverse to the mask, We called this BoT 16th-c. (N)C, If however you inverse the situation on a higher level of abstraction and, instead of projecting
The pattern of interferi ng waves can be read as reflections of waves, or as probabilistic projections of quanta.
particles, you reflect not all the particles (by opting for the wave instead of the particle perspective, which corresponds to the 18th-c, BoT of (C)N), what is being obtained on the screen behindthe mask are patterns of interferences, Thomas Young, e.g., in his famous double-slit experiment (1802), showed up the nature of light as reflections of waves. Proceeding now to the next inversion, a20th-c. (N)C setup, by just projecting not a/lthewaves, we find ourselves on the micro-scale of quantum effects, and—asurpris-ing and simple observation—on quantum level, 20th-c. particles, more precisely quanta, are not behaving like 16th-c. particles, they behave like 18th-c. waves. And some further thinking brings about the 18th-c. paradox: how can asingle quantum "know" about other quanta yet to come, when they take part in the formation of patterns that are "not there yet"? In other words: how may predictions be made regarding the scales that reveal quantum effects? The answer is simple: by incorporating, in asingle point, an overlay of not all the possible quanta that are not there. That 's why t he set up cannot be measured without affecting it: mensuration changes the possible waves. That's why the results obtained depend on the questions asked, That's why the screen is no longer analytically reflecting, but projecting a quantum space, We suggest calling it dimensionality of time.
CITY GRID
The way in which a specific city can be interpreted and distinguised depends upon a city’s “image-ability” and “read-ability.” In the days of Open Source, the interposition of information fluxesthatare constitutive for a city becomes the most determi -nating factor. It affects those aspects that had been the decisive ones in the past: the notions of the City Grid, and the City Art' -facts. For humans as “users,” one of the ways to perceive information is by attending to it through an internal perspective organized around visual elements: paths, edges, districts, nodes, and landmarks. Those elements en masse constitute the city grid, or city pattern. They contain information that contributes decisively to a city grid’s, and the city artifacts', image-ability and read-ability. The possibility for retrieving information, in order to use it as the means for creation, depends on an individual’s skil I s and a kind of strictly personal “urban literacy”
Accordingtothe narration of hybridity, three cities were chosen for our narrative that present their city grid (1) as a symbol, or (2) as a congestion, or (3) as a logo.
SYMBOL:
THE HETEROTOPIA OF ILLUSION
Haussmann 's renovation/ Pari s.The world -famous geographical point for romantic trips, the city as a “honeymoon hotel,” the epitome of a contestation between mythical and real space.
CONGESTION:
MAN-MADE ARCHIPELAGO OF ARCHITECTURAL ISLANDS
Manhattan Grid/NewYork. Where commercial interests have enforced to treat each block of the grid as singled-outof the whole, as “one block alone.” This has instigated and fueled a kind of vertical egothat is now proper to each block, and as we can see by now, ithasgenerated a kind of three-dimensional anarchy and an incredible variety of human behavior.
LOGO:
OVERSIMPLIFIED IDENTITY
Example/Barcelona. Its old and singular city growth through the process of consolidation due to tourist branding and an overflow of landmark architecture. I n consequence, Barcelona no longer “improves” or “develops,” instead it “abounds.”
This chapter results in a set of grids, built from the same simple patterns, but arranged in to va rious configu rations. Such adjustments of specified pattern appearances present us alienated visualizations, and through that, different hypothetical “perceptions” of the cities. (FIGURE07-09)
URBAN
ARTIFACTS
Utopia as a practice.
(PARAPHRASING FREDRIC JAMESON)
Over three hundred satellite images harvested from the I nternet, mostly by Google Earth and the NASA website, constitute the data of a peculiar collection of cities as artifacts. (FIGURE HI They are images that present urban artifacts as a kind of “evidence” on the surface of the Earth, distributed according to preassigned story lines. They are the product of paradigms taken: city patterns, infrastructure, entities of all sorts, nature urbanized. This chapter arranges their “evidence” into groups, such thatthey can be re-arranged into meaningful collages. These arrangements of artifacts were done notaccording to geographi -cal proximities, but according to possible imaginary affinities. This is an attempt in learning to see global phenomena through a practice within the abstract of patching and overlapping pieces into one image and forming “wholenesses” from parts. The hypertrophy value of iconic artifacts probably can exude an essence of phenomena and new kind of diversity out of the Generic. (FIGURES 10-13)
I n classical physicsthe "state" iscomplete; it is never complete in quantum physics, In classical physics, object features are revealed; they are produced in quantum physics. Changes of state aredealtwith deterministically in classical thinking; they are dealt with non-deterministically in quantum thinking: they are at once continuous and discrete; observables do commute and don't; classical physics deals with qualitative features, quantum physics with qualitative values; outcome facts are potential in classical thinking, they are probable in quantum thinking. All this is exposed in more detail in QED (Quantum Electrodynamics): The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (1985) by Richard Feynman; and many of these ideas pop up in Jorge Francisco Isidore Luis Borges Acevedo's inspiring short stories.
An astonishing view of our urban life may also be obtained from considering cinema, TVj electricity, and computing—all the 20th-c, infrastructures—not as analytical reflections of nature, but as probabilistic projections of natures, Which turns the current ly so prevalent misanthropic mood inside out! Orf rorn reading Wassili Kandinsky's Point and Line to Plane (1926) as aprojection of probabilities in non-hornogeneousspace, or as an engineeringof bodies-in-time. And there we are, with our view on urban life, at a point we think is corresponding to our time.
INFRASTRUCTURES AND FUNCTIONALISM
After developing the algebraic-geometric setup of the 20th c., and after gaining some experience in describing actual phenomena, let's get back to information technology and architecture, and their present-day tools and artifacts.
Shape Grammars
A very powerful and widely used tool in architecture and urban design are shape grammars, originated by Stiny and Gips in 1972. By their title and time of origin they directly call up the so-called linguistic turn, Noam Chomsky, and the general linguistics of Ferdinand de Saussure (interestingly not actually his own, but those of a posthumous publication initiated by his students in his name, referring to a linguistic model Sau-ssure himself did not publish, unsatisfied after having worked his whole lifeon it). Shape grammar is an artifact of the BoT we associate with the second half of the 20th c., calling it past-structuralistic. The interesting phenomenon is that shape grammar is restraining the universal algebra of the 20th-c.-(N)C BoT to patterns belonging to Euclidean geometry, by solely imitating Hilbert's (1891) graphics—without openly refer-
ringto him—and ignoring his algebraic part, This analysis shows up the very scheme we discussed with regard to Popper: dragging 16th-c. (N)Nstraight into the 20th c., which allows modeling 16th-c. Palladio reduced to (N)N. Since the 16th c. isarticulated by Euclidean space, so is its architectonics. Trying its paradigm upon an 18th-c, infrastructure results in deadlock, because elements, instead of being projected into an ordered space, are competing for space. Architectural artifacts may be modeled in Euclidean space, but infrastructure cannot. So shape grammar uses20th-c. technics for falsely promising 16th-c. (fake) mastership, and fighting ISth-c. dynamism,
REFERENCES
Apprich, Clemens. Urban Heterotopia:ZoningDigital Space. Berlin: Humboldt University Berlin,
Department of Cultural History and Theory, 2008. http: //www. iw m. at/ pu hi i c ati ons/ ju ni or-vi si ti ng- fei I ows-con fe re n c es/vol-xx vi / ur ban-h e tero top i a/#_e d n 1.
Borges, Jorge Luis. The Babylon Lottery. Buenos Aires: Sur Magazine, 1941.
Koolhaas, Rem. “Generic City.” InS, M, L, XL edited by Rem Koolhaas and Bruce Mau. Rotterdam/New York: 010 Publishers,TheMonacelli Press, 1995, 1248-64.
Leggewie, Claus. “Netizensoder: Der gut informierte Biirger heute.” Transit:europäische Revue, no. 13,
1997, 3-25.
Parametrism
When looking for a setup inverse to shape grammars, parametric modelling is the answer. In a 20th-c.-(N)C landscape, it promises to control complex systernswith but a few numbers, But rernernberwhat a system is: a fictitious thing of rational talks(18th c,), And mind the makeup of our present BoT, with all the computing around: an evocative talk of all the fictitious things. And keep in mind all the inversions, negations, and abstractions. And now consider the undertaking of parametric design, of controlling systems through nurnbersthat represent but a very few parameters. Not only is t here by e voc at i ve t al k get t i ng red uc ed to rational talk. Parametric design likewise controls, and reducesto numbers, the infinities and self-reflections of the 18th and 19th c., and therebytheirtran-scendence as well, which we called the natural order. Such a design's formal and logical affinity to nature (we call it "learning from nature") is an implicit fight against the 19th-c. natural order, played out on a16th-c, platform of abstraction, Such thinking is
inadequate to the 21st c. with all its masterpieces and super-powerful artifacts. It resembles toying with a potentially pernicious tool while ignoring where the trigger is. Such convenient 16th-c. rational talk, fine for a small world with about 0.7 billion inhabitants, can be no answer to today's rapidly expanding world of 7 billion.
The Play
So let's see what we got today, and which algorithms may, to today's architects, be found adequate and worth researching. We'll start with the algorithms taught by the 19th c.
SELF-FICTITIOUSTHINGS OF RATIONAL TALKS, 19TH C.
PCA, the Eigenvector, or Who Am I?
[figureg] One particular, prototypical algorithm makes self-fictitious things gene rally applicable: principal component analysis (PCA),Take a cloud of fictitious points of rational talks, and try to make sense of them. PCA helps find that cloud's main, secondary, tertiary, etc. axes of balance. What will these axes dofor us?
The eigenvector as the most-balanced di m ensional ity of a set of data.
1.	They allow usto establish a new coordinate system
2.	one providing maximum contrast
3.	which is your private reflection of the world
4.	based on such reflections, rational talks are rendered to the world
5.	thereby you become a fictitious point of rational talks in the cloud, reflecting all the other fictitious points,
What we find here isthe (N)C-BoT of the 19th c,, and PCA is a generic articulation to the necessity-part N of it. Any apparatus, any system—meant to provide stability to the world—may be seen as a certain dimensionality, a certain fiction, a certain N, each striving to gain contrast, keep rationality in negotiation with all the other apparatuses. This is the contingency-part C of the master argument.
What is most explicitly articulated by PCA isthe individual, political person (C) in an economic environment N. PCA helps us to a clear and wide entrance to the BoT of political economy, capitalism, and national state.
It is important to realize: every machine we design, any system we set up, may be transformed intoone single dimensional line. Each component or, rather, each feature of the system is represented by a rational number for its position (magnitude) on this dimensional line (multitude). The interplay of the system's features is orchestrated by arithmetics on these numbers. The 19th-c, setup is that simple and abstract. The PCA is a prototypical mathematical artifact of that thinking. A generic designer of systems, Available on every computer tod ay, Just check how PCA is being used, It is very popular in analyt ical works in sociology and economy, and t he level of facti city or truth associated with these fictitious linear machines is amazing, Whenever we see illustrations of clouds of data pointsand centered lines, we are right in the middle of this fictitious thinking, The PCA and the eigenvectors were the topic that most fascinated last year's students. So we named this book, reporting their research, EigenArchitecture: thinking of architect ure as self-fictitious things of rational talks.
H
«II
A matrix of coefficients ready for an arithmetic on dimensionalities or cardinal numbers.
Matrix, or How to Talk?
[figure H] Using the formula axo + bxi to describe the dimensionality of a system, we t ake t wo c oeffi c i e nts or n am es, i, e,, a and b, f or desc r i b i ng t he d i m e ns i on as a st ra ig ht line. Therefore we are talking about analysis and linear systems, which we introduced as fictitious things of rational talks.
Now, in a further step, toward non-linearity and the 20th-c. BoT, and in accordance with the syrnrnetrieswe experienced with our BoT, we expect to be leaving the natural order of reflected linear movements, By this symmetry operation we position ourselves in abstraction to Kepler, who quit the cosmic order of reflected stabil ity and projected linear movements, as described above, But what is it that we project in the20th-c. BoT in abstraction to the linear move me nts? The term non-linearity doesn't cut it, even though much of the looked-for mathematics lives in its neighbourhood. So, sharpening our precision: according tothe algebraic skeleton of our BoT, taking the next step requiresan inversion and a negation; therefore we are in search of the interplay between not all the other fictitious things. By searching for not all the other fictitious thingswe are stepping out of the natural order of moving things, We are definitely out of analytical specificity. And we are putting at least twoof these pre-specific natures on stage for a joint interplay. These on-stage entities cannot engage themselves, lest there be movement, which
Animate Form by Greg Lynn, 1999.
would land us in specificity. In a betterscript, the entities, not engaged and inthat sense still "unborn," must self-reflect, But they still maintain relation in the dimensionality of time—a probabilistic relation that comprehends their self-reflection. They meet as mutually out rageds—outraged, not engaged: a play of outrage by non-born pre-specific bodies of any-movements. Or: an evocative talk of fictitious things. And on the strength of the symmetries experienced in relation to our BoT, we expect a new abstraction of numbers: a rational number', suspecting we rnayfind it inthe numerical ideality of algebraic integers introduced by Dedekind in 1872/83. Thus we are exitingthe natural order and entering, we'd say, the universal order.
Orchestrating the 20th-c. mathematical masterpieces around our distinction of necessities and contingencies, we would associate logic and geometry with necessity, and algebra and arithmetic with contingency. In Augustus De Morgan we meet an interesting promoter of keeping magnitudes N and multitudes C distinct. We shall keep this distinction even when dealing with ordinals(N) and cardinals(C), remarking in passing that this strongly differs from Cantor's set-theoretical treatment of cardinals as necessities (N), and fictitious things, the dimensions (C), as geometrical lines (N).
So this is our question: how do fictitious things, as arithmetics on a linear axis a + bx, talk mathematically on stage? Keeping in mind that that term is not a particular function; in our reading it is an any-f unction, able to operate as a dimension for the arithmetics of any system, as described with the PCA.The question is: how can a vector of cardinals (ai, bi) talk to (a2, b2)? And the answer: by calculating with vectors, as introduced by Grassmann in the 19th c., and popularized in the 20th by Whitehead's A Treatise of Universal Algebra with Applications (1910).
Two interesting things in this context: Grassmann is dubbed a linguist in the English Wikipedia, a mathematician inthe German, Then, the German term Vektorrechnung (calculating with vectors) is commonly translated as "vector analysis," which isthe straight opposite: calculation is projection, analysis is reflection. And a look at Grass-rnann's masterpiece, Die Lineale Ausdehnungslehre. Ein neuer Zweig der Mathematik (Theory of Lineal Extension: A New Branch of Mathematics, 1844), shows how the argumentation works: it is about reflective geometry of the exterior as an inversion of the projective Euclidean geometry from the interior. For Grassmann, vectors are fictitious things, and not rational talks as the term "vector analysis" would suggest. If wethentalk about "vector analysis" in the 21st c., we find ourselves looking at a masterpiece from a 17th-c. perspective, while trying to overcome 17th-c. geometry, Interesting then that Grassmann was widely unknown in the reflective 19th-c,-(C)N environment, becoming constitutive only in the projective 20th-c. (N)C. Which showsthe struggle we are caught up in, adjusting ourselvesto the right level of abstraction in the 20th c.
We take Grassrnann's vectorial calculation, an arithmetic on cardinals, for letting fictitious things talk on stage: (ai, bi) (a2, b2).
As with PCA, we can add more and more dimensions to systems, for rendering them more adaptable to the fictitious points: (ai, bi, ci ... m). We are still able to put them on stage, and they will have the "Grassmann talk,"
Now to the next step: introducing self-reflection to vectors. For specifying a two-dimensional linear system, we need at least two fictitious points ((an, bi 2) (321, b22)), to be written as
an bi2
321 b22
Such self-reflective vectors are called matrices, and there are arithmetical operators for matrices,
((an, bi2) (321, b22)) - ((an, bi2) (a2i, b22))
For specifying an n-dirnensional linear system, we need at least n fictitious points, The arithmetics on these matrices remains unchanged, and we are still in the natural order of linear systems,
In CAD such matrices are constitutive, and used for translation and transformation of the two- or three-dimensional geometry of objects,
[figure i] Greg b/nn'sSpline(\n Animate Form, 1999) may beagood illustration of what a high-dirnensional, linear natural space is: taking the anchor points of the spline as dimensions of the linear space, and the curve of the spline as a transformation of this
linear system to Cartesian space. But in contrast to what Lynn describes, there is no fundamental difference between the two constructions above. The main one in the center is just a slightly different, more flexible renderer of systematically the same kind of an n-dirnensional linear space, A slightly different machine or fiction.
Riemann,orWhat to Look Like?
In yet another step further: what happens when working with an infinite-dimensional linear space? What does the world look like when any point reflects the whole world? Reflects the natural order? What does the world look like if there are no longer points i n sp ac e, b ut t he wor I d 's p oi nts t he rnse I ves a re d i rn e ns i onal i t i es of sp ac e? Not p roj e c -five particles, not reflections of waves, but projective quantafJhai is what Riernann's geometry (1854) is about, and what improperly is called non-Euclidean geometry, And that'swhat Richard Dedekind's numerical ideality, i.e., the algebraic-nurnber bodies {Zahlenkörper in German, usually translated as "fields") are about.
Currently we are following the hypothesis that we are able to expand a finite vector
axo + bxi ... + nxn
j	«'
An illustration of Riernann's continuous curves, 1854
where each coefficient a, b ... n needs n values of fictitious points to become a specific fictitious point, to an infinite vector
axo + bxi ...
where each coefficient a, b ... needs an infinite number of fictitious points to become a specific fictitious point.
In a two-dimensional world, looking at two points at least is required that are ab I e t o t al k (rn at he rn at ic al I y) t o eac h other—element ary stuff, In an n-dirnen-sional world, looking at a minimum of n points is required, which is advanced stuff. In a real world, the requirement is looking at an infinite number of points that talk to one another, i.e., the whole world. We must balance their talking through algebraic geometry, Master stuff.
This shows that specific talk on principle is impossible when the whole world is on stage. But it is still possible to operate on these algebraic terms in a non-specific way. It is possible to operate with not-any-fictitious-points, represented by so-called polynomials such as axo + bxi + cx2 + dx3 .... Affirming the infinity of the polynomials, we need immediately a new understanding of the coefficients (a, b, c ...). They cannot be specific either, whence they cannot be rational numbers. They must be treated in terms of numerical ideality, being, as the polynomials, as yet unspecified. These evocations, polynomials, and ideal numbers, do not have a specific name, as rational projections do have; they have unspecific names to he negotiated (by probabilities, we'd say).
[figureJ] What isthernien oftheseevoc-ative talks stripped of specific numbers or specific names? Under the assumption of continuity (cf, Dedekind again),
BOJANA MISKELJIN
EIGEN-
WINDOWS
AS A REFLECTION OF SINGAPOREANS’ CULTURAL DIVERSITY
Information is everywhere. Gregory Bateson described information as“adiffer-ence which makes a difference” and in reference to that, thisthesis is focused on howdifferencecan be articulated in ordertoengageindividualsto appropriate new qualities.The thesis explores how information can be extracted from the shared material world and transferred into a shared immaterial world of bits, and how it can be rendered back in a way such that, when it manifests in the materialworld again, it may “operate” within an individual’s immateriality as a “desiring machine.”This project hastaken much inspiration from atext by Herzog &de Meuron (“The Virtual House,” 1997).
The thesis is interested in learning about where the “cut” (the term “cut” is associated with a procedure from conceptual mathematics known as the “Dedekind cut,"which a I lows for a conception of irrational numbers) operates insidetheendlessrationalityof people’s lives,and evokestheir irrationality asa second infinity of their existence. Ittriesto understand where “thatt urn,"from one world to another, takes place: from being “here” to being “there.” What is that invisible flow, that sensibility, which Gilles Deleuze named “intensities,” and of which he tells us that it keeps worlds together?
The context of the thesis is the cultural diversity among Singapore’s inhabitants.
they mutually effect their dimensional spaces. Such is the beauty of Riernann's geometry,opening upthe universal order. Thus elegant, and thus abstract.
EVOCATIVE TALK OF FICTITIOUSTHINGS, 20TH C.
Morphogenesis
What isaTuring rnachine?We would saytheTuring machine is a polynomial,The infinite stream of this machine is one single infinite polynomial. The whole world in one evocative point.There isthisone point within a universal nothing. That's frightening. Howto get stabil ity?The answer of Turing, Gödel, Russell , et al., is: by logic. They did not trust Boole's or Dedekind's idea that the infinity of polynomials could be stabilized by the infinity of other polynomials, The Turing machine is one polynomial stabilized by logic using rational coefficients. And like Apollo, which took a single picture from outside our world, Gödel and Turing observe from outer space how to live within one polynomial constituted in natural, logical order, using rational numbers. This is what is called calculability. A desperate attempt at specifying the pre-specific, to treat evocation as rationality. Significantly, Gödel starved himself to death, afraid of being poisoned.
Whereas Turing outed himself as a homosexual, was forced to take drugs by court order, and took his own life because he feared the drugs might lose him his intellectuality,
Shortly before his death, Turing accomplished a further major step, Asa cryptographer he put several such pre-specific natures on stage for evoking biological phenomena, and started afield of research, called morphogenesis(1952), with vast influence on today's biology.
What is morphogenesis?To determine that, let us first look at what it isn't, There is a little t rick for making the abstractTuring machine more intuitively practicable. Instead of taking the machine as an endless one-dimensional sequence, take it as an endless two-dimensional grid.Thereby each element receives not onlytwo but four neighbors, without the principles of the machine being affected. Identical thinking, identical operations. But now we are able to consider this machine a Cartesian map of rational talks reflecting fictitious things (but, however, of course not abstract enough for the 20th c.). Thankstothis natural setup certain events may now be evoked in a familiar Cartesian space, and, following logical principles, they spread out overthe map. And results look very natural indeed. Perforce, since it is a tautological setup. A panopticon. We are in
K fflTPmVITITFfFFI
Cellular automata, a spatial grammar by Stephen Wolfram, 19&3.
ARTICULATING
IDENTITIES:
EXTRACT.
ABSTRACT,
AND MULTIPLY
Singapore has grown into Singapore, throughout the past fifty years, by assembling different cultures such as Chinese, Indian, Islamic, Malay, and European. This thesis is focused on how the rich heritage of these cultures, which dates far back in time, can be cultivated—represented and multiplied with each other—into Singapore’s actual and virtual cultural identity. How can we create an abstractspace that is capable to actively rememberthese legacies, which all together make up the particular culture of Singapore? I conceive of such an abstractspace as conceptual, and as manifest in the concrete structure of the architectural space as it actually exi sts. The concepts I work with to explore this abstractspace are devised to capture, memorize, and integrate diverse components of Singapore’s culturally disparate identity. To this aim, I attempt to translate architectural structuresinto informational structures, which I can treat by computable concepts. I n other words, I attemptto treat the concrete architectural space as abstract I wil I create a series of instances capable of expressing such an abstract space. I look at these instances as actualizations of the different gradients of the translated information. By exposing these many instances as apparently the same, I intend to engage anybody (not everybody!) to identify vi rtual ly with the same abstract space. Anybody should be able to recognize the culturally specific identi ties as f ami lia r, even though they are in a new composition. Like this, recognizing something asfamiliar will inevitably also evoke the recognition of something new atthe same time. Furthermore, mythesis experiments with whether
f he game of cellular automata, Conway's Game ofLife (1970), or even A New Kind of Science by Stephen Wolfram (2002). [figure kj
It means thinking in natural order explicated into universal order, so as to be able to look better—rather to reflect better—on phenomena, but still from the perspective of rational talks. (N)C—(N')C—(C)N—(N)C. What is missing, however, isabstraction. Computers (N')C are treated as machines (N)C, Getting faster and faster, and our (C)N reflections more and more detailed. But reflection is no longer one of rational talks, it is a self-reflect ion of our logical evocations, It is a tautological setup. So we are not looking at details of natural phenomena, but at the increasing speed of logical operations. That's what simulation is about: evocative talks (N')C intuitively (C)N-synchronized with familiar rational-talks-(N)C.
This term (N')C—(C)N—(N)C might be the driving force, the dynarnisof the expansive phase of an (N)C setup, which we addressed as (N)CL, and associated with the 3rd c. BCE, the 16th, and, hypothetically, the 20th c., those periods of colonizing new spaces built around numbers, rational numbers, ideal numbers, around syllogistic, logic, logistics, around geometrical analysis, analytical geometry, algebraic analysis. We got
Hellenism, imperialism, and might collocate globalization along this line. All these expansions populate the new, wide plateaus of the new necessities N' by the old contingencies C and the old necessities N, which expire as they butt against the limits of the old thinking, starting to self-reflect it, That's when, on the level of self-reference, logic hands over its primacy in determining contingency to algebra, and we move from (N)CLto(N) CA, from Renaissance to Baroque, e.g.
[figure L] And indeed, adducing today's masterpieces, they explicate the human genome, simulate the climate of our planet, the risks of our societies, the functioning of our brains. And with due respect for all these masterly artifacts, they will end up in the cultural constitution that the late (N)CL setups always end up in: evocative talk is not 'not all the other rational talks'. They will collect all the fictitious things around a centered void. We shall find that life is not any of these intuitions, climate is not any of these intuitions, thinking is not any of these intuitions. The void is what we called evocative talk. An exact abstraction to the Baroque cultural constitution of people quite as bright as we, who collected all the animated things around acentered void, in orderto address the questions of foe/ktirne. A void that developed into the rational talkto which we are so used today.
Diffusion-spectrum imaging illustrating the complexity of neural connections in the brain.
A fractal map
[figure M] Another popular rendering of calcul ability or the limits of natural order are fractals, as prominently illustrated, e.g., by Mandelbrot (1980),They represent atwo-dirnensional field of instancesof a recursive function which, depending on their position on the map, create series of numbers. The color of a pixel on the map is determined according tothe behavior of the number series. If, e.g., theirtotal after ten iterations exceeds a certain value, the pixel is black, otherwise white. That's it, and thence there sprout these amazing naturalistic forms. So fractals are straight rationalizations of the evocations of infinite polygons. One is either inside the natural order (the black pixel—Koolhaas's Generic City), or one isout of it (the white pixel—Koolhaas's Junk Space). Cf. Douglas Hofstadter (1979) for further discussions on calculability.
Yet another prominent source of globalized projections exists. Instead of evocat-ing rational-(N)C-talks, fictitious-(C)N-thingsare evocated, Which lands us right in the game of grammars, pararnetrisrn, genetic algorithms, neural networks, etc. A game not very different from the discussions above, projecting topographies into universal space—the focus in this setup is on "projected into universal space."The term forthis mode of expansion and colonial izat ion is(C)N—(N')C—(C)N—(N)C, We'd further say
and how identities can be extracted from thei r natural manifestations—the architec-tural space, in my case—and raised into a new form of expression; not by making referential relations rooted in a memory one seeks to preserve, but by simply linking it up with whatever inspires one to create a new expression. My guiding questions revolve around, what in spires one to question representation?
THE
SPECIFICALLY
SINGAPOREAN
SKYSCRAPER: A
HETEROGENEOUS
ARCHITECTURAL
CONCEPT
Can we turn the architectural form of “a skyscraper” into an architectural concept of a specifically “Singaporean Skyscraper,” such thati ti s capable of reflecting Singapore’s cultural diversity expressively ?Thi s thesi s focuses on experiment-i ng with windows as points of intersection, where different cultural identi ties compose their expressions. So conceived, windows acquire a pre-specificity and stop being merely generic units. Within the corpus of all of Singapore’s windows, they acquire a generically specific identity, “a Singaporean window”—at once less schematic, more abstract, and potentially more singular. We can treat “a Singaporean window” as a new architectural unit, and combine its instances into a collective whole as a skyscraper. Of this skyscraper, we can say that it incorporates abstractly, and hence vi rtually memorizes, all the cultural identities of Singapore that have been translated from architectural structuretoan informational structure.
that the (N)C—(N')C—(C)N—(N)C mode dominates the first half of the 20th c., and we would, varying the common acceptation, call that mode structuralism, whereasthe (C)N—(N')C—(C)N—(N)C mode dominates the second half of the 20th c., and we'd call it post-structural ism.
But back to Turing. What did he do so differently from all this, when he introduced morphogenesis in 1952? Why is it new and groundbreaking? He simply layered, in probability space, two of those logical natures—with all the implications discussed above— and merely asked for their difference. His question was not about what each of them was. Therefore his is not a logical talk within a nature, but a talk between different natures. With amazing results: by just contrasting oneslowly-and-intensely-evoking natureagainst another fast-and-smoothly-evoking one (cf, reaction-diffusion diagram), patterns are obtained that are much more adequate to something like, e.g., biological phenomena than anything before. And unlike with fractals, it is not excluding anything. With these algorithms—otherthan with structuralist and post-structuralist simulations—the fictitious things are not there, They are treated as "not-being-t here," similar to the things and the lines in prior (C)N setups, as in the Pythagorean-Euclidean and Renaissance BoTs.
Morphogenetic pattern implemented by a reaction-diffusion diagram.
In my final thesis I make use of well-known window designs from some of the diverse cultures that form Singapore’s identity (Indian, Chinese, Islamic) and “recycle” them into a new unit that is genuinely abstract—my own articulation of a “Singaporean Window.” Such an abstract unit is capable of instantiating windows made up of the many windows: each of its instances exemplifies its own and singular kind. A “Singaporean Skyscraper” is composed of the abstract unit I call “Singaporean Window,” and articulated as an open vertical pavilion. Likethis, a“Singaporean Skyscraper” isspecific,yettruly heterogeneous. Likethis, I hope, it will be capable of reflecting Singapore’s diverse cultures.
The programming tools with which I work are Eigenvectors and PCA (Principal Component Analysis). The inputdata used arethe images of windows, niches, and portals of iconic buildings of Islamic, Indian, and Chinese architecture. They represent the abstract Universes thattogether make up the “li veworld " of ou r new one-of-a-kind unit, the “Singaporean Eigen Window.”
IS IT POSSIBLE TO TAKE A PERSONAL POINT OF VIEW WITHIN THE GENERIC?
When abstractone-of-a-kind unitsare combined, they are capable of producing variants of “wholenesses” within any given reality. Accordingly, the thesis focuses on the question of how one could grasp such “wholeness”—since there can be a whole range of possible ones. Such a notion of wholeness is approached from the point of view of proportions—principles that organize abstract units by rendering them into
Diagram of a Markov chain of an element of evocation, and the space of probabilities toward its neighbors, 1913.
an open-ended number of articulations of wholeness—such that they can express any (not every!) given reality.
The thesi stries to find ways of how one can d ream about abstraction as generating an abundance of opportunities capable of involving as many desires as possible. Moreover, itintendsto explore: what arethe conditions that make it possible for people to work in such a complex and high resolution setup that extracts and multiplies so many abstract details as potential “cuts” (in between rationality and irrationality); can the “cut” be conceived as a tool for “turning something intoanotherthing”; can we think of the “cut” as an integration of abstract u nits which evokes a new perception, a new point of view. Consequently, the thesistriestodiscover if and how, through a collection of “cuts,” a new meaning can be evoked, in a personalized manner.
To sum up: the thesis investigates how we can incorporate standards in an affirmative way, without subjecting (1) the needs and desires of a singular person to the conformity presumed by standards, and (2) our design to the principles which the stand ard s di date.
Markov
[Figuren] One might objectthat implementation always happens wit hin Turing-machine logic; that morphogenetic algorithms are still finite algorithms, as arethe ones attaching to the fractals. However, there is a crucial point: we establish a new level of abstraction, with new numbers, It must be clone with much care and circumspection, not giving in tothefacile temptation of unthinkingly explaining new phenomena through old, lower-level-of-abst ract ion paradigms.
But there is help, from the symmetrical 17th-c, setup and its introduction of the rational number. Remember: rational numbers are rational talks of animated things, whereas animated things are made up of not ail the other numbers, Integrals and differentials are the arithmetic that applies to these rational numbers, a new arithmetic that is symbolizing, and working with not the infinite series of numbers, But when rendering results into numbers as series of things, afteracertain number of iterations, one that will produce the degree of precision wanted, you must say: Enough! Quite as in our school days we were taught howto deal with integrals.
Now, how do we treat infinities? Just operate on the next-higher level of abstrac-
REFERENCES
Herdeg, Klaus. Formal Structure In Indian Archliedure. New York: Rizzoli, 1990.
Herzog & de Meuron. “The Virtual House.” Any 19/20 (1997), www.virtualhouse.ch.
Hillenbrand, Robert. Islamic A rchlieciure: Form,
Fund Ion, and Meaning. New York: Columbia University Press, 2004.
Khan, Ah man N abi. Islamic Archlie dure In Souih Asia: Paklsian—India—Bangladesh. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Mich el I, George, ed. Archlieciure of ihe Islamic World:
Iis Hlsiory and Social Meaning. London: Thames & Hudson, 1995.
Stierlin, Henri. Islam: Frühe Bauwerke von Bagdad his Cordoha. Vol. 1 and 2. Cologne: Taschen, 1999.
Vogt-Goknil, Ulya. Geomeirle,Tekionlk undLlchiIn der Islamischen Archliekiur. Tühingen: Ernst Wasm uth Verlag, 2003.
Volwahsen, Andreas. Living Archlieciure: Islamic Indian. Translated byAnn E. Keep. London: Macdonald, 1970.
Websites:
http: //www.flickr.com http://vi rtual house, ch
tion, on the negative of infinity. And for bringing everything down again to a lower level of abstraction, just say when it's enough. The advantage of this thinking consists in that, with the fiel p of th is abst raction, you may obtain stabilities on the lower level of abstraction—in the case at hand the stability of a series of numbers orthings—unobtainable without that abstraction. For people not thinking on the same level of abstraction, such calculations appear as magic indeed.
Thus, in a natural order water can rise through the piping of our infrastructures, in clear contrast to the cosmic order, where the water movement is always downward, and great aque-ductsare builtfor providing cities with water. Hence, in a universal order, a light bulb simply emits light, whereas in a natural order light must be obtained through burning some stuff.
[figure O] And now for Google, the social media, and the non-content indices to the content of the world. All of them working, symmetrically to the foregoing discussions, only on the level of abstraction on which everything is indexed, and connected with everything else. In the 20th c. we learned howto symbolize, and operate, on the basis of this new infinity, It's called coding. As computer scientists, we would call the lower level of abstraction "rendering level." Markov in 1913 made a significant contribution toward rendering techniques on this lower level of abstraction, by greatly facilitating, after a few iterations, the saying of "it's enough," a procedure nowadays adopted into all our renderings, and by Google into its PageRank. Thus we are, actually, in a position to deal with all the explicit content of the world within milliseconds. If one puts up with the
non- reference to content of our indexes, with moving wit hin indexes and t hereby exposing asked-for content indirectly and evocatively, and not by representation. We are evocating the appearance of content with every question put to Google or Wikipedia, with every pixel on the computer screen, with every glosserne of this text—to use an important concept of one of the truly algebraic linguists, Louis Hjelmslev, who invented an entire system along such probabilistic terms, which he called "glossernatics" (1936).
At that, the problem we are forever grappling with is pitfalls: the conveniently and temptingly mistaking particular results for real, trusting them at face value, taking them as pictures, as signs, as phonemes, as answers. So convenient to ignore their level of abstraction. So easy to forget that they are evocations by mastership, stimuli for further thought.
Self-Organizing; Map
[figure P] Now, to wrap it up, a look at the most advanced generic and—according to our current lights—most promising algorithm around evocationiTeuvo Kohonen'sself-organizing maps (SOMs), introduced in 19S2. SOMs have become quite relevant; but unfortunately they were received, and are being discussed, as are neural networks, cellular automata, or fractals. Which means their specific potentialities are shrouded by a lackof abstraction. SOMs are not—asthey have been made toappear—talks within a nature, but talks between natures.
So	let us discuss SOM as a Cartesian map where each pixel represents a vertical Turing machine. The setup used is comparable to that underlying our discussions of morphogenesis and the layering of natures. Our case at hand is marked by a matrix of natures, each of which is indexing all the others. It explicitly represents the basic connectivity of nature, whatever it be. Once again: SOM can do without preordaining any connections of whatever kind, thus differing from the structural ist or post-structuralist approaches typical of neural networks, cellular automata, or fractals. SOMs play with, talkto, or articulate not all the other connections, or, one might say, they talkwith the pre-specificity of any connections.
Now, when a SOM is being exposed to a some nature, e.g., to a st ream of data from our real nature, its connectivity of natures then adapts to this particular nature, whatever it is, and however it is structured. It may then be said that the SOM exists wit hin its own nature, thus engendering itsown kind of ordaining connections. And when asked about its nature, the SOM will answer as precisely as possible, from within its existence inside its nature, astowhat—regarding the question—the structure of its nature is not, Such infinities ultimately are non-irnplernentable. Give thanks to Markov, and say, at a point you think adequate and that depends upon your mastership: Here'senough!
Neural networks are logical reflectionson natural phenomena. SOM is oof any reflection. It projects evocations. Put aSOM on astrearn of dataf rorn our real world, and it will evoke further data. As in questioning Google, no final answer results, but an evocation of a new answer to the world, Our experiences with SOM are amazing:
A self-organizing map, clustering self-reflective vertical Turing machines.
1.SOM may be fed with any design, engineering, or analytical task
2,	SOM produces a most-reasonable next step
3,	and with it, one always bettersthe statistical optimum
4,	without knowing why.
That's the stuff we think our future world and upcoming universal order is going to be about. Not about scarcities, or about just distribution of limited resources. It will be about primary abundance, and about intellectual challenges. About evoking the most promising questions, about cultivating the sediments of masterful articulations, indexed by machines. Architecture is about evocation of ’riot the other worlds’, It is about creating identities,The world, in this view, is rich, and not restrictive, either culturally or intellectually, A clear path out of thecurrent, all-pervasive, misanthropic generic setup.
We are not saying grammars, neural networks, genetic algorithms, cellular automata, parameters, etc., are not working, What we are saying, rather, is that they are working too well, Indeed, optimizing our entire world is not a problem. The problem—if this term be used at all any longer—is that the problems are for the computers, and that those are solving them with ever-increasing speed. The problem is that optimizing our world is not a problem. The problem is that the necessity N, which is affine to economy, must be tied to a corresponding C, to contingency, to politics. It falls to us to use all the computing power we've got, and to keep asking for next steps within our nature, whatever our nature is. The computed answers, which will appear as necessities N—they
are calculated, after all—will be whatthey are not, Wethen decide, and reconsider, and play the contingency part C. This is how mastership may be cultivated today,
That was a handful. That's where we stand. Did it get you interested? Then enjoy the artifactsarticulated by our students throughout our past academic year, 2012. More of it will be coming ... Be seeing you ...
Vera Bühlmann
Articulating a thing entirely in its own terms
Or, what can we understand by the notion of “engendering”?
071 What or who is the subject of the generic?
071	Grammatizing symbolic domains
072	An abstract object’s integrity:
Political subjectivization
082 Beyond urban comfort, in a state of expulsion
085	Generic as an adverb, universality as an oeuvre
086	BoTs live in algebraic universality
087 Characterizations of
the subject of the generic
087	Characterization on a grammatical level
088	The man without qualities (Robert Musil)
088 The city without identity (Rem Koolhaas)
os» Falling in love with the in-sinuousness proper to an economy of entropy
090 Primary abundance
097 Toward an information-based architectonics
103 Within the Generic City: Master, yet in “whose” house?
toe Characterizations of the subject of the master
106 Attracted by the volatility of a flirtation between the philosophical stances of “critical rationalism” and “speculative realism”
108 Cosmic untendedness, prosaicness in verse 118 Cosmo-politics,or putting to work a symbolist meter 121 Cosmo-literacy, or the alphabetization of the nature of numbers
123 Appropriating
a body-to-think-in
124 The most common representation of the nature of numbers ...
124	... and how it got into trouble still not resolved today
125	Algebraic operations, or how the nature of numbers can be brought to work
i27 Masterpieces, and why there are so few of them
127 EigenArchitecture
I would Hike to thank Nathan Brown for his helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.
1	Here, “tremendousfascination” is deliberately “exported” from religious vocabulary, where mysterium tremendum et fascinosum is used to attribute holiness to God. It is an ambiguous expression that acknowledges the finitude of man’s capacities to understand. It makes reference to something that is fascinating and yet at the same time profoundly unsettling, because it promises a kind of automatic comfort, belonging, and beauty, in which everyone is welcome, while also confronting us with man’s helplessness and insignificance in the face of divine inviolability.
2	Louis Althusser may be considered as the most important theoretician here, yet the same symmetrical relation—albeit in significantly diverse manners—is also constitutively present in the work of Jacques Lacan and, arguably, that of Alain Badiou.
3	Especially the diverse attempts of a post-critical return to philosophy as a rational and metaphysical enterprise, which are referred to as marking a “speculative turn” in recent philosophy, associated with philosophers such as Quentin Meillassoux, Ray Brassier, and Graham Harman.
What or who is the subject of the generic?
Most anyone interested in computational design today shares a tremendous fascination with the somewhat dubious notion of “the generic” and its promise of the “one-of-a-kind particularity” of instances that can be computed.1 Much of the widespread attractiveness of this promise is owed tothe ideathatsuch one-of-a-kind particularity be neither example nor prototype, that its organization be not governed by a logic of rigid classification. Every generic instance counts as “typical” (not needing any surplus gualities to be specified) even though it may well be “singular,” the only one of its “kind.” In programming, the notion of the generic means toformulatefunctionsthat are of highest possible generality such that they apply to no specific structures of data, but to (virtually) any structure of data. More straightforwardly: in programming, the notion of a generic object suggests that its instances are a this, without being a such. Their one-of-a-kind particularity can only be indexed, pointed to; it is a particularity that never manifests as corresponding to a certain genus, but only in terms of indefinite adeguation within a scope of genericness that aspires to be universal (not classificatory), and that is being articulated by each particular manifestation of such an instance. The extraordinary—if not straightforwardly salvational—implication thereby is that with generic objects, articulation engenders universality. Generic objects promise, as objects with a nontransparent and apparently singular autonomy, to be shielded off from any attempt at appropriation by individually vested will, desire, interest, or meaning. Instances that are realized from such a generic object appear in a peculiarly innocent sense “genuine.”
The great fascination for such genuineness today, as I understand it, is driven by a certain subversive pleasure geared against the exhaustive and demanding “political dynamics” of what is often referred to as an economy of recognition.2 It sets the political confines for most of the twentieth-century structuralist and post-structuralist discourses around a necessity to give difference and self-reference a primacy with regard to identity and representation. In all brevity, central for an economy of recognition is that anything that can participate in and profit from it—anything that can find accommodation within the “modern” nomos (political as opposed to cosmological law) of a “modern” oikos that is “mastered” collectively (house-as-state)—needs to be mediated through language and concepts.
Such “mediation” involves all the complex cultural issues related to questions such as, what is actually the “object” described by linguistics? Does language, if we could find its pure form, describe natural kinds? Is there a pure form to language at all, or is language in its everyday use a “natural” language—and if yes, are there many natures of language, and what does such an assumption entail? Should we regard language as a system, a structure, or something else? Is it possible at all to generalize from the diversity of languages actually spoken and written, and what does it entail to do so?
To make a long story (very) short, a peculiar inseparability between interpretation and formalization has haunted notions of theory, objectivity, and subjectivity throughout the twentieth century.The respective discourses have grown quite removed, in all “critical” negotiation, from what is perceived by many as the “real issues at stake” (to improve and optimize global living conditions), and the voices raised are inevitably, it seems, also always acting tactically. But most of all, the idea of a position that could clarify permanently the confusions that spring and proliferate from linguistic attempts at clarification, appears to many, meanwhile, as raising the issues in inadequate terms.3 Our relation to language simply remains as intimate as our relation to breathing.
Gramm at izing symbolic domains
Now this is exactly what computational linguists like Noam Chomsky began to readily affirm: yes, he holds, language is so intimate to all of us that it makes sense to imagine it as a kind of a cultural “genome” we are born with, just like we are born with a biological genome. Such a radical move, whose affirmation must count as a veritable philosophical capitulation, was actually capable of moving beyond the preoccupation of “critical” philosophy with the (politically all but innocent!) foundational issues about the nature and role of language for thought, specifically (ethnic and racial discrimination), generally (socialism), or individually (capitalism). Instead, it was capable of modernizing the interest in language itself by postulating a categorical break with the mimesis tradition altogether. No longer focusing on mimesis and its questions of interpretation, truth, and the definition of meaning, the interest now shifted to the pragmatism of sheer transformability. The so-called transformational or context-free “grammars”
and "vocabulary" with which programming "languages" workdonot even claim to be "natural"; they are, to put it a bit provocatively, genuinely engendered.
Let us look briefly at the development of two very strong paradigms in programming throughout the last decades. Early languages such as Fortan, Ada, or C started out with a procedura I para digrn. T he rnai n i nt e res t was tom ake ava i I ab I e f o r easy app I ic at i o n, as a kind of toolbox of "instruments" in coded "form," the precise way of how acertain organizational procedure needs to beset up in order to function well, Every step of decision can thereby be "dispersed" into constitutive procedures, and hence, an infinitesimal lirn-berness can be introduced into organizational forms. The paradigm subsequent to this pursued a much less directly hands-on approach, and instead became more didactical. With languages like Smalltalk, Java, and C++, an object-oriented paradigm followed the procedural one, and it strictly kept apart the levels of what (described by procedures) and now (the specification of this what). Through this distinct ion, negotiation began to be supplied by "computational augmentation" about what is to be reached, and about how systems can be devised that allow the instantiation of pro cedu res (whats) in much wider variations, Object-oriented programming allows devising entire "libraries" of "abstract objects" that depend on nostatically specified orderor classification system, Yet such abstract objects are not really "objects," they incorporate ent ire "object ivit ies"-t hey al Iow f or one-of-a-kind particulars to "concretize" singularly, and optimally befitted according to the requirements of a task,
This is what we aretalking about with the generic in computation: thearnbition of programmers to develop informational "coatings" as a kind of abstract packaging, as "symbolic cases" that preserve and protect the "abstract object's integrity." All the potential functionalities offered by it ought to be provided in a most robust and compact "manner," and for a largest possible variety of instances.
Equipped with thetechnological powerof such "languages," the subversive pleasure that seems to accompany the wide interest in generic design today lives, on the one hand, from a radical affirmation of those liberating and disciplining constraints within an economy of recognition, which dictates that the nature of a thing is to beconsidered in the(politically sanctioned) terms in which it is actually addressed; yet it also lives from respond-ingtothisdictate by what I would call an "expansion in dimensionality" by investing its energies into the "substantiation" of speculative notions of reality: it sets up, by means of such genuinely engendered "languages," symbolic domains that can accommodate the objects under investigation in the terms sanctioned for describing them, but that open up further possible spaces as well-which are governed "intra-specularly," within an imaginary locus proper to particular objectivities (or any combination of elements of combined objectivities),
MELINA MEZARI, STELIOS PSALTIS
GENERIC
VILLA
An abstract object’s integrity: Political subjectivization
But what kind of integrity are we talking about here, when referring to an abstract object's integrity? What kind
We deal with the notion of theVilla in away thattriesto conceive of a new kind, one that becomes descriptive of the entire group or class of villas, without a brand name, with a generic character. In other words, it is an experiment in universalizing the architectural concept of the villa.
Our project’s focus lies on conceiving the architectural form of the villa as an inhabitable artifact. As such, we imagine that it acquires meaning in an open and indefinite manner, through the articulations of its modularity in all its instances. In ourdesign approach, this modularity is predicated entirely by the activities hosted (actually or virtually) in a villa’s possible compartments. Sincethese activities are infinite in number and manner, the generic villa can never be exhaustively articulated and actualized. Hence, in our attempt to describe it, we follow what we call “a framework of infinitary inclusion”: we assume that certain configurations of its compartments express the generic yet singular, pre-specific individuality of any one villa in particular.
4	An exam pi eof such extensions of num erical corporeal ity is complex numbers, which are composed by adding the imaginary unit vM to real numbers.
5	Fi eld theory is more adequately, albeit I ess often in E ng-li sh, call ed the theory of num eri cal corpus. Thi s is con si stent with the French expression for field, which is corps, as well as the German Körper.
of integrity is proper to symbolic dornainsthat are governed intra-specularly? Much of what this text will be dealing with concerns this question. Far from desiring to disenchant the fascination that surrounds emerging notions of the generic, this text will suggest radicalizing this fascination, Yet to radicalize here, we will see, doesn't mean to "sharpen," as if a weapon, orto specifically devise an instrurnentthat could be put to a worthwhile cause. To radicalize a fascination is to radicalize what charms us, the "spells" that take hold of us, and it is meant hereas it literally appliesto cer-tain ideasabout the natureof numbers, which I will come backto later. In essence, it is about mathematical adjunction in field theory, which emerged out of algebraic considerations regarding the solvability of equations. For now we can say that to radicalize the notion of the generic involves affirming the symbolic nature of numbers.4 And this entails, literally, regarding numbers in terms of finite, yet infinitely extendable “corporeality,"5 With the rise of abstract algebra in the nineteenth century, people were also speaking of providing domains of rationality for a certain (numerical) solution space (instead of taking universal conditions of rationality for granted, as is the habit in a nonsyrnbolic understanding of numbers).6 Put in general terms,
corpus theory is central tor establishing domains of unique factorization—that is, numerical domains where the arithmetic operations are well defined for all elements of a corpus (i.e. not in general, but specifically), Thereby, arithmetics ceases to be, in a unproblematic manner, universally applicable. We regard this as central to a different paradigm of programming that we would like to help grow stronger—not a procedural or object-oriented one, but one we call pre-specific.1
This has several consequences for how we think about computability. Calculations cannot only be right or wrong, but they can also beset up in an adequate or inadequate manner. The solution spaces that are provided for calculations havedifferent capacities. To put it quite provocatively: computing turns into an art (again), just like mechanics used to be an art (and not a science) before industrialization, Even the expression to be industrious once meant to be apt and diligent, in terms of personal qualities one has acquired-very different from the meaning of industrious ness as an alienating submission to an orchestration that is strictly clocked by a responsibility external to oneself, which has become the predominant understanding today. The entailrnentsfor revitalizing this legacy of computing as an art are ambiguous, and they seem twofold: on the
When related to the question of urbanity today, the notion of the villa seems to be of extreme interest once again. Villaswere always related to political issues of power, signifying the power relations within certain regions. It is interesting to see thatfol -lowing the iconic examples representing major architectural manifestos throughout history, villasdon’tseemtonarratea story of progress, of growth and expansion, but rather one which mirrors again and again a time’s BoT. There seems to be a certain invariant symmetry constitutive for the development of the architectural concept of villas, between outward-orientation (which we call “expression”) and inward-orientation (which wecall “impression”). What we find in historical comparison isthatthis symmetry is repeatedly being inverted in the way and manner in which villas have been designed and built, e.g., from Palladio (expressive) to Semper (impressive), to Le Corbusier (expressive) and Eisen-man (impressive). Before the background of thi s hypothetical setup, our core question is: What isthe next villa?[FiGUREOD
As more and more of the entire planet is being urbanized, and as there is increasingly less distinction between countryside and city, it is our interest to consider the concept of the vil la not in terms of a general class of forms of how people live in this global urbanity (homes, Eigenheime), butas an abstractmodularitythatneedsto be articulated—rendered intoinstances in which itpresents itself. Such articulation is achieved through partitioning the compartments that are held to be constitutive for “the villa” as an architectural concept We regard global urbanity asthe universe of the vill a, where it “lives” as an abstract(not as a generalized) identity. What we mean by this is that instead of departing from standardized units, to which we can apply general principles of composition, we suggest to engage in elementari zing the vil I a’s compartments in any way thinkable. Like this, the villa as an abstract modularity allows for the engendering of the particular compositions in which people live individually, in a one-of-a-kind manner.
Hence, the proposed approach could also be considered as an experiment in universalizing the notion and the principle of “the villa”:weproposethattobe“villa-ic” must be considered a property of the entirety of all artifacts that exist in the universe of global urbanity. In all radicality, we want to consider “villaic-ness” as a property of any thing at alt. The question then is, in whatway can the notion of the villa remain ameaningful notion, if we blowitup beyond all classificatory bounds?
It is not the concrete structure of the automobile engine that is expressed hut rather the form, color, shape, the accessories, and the “socialstanding" oftheohject, Herewe have the tower of Babel: each item speaks its own idiom. The conservative, in choosing and using a car, wishes to convey such ideas as dignity, reserve, maturity, seriousness... A no ther definite series of a utomotive personalities is selected by the people wanting to make known theirmiddle-of-the-road moderation, their being fashionable... Further a long the range o f persona lities are the innovators and the ultramodern... No doubt Martineau is right: it is in this way that people define themselves in relation to objects.
JEANBAUDRILLARD
We suggest partitioning the compartments of the generic villa with reference to the activities that are suggested and supported by domestic objects. We propose to set these activities into the infinitive form (sitting, cooking, chatting, sleeping, dressing, etc.), as abstract acts which can be actualized through individual appropriation of these acts into proper activities, in free combination. Like this, the domestic objects too are infinitized, such that we can consider them beyond the delimitation oftheactually objectified functionality which they embody as particular objects. We can begin to qualify the activities in which we appropriate the objects with surplus aspects (like pleasing, comforting, challenging, enhancing, grounding, etc.) in any way thinkable. Hence we can look at the functionality that is constitutive for an
6	To provide domains of rationality foe a certain (numerical) solution space makes sure that the roots of a polynomial with coefficients raised to the nth power can be expressed in terms of radicals according to an integral domain governed by the principle of unique factorization. Leopold Kronecker especi ally preferred to speak of domains of rationality, in distinction to the main inventor of corpus theory, Richard Dedekind. Instead of domains of rationality, Dedekind thought about the possibility to extend a numerical corpus in terms of prims /ofea/s.Thetwo stances can be seen to represent two epistemological vector sol induction (primary in Kronecker's empirically grounded approach), and the strange mixture that Charles Sanders Peirce-another key figure in the rise of universal algebra in the latter half of the nineteenth century-attempted to define as abduction that establishes the conditions of deduction (Dedekind's approach grounded in abstraction).
7	For a discussion of the Dedekind app'oach to ground corpus theory in acts of abstraction in relation to an understanding of computation and calculability, see Vera Bühlmann, "Continuing the Dedekind Legacy Today, Some
00« GENERICVILLA/Manufacturtd objects conspicuously transform info unexpected new forms, making a strong statement about our current cultural condition of abundance. Attention is focused on a reconsideration of the ordinary.
01 Expression—Impression - Expression—Impression
Ideas Toward Architectonic Computability," (lecture, Turing 2012 Conference, Manila, Philippines, March 2012), http:// www. monas andnom os.org/2G12/12/GS/compu ting-wi thin -the-open-totality-of-anything-that-can-be-the-object-of-thought-continuing-the-dedekind-legacy/.
8 For those interested in following this line of thought toward a criticality that is local and universal, seethe Jules Vuillemin's superb book, La philosophic ds I’algsbrs (Paris: PUF, 1962), especially chap. 4, "La theorie de Galois," 222-.770, in relation to adjacency in mathematics, its relation to the notion of groups, and itsoverall entailrnentsfor Kantian and post-Kantian notions of criticality.
one hand its promise is to gain the possi bi I it y for a new criticality, yet on the other hand, this new criticality is rooted in a kind of local universality, When we suggest speaking of an abstract object's integrity, this relates to the particular capacities provided by the solution space that is constituted by such an abstract object.
But let us not discuss this further here in the rat her technics I terms of mathematics,® and instead refer to the same issue—criticality in relation to a certain capacity and ability that is involved in partitioning, identifying parts and wholes and their interdependencies—in the context of contemporary political theory. Within the modern oikos, sheltered by a modern nomos{ a political, not anymore divine, rtornos), each "theme" has to be treated as a "subject" in ordertofind a platform for public address (newspaper, education, etc,): what once enjoyed generosity in how it was treated (or the silencing violence, or the doctr inary appropriation) attributable to common places (a theme as a "topos") now hasto beaccom-rnodated within an overall organization, and that means itstreatrnent (discourse) hasto be su rvei I led and negotiated. Such a "subject," in a purely passive and nonpolitical way, isan "object" in the sense of the grammatical case of the accusative-thecase of that which is "caused," that which is "called to account" and needs to be "accommodated in its proper
object from an inverted perspective—that of its“villa-icness." Thisinverted perspective allows for specifying their properties purelybyindexing: this, and not the other. It is no longer necessary to define in positive termswhatone is looking for. Instead, if we use activities as our reference level, we can include infinitely much into our specification, and we can invert the composition of all these constitutive and surplus aspects of an object in manifold manners. We can design by dramatization and storytelling.
THE VILLA:
AN
ENCAPSULATED
SYMBOLIC
NATURE
THE HOUSE AS A FIELD OF OPERATIONS
Within aframework of infinitary inclusion, each domestic objectbecomes contextual -ized with potentially all other objects that live in the same universe. On the symbolic level of such universality, different stories take place and become meaningful in different environments and at different locations—for example, in particular villasthat one wishes to consider. They too can be regarded as domestic objects like this, as an encapsul ation of symbolic stories asthe dramatization in various coevolving “acts.” Actual villas viewed within such a context express certain generic vectors as their own, independently told stories.
For alt their multiplicity, objects are generally isolated as to their function. It is the user who is responsible for their coexistence in a functional context; their coexistence resembles an assortment of partial functions that are often irrelevant or antagonistic to one another.
JEANBAUDRILLARD
place," i.e. categorized.9 A theme as a subject in that sense, as one that is to be categorized,10 is what is put before public assembly, because its predication is yet to be clarified. If we are to consider the integrity of those abstract objects that constitute the solution spaces in generic computations within a scale of adequacy, every commonplace interest (theme) turns into a "subject-with-disposi-tions-and-capacities." The new criticality at stake, a criticality of finite synthesis, concerns thesyrnbolic constitutions—and through that, the capacities of abstract objects—that are orientating power (public address and its surveillance) in discourse.
Thissarne abstract issue—-the partitioning, the identification of parts and wholes and their interdependencies as problematic— features centrally, for example, in Jacques Rändere's contributions to contemporary political theory.11 His notion of political subjectivation, which he developed i n a 2004 essay ent it led "Who Is the Subject of the Rights of Man?," is very helpful for developing
9	The accusative is the grammatical case whose primary function is to express destination or goal of motion, from the Latin (casus) accusatlvus, "(case) of accusing," from accusatus, past participle of accusare. The Latin accusare means "to call to account," from ad-, "against," + causari, "give as a cause or motive," from causa, "reason." Online Etymology Dictionary, s.v. "accusative," http://www.etymonline.com/index. php?term =accusati ve&allowed_in_fram e=0.
10	From the Greekkategoria, "accusation, prediction, category," verbal noun from kat-egorein, "to speak against; to accuse, assert, predicate." Online Etymology Dictionary, s.v. " cat egor y," htt p: //www, ety m on I i n e. com /i nd ex. p hp ?t er m=cat egor y &al lo wed_i n_f r a m e=0.
11	ThewayR anci ere ap pro ach es an d u nfol d s h i s pol it i cal argu m ent s, wh i ch cent er a roun d a foundation of pol iti cs i n aestheti c judgm ents, i nvolves fol lowi ng him on an unusually high and demanding level of abstraction. Indeed, this is often one of the key points for which he is criticized—it raises people's suspicion because it is not easy to follow (in understanding, not in action!). Contrary to this view, his engagement with abstraction is precisely what exposes him within the current landscape of political theory and philosophy—which is to a large amount straightforwardly programmatic, if not outright polemic, by not demanding the reader to understand the abstractions at work in it. This is unfortunate because it cannot facilitate a problematic engagement with the proposed arguments, but rather demands devoted followership—the creation of "movements," by being promised (by the authority of expertise that is declared too difficult for the common person to understand,
and hence needs to be presented in trivialized and infantil i zed manners) to "stand on the right side of history." See for example SIavoj Zizek, Die bösen Geister des himmlischen Bereichs. Der linke Kampf um das 21. Jahrhundert (Frankfurt am Main: S. Fischer, 2011).
12	Jacques Rand ere, "Who I s the Subject of the Rights of Man?," South Atlantic Quarterly 103, nos. 2/3 (Spring/Summer 2004): 303.
13	Ibid., 306.
14	Leibniz's dictum was, famously, that nature makes no jumps—the assumption of uniform continuity in natural processes has been central for applying the then-new infinitesimal methods in modern science. It is needed to support all epistemological positions that consider themselves analytical-empirical. It seems to us that Rändere is opting for a similar framework as this one between movement-continuity (infinitesimal calculus in science) for his context, that oi political-acting-human (aesthetic judgments in politics).
an idea about what such criticality entails, "Political subjects are surplus names," he holds, "narnesthat set out a question oradis-pute (in French, litige) about who is included in their count."12 For Rändere, the name of such a political subject cannot be a proper name, nor the name of a general class (a noun). It is whatever and however may qualify such a noun: the adjective of the general class of humans. Thus, the name of such political subjects can only be "generic," and assuch it is, for him, the name of the demos.13Thus he referstothe demos in an adjectival sense, from the Latin adjectivum, "that which is added to (the noun)." It is in this adjectival sense that political subjects are surplus subjects for Rändere, a view that grants that giving a definition of the noun (humanity, in this case) is not necessary—it is barred from articulation and being spelled out and must be taken as a premise and treated approximately, just like the continuities of movements are treated in modern differential calculus.14 Here is not the place to
discuss Ranciere's position in any adequate detail, yet it needs to be pointed out that our own proposition turns away from Ran-ciere's at a certain point. By raising the issue of an abstract object’s integrity, we propose to treat his notion of political subjects not in classificatory terms altogether, but in categorial terms. This means that we opt to regard political subjects, subjects named generically, as universal and adverbial (not as adjectival), We will come back to what this entails in more detail; for now let me simply point you to Michel Serres, who has most forcefully articulated such a perspective in his 1990 book The Natural Contract: "My book argues that this Declaration [the Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen f rorn the French Revolution, and its update bythe declaration published by UNESCO after the Second World War] is not yet universal as long as it does not determine that all living beings and all inert objects, in short, all of Nature have in turn become legal subjects."15
15 Michel Serres, "Revisiting Trie Natural Contract," trans. Anne-Marie Feenberg-Dibon (lectur* Institute of the Humanities, Simon Fraser University Vancouver, May 4,2C06), http:// www. ctheory. net/artid es. aspx?id=515.
Causal relations enable the functioning of the elements. These relations or recurrent causality between the forms, are constituted by theassociatedmilieu, which mediates the relation between the elements.
GILBERT SIMONDON
Forms exist as separate entities and become active when they organize themselves in relation to the ground—the mental associated milieu, thusactualizing prior virtualities.
GILBERT SIM OND ON
A bed is a bed, a chair is a chair, and there is no relationship between them so long as each serves only the function itissupposed to serve. [FIGURE02J
JEANBAUDRILLARD
Without such a relationship there can he no space, for space exists only when it is opened up, animated, invested with rhythm and expanded by a correlation between objects and a transcendence o f their func-tionsin this new structure. Inaway space is the object’strue freedom. [FIGURE03J
JEANBAUDRILLARD
Space takes the form of relations among sites. Different renderings of geometries, attributes, activities, potentials, blend according to certain vectors. Within the framework of infinitary inclusion, new artifacts can be engendered by ‘infusing’ indexes intothe articulated organization of compartments.
What isthe Next Villa?
STORYTELLING BY ARTICULATING AND DRAMATIZING VECTORS
How can the generic villa be engendered specifically and individually by a kind of storytell ing that uni versalizes the architectural conceptofthe villa into aprinciple, and global urbanity into an abstract universe? Such storytelling dramatizes everyday stories that are told differently by different houses. We propose that itfollows a series of steps, presented herein an “infra-order” from abstraction to actualization:
16 For a contemporary oontextualizaticnof this idea see Sjoerd van Tuinen, "Difference and Speculation: Heidegger, Meillasscux and Deleuzecn Sufficient Reason," \r\DeleuzedndMetaphysics, eds. Alain Beaulieu, Edward Kazarian, and Julia Sushytska (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, forthcoming).
Let's remember, our interest is in a notion of criticality that need not sacrifice the infinite, into which thought plunges, in order to gain a notion of consistency. This means that we are looking for a notion of criticality that is not grounded in a general principle of sufficient reason, but one, we might say, that is governed in the way it is foundational for discourse, by a universal principle: that of finite synthesis,16 How can we picture such governance? The topicality of atherne that comes to be of general interest cannot be treated as an "objectivefact"—precisely because as an "objective fact," it is called into account. What I would like to suggest to see inaction, in the expansion of the generic whose instances are viewed as pre-specific, is a universalcorpo-rea/ity, acorpo-reality of symbolic na ture. T han ks t o i t s s y rn bo I i c nat u re, s u c h co r po real -ity is not "the one body of the collective," as the political-st ate form may be interpreted, and it is not "the one soul of the people," as Ranciere's notion of the demos see ms to maintain. Nevertheless,
1.	We assume that every villa can be represented as a constellation of independent compartments, through which it narrates a certain story. Such a story is dramatized individually in the vectors that are actualized by a villa, and in the interplay between those actualized vectors.
2.	We start out with identifying the villa’s compartments by looking at how domestic objects actual ly organi zethe particular house. Like this, we engender theelementarization of the villa intoits compartments.
3.	We look for stories in the daily used domestic objects. We regard them as pre-fiinctional and begin to overlay and density these objects in their interplay and meaningful articulations/constellations. We virtually dissolve domestic objects beyond the manifestf unctional -ity they embody as objects. The objects turn into platform-1 ike formations carrying certain potential activities.
4.	On the dissolved grounds of this activity-based reference plane, species of domestic objects can be designed by including surplus i ndexes intothe reference plane. Such engendered species of domestic objects are of a “villa-ic" nature.
5.	The generic villa is engendered specifically and individually, and consists of artifacts that incorporate globally-urban infra-functional structure-abilities. These artifacts spell out singular instances of the generic villa.
02	« We elementarize up to the degree that the object
can function as an individual.
03	The object loses its objective functionality and becomes a body of indexes carrying a certain potential activity.
it is political, It binds, as symbolic corporeality, in lofty and contingent manner, what it Rändere, "Who is the Subject of the Rights
Ranciere conceives as dissensus: "This is what I call a dissensus: putting two worlds ofMan?," 304.
in one and the same world, A political subject, as I understand it, is a capacityfor stag- is ibid.
ing such scenes of dissensus,"17 A dissensus for Ranciere, as for us, is not a conflict of
interests, opinions, or values; it is, as he puts it, "a division put in the 'common sense1: a
dispute about what isgiven, aboutthe frame within which we see something as given."18
What names political subjectivity understood as such must be generic, we can agree with Ranciere. But if we understand itas categorial, asan adverb of universality and not as an adjective of a particular natural class, it does not name mankind in terms of demos, it names nature itself, The change is profound: both approaches opt for confounding the distinction between politics and nature, but Ranciere's classificatory treatment of the generic name places us within a naturalness of politics, while the categorial treatment of it confronts us with a politicality of nature, Everything among which we live—facts and laws, artifacts and things, elements and climate, codes and rules—appear under their proper natality aspect. Such a politicality of nature puts a dimens ion ality of genuineness in the place of points of origin and hereditary lineage. More precisely, it suggests treating
04	First generation
05	Second generation 06» Third generation
THE NEXT VILLA: AN INHABITABLE ARTIFACT
In this experimental approach of architectural design, the following technical tools are explored and applied:
APPLYING PRINCIPAL COMPONENT ANALYSIS
The codes of Principal Component Analysis (PCA) are used as the main tool. I ni-tially, we select floorp Ians from twentieth-century villas as input data. The data of these floorplans are related to a domestic object as their common point of reference, and the abstract data space is set up through placing them in relative position to each other. To this setup, we apply PCA. The output achieved is a number of
19	Ibid., 305.
20	Ibid.
21	See footnote 11. This is what distinguishes Ranciere's approach from those that demand followership by faithful devotion (of the illiterate) rather than critical subscription (by the literate), with the effect that his arguments hardly lend themselves to creating a movement that will realize a political program.
questions of origin and lineage by recourse to distributiveness, Such a dimensionality of distributed politicality adds the modality of probability to those of possibility and necessity, which govern in rationalist philosophy anything that extends in space and in time. Hence the political is not a sphere, both our views agree; rather, itseparates, as Ranciere puts it, "the whole of the cornrnunityfrorn itself,"19The political, for both views, shapes the gap between abstract literalness and the conditionality of possible verification of what is meant by abstract literalness. Such a politics of difference is acted out, according to Ranciere, by distinguishing two "counts of counting" the community: "You can countthe community as the surn of its parts—of its groups and of the qualifications that each of them bears," This way of counting is entirely rule based and uninvolved, and it results in cold observation and surveillance according to a logics of classification (Ranciere calls it "police"). He putsasecond way of counting asfollows: "You can countasupplernentto the surn,a part of those who have no part, which separates the community from its parts, places, functions, and qualifications."20To Ranciere, only this second "counts of counting" is politics, and such counting is not uninvolved, it is acted out by political subjects, and it does not submit to rules in any mechanical manner.21 Its procedures are infinitary,
Eigen Floor plans, equal to the number of input floorplans. The differences between the Eigen Floorp Ians depend upon which input floorplan is defined as the “first principal component.” In that way, different focal points define the overall setup of these arrangements, and rearrange all the included constellations and—consequently—all thestoriesthatcan possibly be nar rated. S ince a 11 floorplans a re projected to an abstract and many-dimensional coordinate system that takes the properties of all inputfloorplansas itscoordinates, each one of them potentially gains new meaning and content. At this stage the Eigen Floor-plans express new constellationsof values and unforeseen stories.
In a second step, from a potentially infinite number of EigenFloorplans, certain constellations are selected and rendered in three-dimensional models. The main purpose of this is to create models of real (three-dimensional) hybrids that encapsulate a qualitative variety of different stör i es. As physic a I o bj ect s, t hese mod -eled hybridsextendwithin the boundaries of three dimensions; butasqualified artifacts, they embody a m uch higher d i mensional ity. This high dimensionality isachievedbyf using the input data (the individualized internal compartments, in this case extracted from the floorplans) in a series of generations. Different kinds of qualitative geometries (always within a same 3-D bounding space) merge together and synthesize new articulations, of which each containsa par-tic u lar d istr i but io n of we ight s (perce ntages) of the vectors of the input data.
This process could also be referred to as “doping” theoriginal setup after having rendered it generic. We select and exclude indexesfrom theframeof infinitary inclusion, and through this, new architectural, formal, and functional qualities can be excited from within the original setup. The simple rule we follow: compose all the functional compartments in a manifold way and get their common Eigenvector, and this Eigenvector once again servesto root—that is, to host virtually—the entire previous stage.
as opposed to the fl n itary way of counting bysummation (that of his notion of "police"). His usageof "counting" consciously evokes that mathematical practice in its irreducibly intertwined double sense of accounting and governing. Such politicized counting, which affirms to count in infinitary values as supplements to each totalizing "sum," follows in Rändere what might be called a materialist aesthetics of classification (not a formalist logics of classification). We can see now where the naturalization of politics happens in Rändere's position: his politics of difference is acted out in a twofold manner, by the police and by political subjects. Thereby, responsibility is delegated to one side only—that of political subjects, while the police is treated almost like we treat the weather: as the quasi-rnaterial incarnation of necessities whose constraints are determined on a more abstract level (climate), butthat we haveto deal with for bringing both rhythrnand chaos, fertility and destruction, homogeneous and disrupted growth, prosperity and corruption.
Beyond urban comfort, in a state of expulsion
In order to see more clearly what is at stake with a cat egorial treatment of what names political subjects, in distinction to a classificatory one, let us briefly consider what seems
TECHNICAL STEPS:
THE CODING PROCESS
The overall procedure in which the coding process consists is called an EigenTrans-formation. We arrange certain setups of a specific constellation and calculate their Eigenvectors such that the constellation can be defined as an EigenFloorplan. This is achieved by placing a number of unprocessed input data according to the Eigenvector in a single bounding box, by using a 3D modeling software (in this case Rhino).
In technical terms, the whole process follows the steps given in an infra-order (from abstract to actual) below:
1.	Voxeli zi ng. We convertthe input geometries to voxeli zed geometries, and thereby achieve one-dimensional numerical array li sts.This i s necessary in order to calculate the Eigenvectors of a constellation, as the code procedure requires all the input data in the form of one-dimensional numerical array lists.
code: _001_VOXELIZI NG
2.	Weighting. We extractthe exact values that di splay the origina I geometry as a setup for Eigen Transformations, code: _002_WEIGHTS
3.	Applying EigenTransformations. We apply such transformation sto the orig-inal geometries according to certain controllable attractors: We define areas of 100 percent representation of original geometries, and areas of blending between them. The output geometry is rendered directly as a voxelized one. code:_003_EIGEN_ TRANSFORMATION_Z
By looping and repeating these steps, we produce generations of the original geometry, and we can achieve an increase in dimensionality for every new EigenGeom-etry computed. Each “generational geometry” can be treated with new unprocessed input data, or other already computed EigenGeometries. Following these steps, we can engender an infinite number of generations out of a whole universe of potenti al
artifacts—resulting in whatwe mightcall a combinatorial endlessness of populations of i nstances. The geometries di spl ayed here are just a small number of the vast amount of examples that could be extracted.
IMPRESSION-IMAGE,
TO SYNTHESIZE NEW CONTENT
The artifacts engendered like this incorporated rich diffusion offunction -ability, in a manner that feels like surreal coherence. The objects lose their symbolic naturalness and order, and they achieve a higher degree of abstractness which al lows them to experimentwith their own functionality.
This experimenting results in the defini -tionof an Eigenvector which comprehends a II the symbolic activities, and which can be used to articulate an instance of the generic villa to formulate an inhabitable artifact, engendered by doping original geometries. [FIGURES 04-07)
The inhabitable artifact consists in a system of signification, butitlacksan active syntax. It has the simplicity and effective-ness that is proper to code. It formalizes a universal system of statuses. Thus, the inhabitable artifact offers an abundance of electable acti vitiesthatcan be appropri -ated with its support Everything is there, but nothing is defined. All we have is suggestive delineations: certain symbols, as parts of the initial inputs, specify possible activities for certain areas.
This experimental approach of architectural design proposesto build on the grounds of activities, as they are commonly and possibly performed in urban spaces. It seeks to translate the increasingly differentiated dimensionality in which we engage in our activities into architectural expressionsthat allow developing novel ways of dealing and inhabiting the places where we live.
No more beds for lying in, no more chairs for sitting at.
JEANBAUDRILLARD
—instead: artifacts that comprehend any position and hence any human relationship!
to be an important motive for Ranciere and his classificatory treatment. Toward the end of histext he clearly states that he sees a certain contemporary tendency intervening toward the "erasure of the political in the couple of consensual policy and humanitarian police,"22 a tendency he sees threatening to turn what used to be political activity into "an anthropological or ontological destiny,"23 Political correctness, administrated by discourse, perfidiously urges usto be "passive" if we want to be politically "active." His aesthetics of classification is geared against such false "political correctness," which in effect hands over the legacy of political thought and action to some larger powert hat predicates us as Subjects of Rights. This "larger power," obviously, manifests in the process of progressive rising levels of welfare, which unfolds on a global scale, albeit in unequal rnannersand paces. Ranciere seems to ask, what if we dared to turn our backs tothis urbanity that isspreading globally, propelled by its promise of quasi-sal vat ional comforts, and that tends to erase all politics in the manner mentioned? He does not seem toseek tosornehow "overturn" the system, nor to fight for more global justice; rather he seems to ask, can there be an exodus, can we not learn to cultivate differently the grounds on which we would happen to find ourselves, if we affirmed to
live in a state of expulsion? Can we not begin to oppose the auto-iogy of such destiny by producing the means we need, in order to remain active political subjects, through a kind of "farming" that learns to root that for whose growth it cares, in—to use his own formulation of how political subjects "count"—the infinity of asublime object, the o bj ect of aest het i c j udg ment, wh i c h v i rt u a I ly supple me nts ea ch sum?
Rändere suggests a kind of aesthetic calculus rather than a logical one. It is aesthetic beca use its f u net io ns ma p proced u res i n a twof ol d man n er: by n u mbers t hat la be I t he s u ms of i nfi n ite te rms, y et t h ese I a be Is are mere ly i ndexes, poi nte rs 24 S uc h an aes-t het ic ealeu lus is "genet ic," its f unct ions are product ive; t hey do not merely represent a process, they initiate its enactment. Such is the involvement and activity that Rändere holds necessary for counting as political subjects. It is not an act iv ity that figh ts what is counted i n a poi ice manner, but one t hat has decoupledf rom such count ing and instead rega rds it as a q uas i - we at h er, as te mpo ra ry st at es t h at a re i m pos i ng cert ai n cond it i o ns with which we have to deal, if we were to hold that it is not entirely unthinkable to begin again: by affirming to live in a state of expulsion from the secular urbanization of modernity, which used to be like a promised land but turned out to sentence its "subjects"
24	It is important to see the difference of an aesthetic calculus to phenomenology and semiology—both of these attempt to supplem ent calcul us with either a general theory of signs, or with perception. An aesthetic calculus, on the other hand, does not keep a notion of calculus as distinct from one such supposedly more general theory. It stresses that the rotion of calajlus can rot remain untouched if we want to avoid sacrificing the openness of the infinite. Thus,
I describe its labels in the conventions of symbolisms as indexes and pointers (codes), and not as signs, etc.
25	Michel Foucault, "Les heterotopies," Radio France, December 7,1968; here cited and translated from Foucault, DieHeterotopien. Der utopische Körper (Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp, 2013), 39.
to the status of "consumers," allowed to "do politics" in terms of "correctness" that is policed by a kind of counting that builds on a logic of classification that deprives the individual of holding her aesthetic judgments as "naturally legitimate."
26	Se e M i ch el Fouc au It," L e ccr p s utopi qu §" Radio France, December 21, 1966; here cited and translated from ibid., 55-65.
Generic as an adverb, universality as an oeuvre
In all of this our own views would agree. But what is entailed now with opting for a cat-ego rial rather than a cfassificatory approach? How can we picture what a philosophical stance of "critical rationality" would entail, a rationalismthat is coupled with a notion of critique-ability, a notion of critique in the terms of an ability that revolves around a symbolic understanding of numbers?What would it entail to stick with Ranciere's operative distinction of two "counts of counting," while transposing them onto a stage set such t hat t he generic name acts as a universal name, adverbial not adjectival, a stage on which it articulates and spells out the oeuvre that produces nature? In all figurative brevity, it does not characterize life in such a state of expulsion as the life of farmers, but as that of gardeners. It is not the material grounds of a new existence, generic and singular (politics anchored in aesthetics) instead of comfortable and general (global urbanity), that
REFERENCES
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969.
Baudrillard, Jean. The System of Objects. Translated by James Benedict. London: Verso, 1996.
Cache, Bernard. Earth Moves; The Furnishing of Territories. Translated by Anne Boy man. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1995.
Davies, Colin. Key Houses of the Twentieth Century;
Plans, Sections anti Elevations. London: Laurence King Publishing, 2006.
Foucault, Michel. “Of Other Spaces.”Translated by Jay Miskowiec. Diacritics 16 (Spring 1986): 22-27.
Rowe, Colin. The Mathematics of the Ideal Villa anti Other Essays. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987.
Simondon, Gilbert. Du mode d'existence tlesohjets techniques. Paris: Aubi er, 1958.
---. “Technical Individualization.” In Interact or Die!,
edited by Joke Brouwer and Arjen Mulder, 206-15. Rotterdam: V2_Publishing, 2007
07 Third generation
needs to be cultivated, but the intellectual grounds of heterotopia, common places (topoi) that are nowhere there, but nevertheless real. Heterotopias are the kind of sites that have consistency not despite but because they are distributed, they are "continents, cities, planets, universes," as Michel Foucault imagines, that are engendered "in the heads of people from the in-between of their words, from within the deep layers of their stories and also from the place-less site of their dreams, the void in their hearts."25 If heterotopias a re n owhere there .which we take f ro m Foucault's idea, it is because they are always already here. As utopian in the literal sense, a placethat has no place, hete rot opi as spri ng f o rt h f rom the non -places of the immediacy of a present we I ive through our bodies.26
Thus we would suggest that the universality named by Ranciere's notion of the political subject, once thinking about its generic name as adverbial rather than adjectival, instantiates as bo dies-to-think-in. A particular body-to-think-in is one of a kind, and its kind is what I mean with symbolic corporeality. We can look at the universal as an oeuvre, at work in the symbolic contracts that household the energy from which it lives, as nature. Hence it is true that the symbolic is vested toward establishing consensus—for Rändere the negative of dissensus, and according to his dialectical thought, the death of politics—but it does this as a means to make room for staging scenes of dissensus. The symbolic is neither political nor doctrinaire, it is operative, and only in a derivative sense is it functional. It is "at work" indefinitely, never as a process that begins and ends. It creates the capacities proper to generic conditions of transf or inability, and it insiststhattheseconditions
be universal while at the same time having actuality only as local instantiations. We can see formulas or equations as the symbolic “form” such adverbial contracts take. What I would like to suggest is that they open up and cultivate an interval for the political subjectivization of any identity, just as Ranciere claims for what-is-being-named-by-the-demos (he speaks only of political names and political subjects, not of political identities). Nature’s politicality dimension constitutes, in its principle expropriation of particulars from their individual genuineness (generic means to expropriate all individuality from specificity), the non-possessab/e disposition for staging scenes of dis-sensus.Things have a genuineness, they have a nature, but it is symbolic and rooted in an elementary distributedness ratherthan in an individuality.
The unsettling aspect about understanding the symbolic in such terms is, of course, that it may be instrumentalized in both directions—politics and/or doctrine. There can almost be no better characterization than Ranciere’s own of what kind of subject is named thereby27—cases whose kinship is unsettled: “Political names are litigious names,” he writes, “names whose extension and comprehension are uncertain and which open for that reason the space of a test or verification.”28 For him, political names name political subjects in such a manner, and this is how they are capable of reorganizing “the frame within which we see something as given.”29
I am aware that suggesting to see identity that can be expressed by a formula or equation in the same terms that Ranciere finds for political subjects might strike one as a gross misunderstanding-isn’tthe solution space for a symbolic form determined in absolutely certain ways, not in uncertain ways! On which grounds can we speak of such a politicality that belongs to nature, and of which we claim a universality that allows to characterize the abstract objects of symbolic computation in terms of their particular integrity? I briefly pointed to the importance of how we think about solution spaces when I introduced the notion of adjacency in mathematical corpus theory. Let us see in more detail how this is exactly what was at stake with the emergence of universal algebra throughoutthe nineteenth century, and how we are confronted today with its entailments.
27	Although he would, by what I can understand from his own programmatically political commitments—which he keeps respectfully separate from his philosophically political commitments, as I have argued before (see footnote 11)—not at all agree with my proposed application of his concept in the context proposed here.
28	Ranciere, “Who Is the Subject of the Rights of Man?,” 304.
29	Ibid.
30	Letter by Henry Wilbraham, published in the supple-mentto The PhilosophicalMagazinel (June 1854); emphasis mine. Cited in Rod Grow, “George Boole and the Development of ProbabiIityTheory,” http://mathsci.ucd.ie/~rodgow/ boolel .pdf. See alsoTheodore Hailperin, “Boolean Algebra Is Not Boole’s Algebra,” Mathematics Magazine 54, no. 4 (September 1981): 172-84; Walter Carnielli, “Polynomizing: Logic Inference in Polynomial Format and the Legacy of Boole,” http://www.cle.unicamp.br/principal/grupoglta/ Thematic-Consrel-FAPESP/Report-02-2007/C07.pdf; and Stanley Burris, “The Laws of Boole’s Thought,” http:// www.math.uwaterloo.ca/~snburris/htdocs/MYWORKS/ PREPRINTS/aboole.pdf.
Bodies of thinking live in algebraic universality
Let us to try to make sense of the sentence-or develop the equation.
Jacques Ranciere
Computing with the symbolic means of algebra has added a new dimension to mathematics: the input of certain values in a formula may not only turn out to be unsolvable, it may also yield asolution spacethat isso vast in optionsthat none of the possible solutions seem more necessary than any other. This was indeed the key critique of George Boole’s Algebra of Logics, which is illustratively expressed in an open letter by one of his contemporaries:
The disadvantage of Professor Boole’s method is [...] he takes a general indeterminate problem, appliesto it particular assumptions not definitely stated in his book, but which may be shown, as I have done, to be implied in his method, and with these assumptions solves it; that is to say, he solves a particular determinate case of an indeterminate problem, while his book may mislead the reader by making him suppose that it is the general problem which is being treated of.
The question arises, is the particular case thus solved a peculiarly valuable one, or one more worthy than any other of being solved? It is clearly not an assumption that must in all cases be true; nor is it one which, without knowing the connexion among the simple events, we can suppose more likely than any other to represent that connexion.30
Boole’s methods were not shown to be faulty or inconsistent—the reason why they had been disliked or even spurned by so many was the immense depth of horizon they had opened up. Indeed,Theodore Hailperin has, in a relatively recent paper, explained how Boole’s ideas make sense only if we read them in relation to algebraic concepts like ring, module, and domains, concepts that had, in his time, been farfrom digested and settled, not even on a methodological level, and certainly not on a philosophical level.
I will come back to this in a later part of the paper. These preliminary indications are merely meant to induce some confidence in my postulation of the generic as constituting a kind of symbolic corporeality whose singular instances manifest as particular bodies-to-think-in, and my speculation about what such a postulate might entail for thinking about computability. The most important aspect isthatsuch bodies-to-think-in are collectively constituted—before they can be acquired individually. Yet this collective
31	There is, for example, an extremely interesting history regarding the status of grammatical cases. All throughout the centuries, the disputes of the grammarians centered around how cases can be accounted for: cases express all kinds of relations—there are languages still today that have more than twenty distinct cases that differentiate the most common ones: nominative, dative, genitive, and accusative—and the question of how we can account for them involves assumptions about causality. There are two main positions for which different schools have opted: a casus is “what has fallen off” something, literally; that’s how it is caused. The common understanding today seems to hold that the case of the nominative is somehow different from all the other cases, andthatthe latterare indeed what falls off from the nominative—a view that puts the noun in a grammatically central position. Yetsincethe earliest grammarians, another view holdsthatthe nominative case is like all the others, and that it marks the imprints of activities that are happening with some degree of regularity—activities that happen in repetitive manners. According to this view, verbs in infinitive form are marked out as central for identifying syntactic units in language, not nouns. It is easily transparent how two views entail profound metaphysical implications. See the classic 1874 book by Heinrich Hübschmann, Zur Casuslehre; and Louis Hjelmslev, La categorie des cas (Munich: Wilhelm Fink Verlag, 1972).
32	This is of course not really true; in fact, what characterizes late scholastic philosophy is precisely a forceful dispute around the claim, raised by some scholars, that we ought to assume a reality distinct from that of concrete particular or individual things, and proper purely tothe universal. It was called the problem of universals, and to liberate thought from the kind of dogmatism that could be attached to such a notion of reality was surely one of the great moving forces behind the break of the Renaissance. Universals constitute every notion of “pure reason”—against which Descartes brought forward a new analytical method linked to an attitude of “fundamental skepticism,” and with which Kant, a bit later on, soughtto reconcile a certain legitimacy for speculation with the Cartesian “method of doubt” in his Critique of Pure Reason (1781).
constitution is realized only through the individual acquisition of the bodies-to-think-in. The agility they are capable of relies upon individuals who learn to inhabit what has been collectively achieved; they turn lonely and clunky otherwise. We can think of such bodies-to-think-in perhaps best as literacies: we can see the canonical corpus of authoritative knowledge turning into bodies-to-think-in, animated and vibrantly present in a manifold manner, according to the breadth and articulacy in which these corpora are inhabited. Does such inhabitation not point us toward the possibility of affirming mastery in a different manner than that of domination, dependency, and exploitation? Does it not announce a revival of other aspects proper to mastership, like generosity, care, and commitment?To inhabit politically such a canonical corpus requires the act of appropriation as we know it from learning-to-become-literate: not only in the sense of writing and reading correct sentences, but finding apt forms for one’s words, and apt expressions for one’s thoughts.
Let us return from these preliminary remarks, and from viewing computability within the paradigms of programming, back to computational design more strictly. Here we can see in architecture, for example, how the first wave of this fascination with the generic raised an interest in form finding as opposed to giving form, or deciding about form. By now, this first wave has given way to an interest in developing the parametric condi-tions from which such forms can be found. Yet along with this comes a certain complication with regard to seeing in the generic a kind of genuineness that would liberate us from troubles associated with individual authorship and mastership. In the light of parametricism as a new paradigm in computational modeling, it becomes much more transparent that, indeed, the one-of-a-kind particularity attributed to instances of such abstract objects is neither example nor prototype, but that there is a “suchness” to the “thisness” of their instantiations nevertheless, and that despite the engendering of its hylomorphic identity (its form and content) through mere tentativeness (purely indexical, without a decision of howto interlink the dots into a figure), these instances are conditioned. Technically speaking, they are conditioned by a master model whose instance they are. Theoretically speaking, the form of organization and government proper to a master model (you can think of the intra-specularly governed domains mentioned earlier in relation tothe integrity of abstract objects) may well be singular, yet they are not absolute—simply for the reason that there is an open range of manners in which each and every one of them could be set up. Or to put it differently: we may well be dealing with absolutes when we deal with such abstract objects, yet they are absolutes whose symbolic nature tells us that there always are alternatives to be considered.
Characterizations of the subject of the generic
Characterization on a grammatical level
Against our suggestion to read the generic in an adverbial sense, the “grammatical common sense” (if indeed there is such a thing) today maintains that the generic be the adjectival form for referring to a genus that can be represented by the formal notion of a class. There are many ways of how this could be explained,31 but the most important one seems to involve a strange “metaphysical competitiveness” between the notions of genericness and universality. Traditionally, any one gen us could never count as universal, because its role is descriptive and representational in relation to concrete things that in reality are always individual, and whose collective nature the genus is to determine. Universality, on the other hand, has traditionally been attributed to categorial determination, of which it is clearthat it is a genuine abstraction (however we mightthink about the nature of abstraction). Noone would seeka “position in space” or “quality (per se)” as a concrete instance of it existing!32 Categories were held to be universal, and they were what concrete things would instantiate. This is how the universal comprehends, literally, that which is the property of all things.
It seems hardly an exaggeration to see in the conflation of this distinction, between classes and categories, the key aspiration for modernist political philosophy. In its striving to rid philosophy and science from metaphysics and theology, it sought to overcome orders of supposedly natural kinds and their rigid class distinctions. The challenge was, and still is today, to find a way of “attaching” the universality proper to categories of abstract criteria to the notion of class that can be formed according to concrete marks of distinction. The quest for a universal subject, a universal object, or even a notion of universal reality, must try—if it wants to be critical and not dogmatic—to identify a notion of universal class. A universal class would be a class that
acts genuinely without self-interest, and in the interest of all, Orto put it differently, more adequately but also more difficultly: the universal classwould be the classwhere self-interested action coincides with the needs of humanity as a whole,33
The man without qualities (Robert Mu«i)
Robert Musil famously wrote a novel of a man whom he portrayed in the light of such an essential abstinence from desiring individual property, as the man who aspires to be, tautologically, nothing but a man (Der Mann ohne Eigenschaften, 1930-32), The novel accounts thestruggles its protagonist has to take upon himself: as a character with a life of his own, Ulrich is faced with this task as a sheer impossibility. He tries to find meaning for his life under the condition of resigning from any possibilities offered to him by the particular class to which he happens to belong—in his case as an intellectual, a mathematician by education, that of the bourgeoisie. In vain atternptsto reconcile "soul and exactitude," his vocation and his profession, he searches for a place and role purely within the "universal class of mankind"—-that is, by ref using to accept any privileges that might be granted to him on the basis of his particular individuality-within-the-actuality-of-the-social. Musi I 's novel is appreciated widely for its capacity to express and thernatize in most subtle and differentiated ways a widely shared mood of thezeitgeist of his time, and counts today as one of the most influential books of the twentieth century,
DIANA ALVAREZ
33 What haunts modernity, and thereby hinders it to continue with itself on it sown terms, is the idea of a natural reality, one capable of hosting a notion of universal commonality. Still today we can read much of contemporary pol iti cal phi losophy through the I ens of how a universal sub-j ectivity m ight be conceived—from thi s point of vi ew, even very contemporary contributions to political discourse root back rather directly to Hegel's suggestion of understanding bureaucracy as such a universal class that serves all, without self-interest, and to the Marxian totalization of this idea by seeing in the universal class the proletdridt from Laclau and Mouffe's dialectical affirmation of the political as a condition of competing hegemony to Hardt and Negri's Multitude as the political subject of the New World Order they postulate, Badiou's and Zizek's ideas about how to conceive, in secular terms, of an abstract persona whose i/o ice is to mdtter most (Zizek's Lacani an-Hegelian mdster discourse, and in the case of Badiou, his set-theoreticdffy cons titu te d md the mdticd I on to logy) to A g am b en and Vi r no 's interest in personifying abstractly the (Marxian) concept of a generdl inteffec t
The city without identity
(Rem Koolha.a^)
More recently, the architect Rem Koolhaas has taken up this Musilian theme, yet now in relation to cities instead of an individual person. The Generic City gives the portrait of a city in the light of having done away with all that MusiI 's protagonist still tried, in vain, to reconcile for himself—in short, identity, property, history, the entire inheritance from a premodern era with which an individual has been equipped "to-begin-and-continue-with-itself'i in short, to lead a proper life, a life of one's own (to pick up a wording coined by Vi rg i n i a Woo If in herserninal 1924 essay "A Room of One's Own"). The Generic City confronts us with an account of the peculiar realism of thegeneric; there is neither identity nor history nor property in the Generic City. Consequentially, the Generic City establishes its order in purely infrastructural, systematic, and continuous terms. There is singularity in the Generic Cityas he portrays it, yet it is asingular-ity that is liberated from the standardized. Ratherthan incorporating a cosmic, cosmological, orotherwisetranscendent order, the Generic City provides settlement within what Koolhaas in all consequential ity calls Junkspace: preempted from ever manifesting something of substance—sornethingthat would have to be conceived of in how it maintains its own finite continuation—such space is only thereto ultimately be disposed of. All reason for categorization is annihilated in it. In Junkspace, order must not be wrested from chaos. Instead, one-of-a-kind particularity (which he calls "the picturesque") is wrested from the homogenized.
EXILED TO THE VIRTUAL WORLD OR THE INCONSISTENCY OF THE REAL
(INSTABILITY IS OUR NEW FREEDOM)
Unsurprisingly, the reception of Koolhaas's portrait of the Generic City is quite different from that of Musil'stherne-opening novel, Bluntly speaking, ittendsto be perceived as a bothering impertinence. Its clinical viewpoint and the somewhat drastic (and also, arguably, resigned and sarcastic) tonality is often taken for the cynicism of a global architect who portrays, with a certain braveness, it must be admitted, a threatening development that he contributes to and lives from: the drastic homogenization of our living environments. For many people it seems clear that the homogenization he portrays is an effect of the global expansion of capitalist economy and a respectively Darwinian survival-of-the-fittest dynamics that goes along with such expansion. To this understanding, Koolhaas's suggestion of relating these effects of homogeneity to the strengthening expansion of the generic must appear monstrous. Large portions of the aggression Koolhaas attracts is surely because he seems to ridicule hopes that feed from the belief that there must bea wayto purifythe generic from the exploitative dynamics of capitalism, and tofind in it, finally, a long-sought rneansto realize the core values of socialist and modern politics. But where am I speaking from, when daring to refer so distantly and seemingly uninvolved to this thematic locus of vibrant emotion
Perhaps this story will be almost out of date by the time you’ve read it. The twentieth century gave way tot heTay-lorization of the city and by the same tokens to a massive production1 of gener ic2 space, as the i mpri nt of i nd u s-trial age and globalization. However, the emergence of networked communication technologies has extended our interaction with the city toward an invisible and complex network of relations and data. For the first time in history, we are not only aware of such a deg ree of complexity surroundingus on an ordinary basis, but also likely to grasp it through a real-time flow of data. Hence, we are no longer constrained to see the city asa limited set of logical assumptions on reality, but as a data platform aptto preserve any potential relations.The Pre-specific City is the upgraded generic space.
The Pre-specific City is not exactly definable in geometric terms. In order to locate it, one must consider n dimensions, out of which none is correct or false. Infact,all ofthemcoexistsimul-taneously, engendering one and only space-time. Therefore, the Pre-specific City is not a point in space, but rather a point and all its possible trajectories. This non-Euclidian condition induced in some of its inhabitants some kind of painful sensation, like the one that persists in an amputated phantom limb. Seemingly, the definition of the city has been stretched toward inconceivable limits, in a desperate try tofitto it what has become thecontemporary urban condition. But why does detac h me nt seem a I way s so painful, when change is the only certainty there is?
“Exiled to the Virtual World or the Inconsistency of the Real” is an initiatory journey through the Pre-specific
C ity. After a violent fl ow of inform ation, ceaseless political fluctuations, and the marks of globalization, the stability and longevity of contemporary life have been dismantled. One funeral after another, the deaths of the main stands of modernity and its im manent rational principles have been declared: control, order, identity, beauty, the city... At the rate at which population growth increased and at which the speed of changes accelerated, there were too many disappearances and not enough room for all the dead bodies. The bodies were then buried in a reversed skyscraper, hundreds of sto-riesdeep, belowthe buildings. Coupled with an elevator, an undefined number n ofTypical Planst willturn intoafreak show, a surrea I istic m ac h ine enabled to fabricate some unexpected encounters.
Cou Id arc h itect u re’s focus on order, crystallization, and longevity become itsown damnation? How can architecture cope with the speed of changes? Wandering through the reversed skyscraper, Rem Koolhaas performs, like a contemporary Dante, an allegoric travel in search of project strategies likely to deal with this radical shift, through misappropriations, overlaps, and hybridizations. His stroll through t he Pre-specific C ity is I i ke a shopping afternoon in a mall of predicates. If by chance you manage to wander inside the reversed skyscraper, you will find everything described here,butalso its perfect opposite, the only sure thing is that there is no sure thing. And one cannot even guarantee this...
1	Lefcbvrt, Henri (1974),
2	Koolhaas, Rem (1995).
3	Koolhaas, Rem (1995).
(and activism)? Before turning to my staging of that conceptual personathat, as I would like to convince you, ought to complement that of t he generic, namely the concept of the master, it seems adequate to make a few short statements about this.
Falling1 in love with the in-sinuousness proper to an economy of entropy
Primary abundance
1 am speaking from a point of view that credits a development with principle importance in a manner not usually shared today, even though as a phenomenon, it is almost permanently in the media—yet as an observation only, without instigating the least dissensusso far. The phenomenon I mean is this: our planet is literally bathing in the solar stream, with ten thousand times as much energy to be potentially harvested from its light particles
as all of humanity is currently using worldwide, each day, streaming by continuously. For the first time ever, we can encapsulate and integrate, within the planet's ecosphere, energy that is additional tothat which is already stored in its manifest natural body—the weather, plantsand animals, stone and earth. It rnaysound strange and somewhat amazing to view photovoltaics like this, but as a phenomenon it doesn't seem to be disputable. Yet weighing this phenomenon as being of principle importance for how we think about our habitat and anything that derives from such thinking—economy, politics, how we make sense of what we experience and engage in—this is much more critical. Because it means to attempt generalizations t hat were based on what this phenomenon implies.
What would that mean in the first place, attempting to generalize on the grounds of regarding the planet's location in the universe not in terms of Wsposition within the interplay of cosmic forces, as in astronomy and geometry, but in terms of the planet's activeenergetization? I put "generalize" and "phenomenon" in quotation marks, Why? Because this "fact" is an "artifact." It didn't come about (in a naive sense) naturally, it became afact only on the decisive grounds of human intellectuality. Photovoltaics istechnics at its most sophisticated level (yet). And to generalize usually means to
The city no longer exists as we knew it.
Fach insistence on its primary condition irrevocably leads via nostalgia to irrelevance, like a phantom pain about an
Electronic revolution seems about to melt everything that is solid - to eliminate all necessity for concentration and physical emI>odiinent.
Hut this city, the generic city, the general urban condition, is happening everywhere, and just the fact that it occurs in such enormous quantities must mean that it’s habitable.
Everything is melting down
This is any space, any time, an “event city" that cannot be captured, an universe of uncertainty and unexpected hybrids.
A violent flow of information, ceaseless political fluctuations and the mark of globalisation, have cut ofF the stability of contemporary life. One funeral after another, the death of the stands of modernity and other immanent principles is being declared:
delineate classes such that they are capable of representing as adequately as possible, in mimetic terms, a certain common nature among different things as they are given. Yet in the case of the Earth, viewed in such terms, we have a singular situation. Attending to how we might "address" the planet's situation in the universe in terms of its energetization inverses our well-tested and refined language games around localiz ab Hity .The prin cipie of loc aiity intirneandspac e—t heprinciplethateachthing has its place—needs to be replaced with a principle of circumlocution. The point is that which is being given, not that from which we can deduce given in an immediate sense. It is not enough to consider circum-stances as characterizing location; more radically; we owe our location to the circum -giving (das Umgeben, in German) of rambling tails (the wave ranges of cosmic streams). Under such conditions—let us call them adverbial—quantization precedes localization, just like the case in quantum elec -trodynarnics, which also views light as particles.34 In all consequence, attempting to generalize from the implications of photovoltaics irrevocably urges us to distinguish between "generalization" and "abstraction" much more strictly. The implications of such generalization are abstract at first, they affect our notions of universality, but
34 See Richard Feynm an, Q£D\ The Strange Theory of Light and Matter (Princeton, N J: Princeton University Press, 1985).
35 Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari, Anti-Oedipus: Capitalism and Schizophrenia, trans. Robert Hurley, Mark Seem, and Helen R. Lane (London: Continuum, 2003), 112.
they also reach backtowhatwe hold as general, the empirically based and classified descript ions of things. Attempting to generalize from the planet's situation within the solar stream comes close to a modulation of cosrnologic stability, To put it as pragmatically as possible; it suggests that we should count on a primary abundance of (clean) energy, and with that, an abundance of water and food; furthermore, bringing all materials that are rare and scarce into a regenerative cycle was not a paramount problem anymore, because the main obstacle to recycling is energy-budget calculations, which depend upon the principle scarcity of resources. In less pragmatic and more theoretical terms; such an inversion turnsthe Earth not only into an object, but also into a subject. This falling together inevitably collapses the critical distance that is so necessary for thinking considerately—which literally means through observing the stars, from corn- (with) + sidus (genitive sideris, constellation)—and not furiously and impetuously. This was the key motive for Gilles Deleuze, with his difficult attempt at inverting, philosophically, the entire legacy of Platonism, which he stated in strikingly clear terms; "It is not the slumber of reason that engenders monsters, but vigilant and insomniac rationality,"35 If itwouldn't sound sodrarnatic, itwould seem adequate
to say, instead of speaking about the possibility to "generalize" from this "phenorn- 36 Senes, "Revisiting The Natural Contract:' See also enon," that to assume the very possibility to do so entails assuming the possibility of Michel Serres, confraina w (Paris: Bounn.iseo). engendering the Earth in its kind.
This is a hyperbolic way to put it, and I am aware of its polemical nature, To contextualize this, I would like to come back now to what the perspective of universalizing the Subjects of Human Rights entails in more detail, Let's attend more closely to the position of Michel Serres already mentioned earlier. To illustrate more concretely what rnotivatessuch overstatement—-that we are engendering the Earth in its kind—we can take up helpful terms he has coined. He names "collectivity" asthe new object-subject distribution, and places in its range of responsibility what he calls world-objects1. "By world-objects I mean tools with a dimension that is commensurable with one of the dimensions of the world. A satellite for speed, an atomic bomb for energy, the Internet for space, and nuclear waste for time [...] these are four examples of world-objects."
The turn in the language game of local izabi I ity for him rneansthat "we become the vie -tirns of our victories, the passivity of our activities. The global object becomes subject because it reacts to our actions like a partner,"36
Hence, attempting to generalize f rorn the planet's situation within the solar stream in terms of its energetization and circumgivenness(instead of position and locality) comes close to a modulation of cosmologic stability, and this, perhaps, with a momentum no less severe than that of the secularization of cosmology that accompanied modernity, There is little reason to doubt that we can cont inue to count on what we believe to "know"—all the technical and scientific artifacts certainly bear witness to that—yet we might have to reconsider how we can account for the stability that is captured in what counts as knowledge. If our thinking about the Earth means to engender it in its kind, the Earth—of which we are, intimately, a constitutive part—is the "whole" that comprehends all that can be articulatedj and all that can be substantiated in formally corporeal terms (symbolic artifacts) as well as in materially corporeal terms (manifest art if acts).Taking the implications of mastering photovolt aics seriously means to articulate the "identity" of the Earth not in its general or correct terms, but in any terms that can be substantiated. And it also means that all the terms that can be substantiated are terms that properly characterize its kind.
r Wait a nanosecond. I have something that might ^ interest you.. .
' The speed of changes is unaccountable, this story is almost out of date »	already.
COME ON IN!
KNOCK. KNOCK]
Somewhere in a simulated world.
F" Some rumours have been running about these surrealist techniques for neaning detoumement. They call it Paranoiac-Critical Method, there must be something to dig in . there for our screen-play! ^
' Yeah, we've been working^ on this screen-play for some time now. But still some blurred details need to be cleared up after these massive ^ paradigmatic changes... >:
This is an active ^ and concrete way of interpreting the world through a distorted relationship to it. l Smart move I may say! ^
' Koolhaas, you ^ have to be fast, nothing can go faster than contemporaneity, not even light!
SHIT!
1 knew the best place to go would be the rcvcrscd-skyscraper, tin- place where all the paradigm funerals had been taking place.
GRRRR THUNDERS
Well, to be sincere I find all these upheavals of value extremely exciting..
I guess you have an idea now of the reason why you are here. A
Welcome to the reversed Babel.
’Nlllll COFFIN OPENING’
Modern science has assumed anatural homogeneity as characterizing all things natural, in terms of which it attempted to classify scientifically all things on an equal basis, dynamic yet universally coordinated, within dimensions whose interplay applies uniformly and globally Serres has named them as the "dimensions of the world"-speed, energy, space, time.The principle that modernity found for identifying the individuality of all things in this manner, as constituted not by natural kinds but by a universal nature, was "work": transforming energy from oneforrn into another. The architectonics of such systernaticity restson the assumption that the total amount of energy within the cosmos is finite. Only on the basis of this assumption can we learn to understand forms of individual becoming purely on the basis of what a thing is doing, literally, through understanding the transformations of energy and matter, What we see questioned with the principle of primary abundance is not this axiom, but the adequacy of the modern (thermodynamic) stance to treat world and universe alike. There seernsto be no reason to reconsider that the total amount of energy within the universe be stable, and that energy is what can neither be produced nor decay. It is the equivalence between cos-rnosand universe that appears as inadequate from the energy perspective of primary
37	The aspect that there is a third component is a key motive of cybernetics, and has perhaps most prominently been articulated by Norbert Wiener—"Information is not energy or matter"—without being able to suggest a different architectonics that could accommodate all three of them. Serres's approach here is the first that aspires to do so.
38	Michel Serres, "Les nouvelles technologies: Revolution culturelle et cognitive," lecture held on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of INRIA, a public institution for research devoted to the sciences of computation (/es sciences du numerique) in France, December 11,2007; https:// i nterstices. i nfo/j cm s/ c_33030/les-nou veil es-technologi es-revol ution-cul turel I e-et-cogni ti ve?hlText=m i chel+serres. Thanks to Diana Alvarez-Marin for translating from the original French.
abundance. In concrete terms: the total amount may well be finite and stable within the universe, yet that which is integrated and encapsulated within the ecosphere of the planet Earth is not.The criticality we are looking for, one not based on a principle of sufficient reason but on one of finite synthesis, needs to live up this change in perspective.
Toward an in formation-based architectonics
Michel Serres has recently suggested not only that but also how the two physical categories of mass and energy—those that are derived from the principle of work—could be complemented with a third component that is orthogonal to the latter two: information.37 "I do not know any living being, cell, tissue, organ, individual, or perhaps even species, of which we cannot say that they store information, that they treat (or process) information, that they emit it and they receive information, [...]! know of no object in the world, atom, crystal, mountain, planet, star, galaxy, of which one could not say again that it stores information, ittreats (or processes) information, it emits and it receives information. Sothere'sthis quadruple characteristic in common between all the objectsof the world, living or inert."33 Between all things in the world, he suggests, what is common
Bigness has the potential to recontruct the whole, resurrect the real, reinvent the collective. A dissociation tool from exhausted movements of modernism and formalism... a new economy where no longer “all is architecture".
At the rate at which population size has increased and at which the speed of changes has accelerated, there were too many deaths/disappearances/ dismantlements and not enough room for the bodies. The dead were then buried in a revcrsed-skyscraper. hundreds of stories deep, below the buildings. Coupled with an elevator, an undefined number n of Typical Plans will turn into a freak show, a surrealistic machine abilitated to fabricate some unexpected encounters.
The Typical Plan is “the plan without qualities”. Its only function is to let its inoccupants exist. Create new territories for the smooth unfolding of new processes. At the same time, the reversed-Babel was transformed by its own Bigness, it was no longer a building but a city in itself. It could compete with “the city”.
At one of the desks, I* Corbusier desperately multiplied hi; attempts to win a chess game against a computer.
I’ll do it. I’ve been^ to hell and back. And let me tell you. it was wonderful!
When I looked at his chessl»oard I realized he only had towers, you cannot do much without a horse, a trojan horse!
I arrived in a panoptic room where moderns still tried to cope with instability...cternally
Allez,
once
more!
CHECK
MATE!
CHECK
MATE!
' You might be too predictable.You should try some programmatic alchemy, loss of control, contamination, quantity rather than quality! Relax man!
I have 5 strategies to win this game, this is irrefutable: 1. Pilotis 2. Terrace roof 3. Free plan 4. Band window ^	5.	Free	facade	-
y I wonder on ^ which floor in this building we can kfind its architect
Look,
Michael
~ Hi. I'm the receptionist. ^ If you are here to visit the chambers, please take the lift and go all the way straight down. The number of floors is undefined, only direction is unvariable.
Jackson!!
whole floor dedicated
to Post-Modems, amazing!
is a fourfold activity—to store, to treat, to emit, and to receive information. While work, the transformations between energy and matter, wasthe emancipatory principle that allowed the overcoming of premodern doctrines of natural order by demarcating a strict separation between culture and nature, mind and matter, and spirituality and reason, the introduction of information severely complicates things, While work as a category operates on the level of representing a generality (the class of all things insofar as they are natural—or technical, in the sense of scientifically natural, as they do work), the fourfold activities operate onthe level of actualizing abstractions, The cosmos (world, manifestations of things) does not represent a universal order (forms, templates, types, etc.). Intact, the universal cannot be represented because it is pure and infinite activity: storing, treating, emitting, receiving, The so-induced notion of universality cannot be represented by concepts; it acts, Within the quantum clouds of probability distributions it keeps predicating potentially, and can only be actualized when articulated (factorized and complemented with coefficients) within aforrnula, and expressed asacase of the symbolically established solution space. Information (what is distributed and integrated in this acting) is like the photons from the solar stream: an e/ernentarity abounding and
discrete packages of powerful indefiniteness. Articulating it, inthe metaphorical terms of how an alphabet articulates the stream of breath, excites its indefinite ness to take on the characteristics of what we might call an imaginary magnitude, corresponding to how the number that counts (and through that, governs and accounts) the possibility space is indexed, and indexically labeled. Such indexing raisesthe indefinite ness of information into lofty probability distributions of local density (amplitudes) and local plenty (probability amplitudes). As long as information is not thus excited and raised, it is indefinite just like the photons of solar radiation are indefinite as long as they don't incite, through interaction, state changes within the relative stability of chemical bonds.
In all consequence, the relation that can be maintained to the universal, so conceived, varies locally and depends upon the capacities and abilities that can be mobilized for articulating the terms of a formula that render solvable functional mappings. As long asthe virtuality of the universal is not actualized, it remains pure indefinite elernentarity, an elementarity we could call ideal because it is of no substance, Such virtuality of the universal is a kind of ideal that belongs to all things. In order to turn substantial, it depends upon being actualized, and such actualization, I would suggest,
I just followed the hare as fast as I could. All of a suddent the floor started folding down, and I had the feeling someone was playing with us, someone playing to be an architect...
I.KVKL IN BKTWF.KN SOMKWII1KI-
A system of folding plans was about to destroy the status of the individual floor. I lost the notions of above and below, while having the sensation that the regime of orthogonality that had dominated architecture was close to an end. Combined to a grid and stacked this new architecture could be defined as
new inside-out city. The hare disappeared...
The new definition would lie “ Beautiful as the unexpected encounter of a sewing machine, an umbrella and Dali, fabricating hybrids, on a dissection table”
' Descent in 1 progress, please stay still behind the yellow line.
fCatchy me il you l can! )
rruuuuu - urr machine noise
HiSSSJJF Follow me, V "i ■ ■■■I this way!
rTo look is to invent‘d Paranoic-Critical Method is about looking at one thing and seeing another. _^A
r Architecture is too ' slow, just a vague memory of a hope, that shape, form, coherence could still preserve it . from melting down.
r Only what makes' a difference can generate meaning.
that is the
L encounter! A
~ I'm hybrid. ~ contemporary, and I speak English k fluently. .
Y Aww. these i little red plastic men look so cute in the k model! A
r Well, I'd like to see ^ myself dressed up as someone who serves tea for the Queen of England. . Cool, it works!
You are continget and ^ cohesive, also extremely contemporary. Everything happened so fast...but I'll find away...	.
I walked until a strange shadow took me out of 1 thoughts...
BURR - NEON MAKING NOISE
is achievable in acts of learning. Learning, literally, is an act of appropriation: it means mastering a subject matter, and it is through such mastering that the virtual can be actualized and rendered manifest. It is not the formulas that incorporate the universal in any schematic sense; the formulas, in their apparent schematism, depend upon animation through the learnedness according to which the partitioning differentiation of the activity a formula constitutes, as a matheme, is modulated, To conceive of formulas as mathemesfrom the Greek rnatherna, for "that which is learned," has been the custom for many philosophers throughout antiquity to the Enlightenment, and has been revived very prominently in the twentieth century by Martin Heidegger in Die Frage nach dem Ding (1950), and also by Jacques Lacan or Gilles Deleuze, among others. From our point of view with regard to primary abundance, what all of them are concerned with (in very different ways!) is that the universal—if it is in act (ontologies of the event)—is literally entropic, from the Greek term entropia, en for "in" and tropeior "a turning, a figure of speech."The universal is that which keeps turning within figures of speech,
With this, we can now summarize our proposition of an entropic economy: It is not against entropy but thanks to it that we can maintain a locally variable relation to the
universal, and substantiate figures of speech by treating them as abstractions, not as generalizations, and by striving to formalize them into the constitution of a possible erne. From the point of viewof mathemes, the relation we can maintain to the universal is locally variable, and it issubject to an "economy" that is both collectively and individually based, and whose "stocks" are those accumulated through learning, and whose exchanges are rated bytheappreciation of mastership. In alldrarnaticexaggeratiomsurplus names can be rated in terms of any scale, from completely worthless to sublime dearness. The subjectsthat are mastered, by learning, are political subjects in Rändere 's sense, which I introduced earlier. They are subjects whose names do not represent definite collectivities. It is in this sense that their names ar e abstract, not general. They are "surplus names, names that set out a question or a dispute about what is included in their count," The predicates whose activity is being governed by such counting are, due to the virtuality of their universality, open predicates: they do reign by (arithmetic) means of summation, division, etc., yet what they sum up is symbol ica I ly const it uted, and becauseof that, can never be exhaustively totalized as a finite sum. They are predicates that open up a dispute about what they exactly entail and whom they concern in which cases. They are capable
.YTlOC
Do you need some ' help here? Whal are you exactly trying to achieve through all this daring acrobatics? .
Pttt, again, I haven't slept i in a week! ,
r This is ~ what I call serendipity!
Disconnect!" ^^B ' Let's detine this by 1 the strict separation ot its components. What used to be together can be split in order lo deline its lasks in k a performative way!
r Hi dear, v welcome to the Trangression Club, are you . new here? >
I’m trying to find a way to avoid the isolation of my members, by turning myself into a human loop, so I'll never feel alone again!
Eeuuuh.
Wait. I have^^B r a better idea, what about s introducing specificity in the indeterminate accomodations? It's like coupling universality with shafts of specificity, every s moment would be one ot A uniqueness!
T We love ~ transforming things into something they were not intended . for initially.
It's also about
contradiction, making
something become it’s opposite, that's a . poetic tension.
r All this is ’ getting a bit too compromising!
r So as you can see. we are interested in the relationships between fragments and whole, continuity and discontuinity. integration and decomposition., it's ^ all about collisions. A
r Yeah. I like that, to ™ create links between independant parts. Hybridizations, proximities.
frictions, overlaps,
^ superpositions. a
r This is no longer ^ a lift but a moving room that can create a changeable house. So we can be everywhere ^ and nowhere! a
'You should visit our 'Montage' neighbours, some floors down, they . are lovely!
At'i! .ll;. .' ^^^B
Y accumulating all the ^ residual and contradictory demands of the program in a mould that has nothing to do with it. Then form would become k extremely contingent and A poetic!
* This could also ' be a programmatic
loop, something
that unites and ^ confronts. A
programmatic intention directly translated into l shape! A
of introducing an interval that makes possible political subjectivization into any status 39 Rändere, "Who is the Subject of the Rights of Man?;
quo. Let's remember: "Political names are litigious names," Rändere points out, "names m
whose extension and comprehension are uncertain and which open forthat reason the
space of a test or verification. Political subjects build such cases of verification, They
put totest the power of political names, their extension and comprehension."30 It is such
a putting to the test that formulas, conceived as mathemesthat are allowed to calculate
with what has been learned, are engaged in. What has been learned can also be taught.
If we cease to represent the universal, and instead relate to it by means of actualization, what opens up is the perspective of an economy in which all acts of appropriation are contributing to—not depriving—the prosperity of the universal. What comes within reach to bethought is an economy where privation increases the wealth of that which belongs to all. If an individual learns to know, through acquiring mastership, developing it as a proper ability and demonstrating that and how it can virtually be learned by anyone, it differentiates and proliferates the richness of the universal.
From the adverbial and categorial point of view to universality, the commonness of the common nature of things is the result of inception, rather than the result of
conception. With regard to political subjects (in the extended sense proposed in this text, not in Rändere 's original sense), abstraction precedesthe concrete existence of that which presents itself to us in regularities. That which appears recurrently as cases follows a categorial order before it can betested inductively, empirically Abstractions are for learning, generalizations are for testing and settling the learned such that it can betreated asacase, asa "such" and not only asa "this."
Contrary to pursuing a prosaic disenchantment of the fascination with the generic,
I hope to have been able to express why I think it only now begins to get truly interesting: the generic introduces a possible understanding of mastership that, seemingly paradoxically, builds on the premise of expropriation. It introduces an understanding of mastership where the -ship, the affix demarcating a "state, condition of being," is primary to the individuality that actualizes and acquires this state—the masters.
Within the Generic City: Master, yet in “whose” house?
By coining the striking word of mankind as having to come to terms with "not being the master in his own house," psychoanalysis has suggested that we ought to understand
ANYWI1KRK
Now everything looked difVcrcnt. eternal... as if three people had !>ecn living here forever. I secretly believe I have shifted from the Predicate to the Existence Sphere.
Time is still there.
I have the ability to decouple my intellect from my desire, I am also a conceptual zebra.
invest our hopes^^H
y in the unbuilt as the last ^ f source ot the sublime. II we deploy in the unbuilt the powers formerly applied to the built, we can 1	attord to treat the built as we
formerly did nature, and 5/?hvtake it lor granted
iuuuuu -1.1 rr machine: noise
r Here, apples always lall last. Please mind your relation to the ground, we only think in terms ol section. *
But could a floor become also an inhabited truss? Then we could play odds and evens of inhabited structures and completeley , free of floors from . structure.
r	Since	^
gravity works as a sum, the theoretical shape of a column is a V	cone	-
Not sure about f this. dear. I think we create by elimination, by scooping out forms from a solid, like an ice cream. It's always L harder to construct than to take away.
' Here, we define the rules that allow the existence of all the other . levels.
EVEN ruUTTII K DOW
I feel empty inside
ourselves through roots within the unconscious as a peculiarly expropriated ground- 40 ibid.,307. ednessof what can he understood and known. Psychoanalysis has rendered explicit a veritable negative form of architectonic thought that operates by working through an element of collectivity that remains unavailable for all attempts at taking control. Jean-Frangois Lyotard has modulated this language game by making the point that not ions of humanity need to be rooted in an element of what he calls "the inhuman," aconstitutive part of usthat we do not control—which may be birth, infancy, the law,
God, or the unconscious. Rändere has taken up this consideration in his reflections about who isthe subject of the rights of man, to which I have made reference several times: "Absolute evil begins with the attempt to tame the Untamable, to deny the situation of the hostage, to dismiss our dependency on the power of the Inhuman, in order to build a world that we could master entirely," he writes, and continues: "Such a dream of absolute freedom would have been the dream of the Enlightenment and of Revolutionary emancipation. It would still beat work in contemporary dreams of perfect communication and transparency."40Important is that such inhumanity isthe irreducible otherness, the part of the untamable of which human being is both host
41 Hans-Dieter Bahr has developed this theme toward a veritable reconc ept ion of philosophy, which he cal Is Xe/?aso-phie. See Hans-Dieter Bahr, Die Anwesenheit des Gastes: En twurf e iner Xenos ophie (Nor dh au s en: B aut zVer I ag, 2012).
and hostage, Gastgeber and Gast, as a relation we might perhaps call coexistence or "genuine mutuality."41 Along the lines introduced in this text, I would say it isthe infinite surplus that needs to be taken into account wherever we are working with summations, checks, and balances.
The grand project of an architectonics of reason, whether in positive or in nega. t ive terms, even if it were to inverse the problematics of mastership into non-mastership—purely into activity that doesn't require mastership at all, but that unfolds auto-logically and automatically—meets its limits and turns stale and oppressive in the reduction of its own categories to representable schematisms. A schematism cannot engage critically with its own constitution intra-specularly. Our interest in a next paradigm for programming languages, a pre-specific one after the procedura! and \Y\e object-oriented ones, derives from the unease in observing that these limits are indeed being met today,
Programming languages, as I have argued earlier on, have entirely broken with the mimetic paradigm of language (at least in the representational understanding of this paradigm)—their grammars are engendered, their structures are governed self-reli-
REFERENCES
Koolhaas, Rem. “Generic City.” In 5, M, L,XL, edited by Rem Koolhaas and Bruce Mau. Rotterdam/New York: 010 Publishers, The Monacelli Press 1995, 1248-64.
Lefebvre, Henri. The Production of Space. Malden: Blackwell Publishing 1991 [19741.
CREDITS
IMAGES
Boticelli, Sandro. Portrait of Dante, 1495.
Bruegel, Pieter. The Tower of Babel, 1563.
Crewdson, Gregory. Untitled, 2001.
Crewdson, Gregory. Untitled (Ophelia), 2001.
Dalf, Salvador. La persisiencia de la memoria, 1931.
Gursky, Andreas. Mayday III, 1998.
Nieuwenhuys, Constant. New Babylon: Outline of a Culture, 1974.
Paucar, Antonio. Shoes That Breah the Silence, 2011. Prada & 0MA. The Spring-Summer Looh Booh, 2009. Recht, Sruli. When Gravity Fails, 2011.
FILMS
Das Cabinet des Dr. Catigari. Dir. Robert Wiene. Decla-Bioscop AG, 1920.
Der Himmel über Berlin. Dir. Wim Wenders.
Argos Films, 1987.
Ed Wood. Dir. Tim Burton. Touchstone, 1994.
Metropolis. Dir. Fritz Lang. Universum Film, 1927.
Rem Koolhaas: A Kind of Architect. Dir. Markus Heidingsfelder. and MinTesch. Arthouse Films, 2008.
ThePruiii-Igoe Myth. Dir. Chad Freidrichs. Unicorn Stencil, 2011.
ant ly, symbolically, within the confines of certain arbitrarily set determinations of usefulness, Without an understanding of mastership, all engagement with intra-specularity would mean to subject one's own critical engagement to the governance of these arbitrary determinations. In other words, if the generic makes a worthwhile point in suggesting to trust in a "grounded-ness" of knowledge that roots within an elernentarity of distributedness, where all particular instances are expropriated from their individual specificity, such trust would mean—in programming more generally—to subject read-ilytothe abstractly synthesized and arbit rary master language, or to master rnode/s in object-oriented computing more specifically. The problem t hereby is not that these synthesized masters are synthesized; and neitherthat their "nature" is induced according to the orientation of a certain ambition, The problem is that the synthesized masters tend to appear as quasi-naturalized, while in fact they are synthesized by acts of learning and on the basis of acquired mastership. The problem, hence, is that they ought to be esteemed and treated accordingly— that is, the categories with which they operate ought to be understood as characterizing "political subjects," not thesubjects of "natural kinds." The criticality with which they need to be met is not one principled by criteria indicating when reason is sufficient, but by criteria that index the capacities that constitute acts of finite synthesis.
Thus, instead of referring to this dimension of expropriation as an expansion of the Unconscious, the Law, Provenance, or Divine Chance into and within the scope of what can be computed, I prefer to call literacy this abstract "where," where "what can be engendered through learning" is rooted
and grounded. We need not make any appropriative claims about the untamable nature and insistence that animates literacy, if we relate to it as a kind of body-to-think-in that indeed is generic, and hosts us before it can be inhabited individually, while its existence depends, at the same time, on actually being acquired and inhabited by individuals. We can now see, in literacies, that which incorporates “loftily” what I have earlier suggested to understand as the politicality aspect of nature. I have characterized it as a dimensionality constituted purely by distributiveness, and as complementing the modalities of the necessary and the possible with a further aspect, that of the probable. Expropriation and mastership maintain a kinship relation that might appear surprising.42 Yet at the same time we all well know how, in orderto communicate—whether in spoken words (speech), written phrases (discourse), or symbolic terms (algebraic code in IT and IT-based CT)— we depend on means and constraints from which we may well choose, but to which we first have to submit, in order to be able to choose. As long as we don’t master articulation and expression, argumentation and composition, signal interpretation and interface decodings, the less schematic and more interesting ones of them appear to us not as wrong, but as empty, superfluous, often confusing, insufficient, not entirely adequate, etc. It sounds quite paradoxical, but we feel comfortable, individually, within this generic dimensionality (our literacies) proportional to how well we are able to "master," individually, these collectively constituted and governed capacities,43
Characterizations of the subject of the master
Attracted by the volatility of a flirtation between the philosophical stances of “critical rationalism” and “speculative realism”
So let us get back then to characterizations of the second conceptual persona that features centrally in this text, next to that of the generic: the master. While many contemporary intellectuals seem prepared to submit, with all due acrimoniousness, the rich legacy in architectonic inception to forms of often all too unimaginative and uninspired scientism,44 a young French philosopher is currently raising hopes for the possibility of philosophy to actually continue its legacy of architectonic inception. Quentin Meillassoux is central to an emerging school called “speculative realism,” or sometimes “speculative materialism,” a vibrant field of intellectual thought and debate characterized through its reactivation of metaphysical and ontological themes, while at the same time being very active in strictly programmatic and political terms as well. Furthermore, the people associated with this community are closely watching recent technological changes, and they often take certain aspects of what they observe as their starting point. All of this is interesting enough for our context of computability, information, and architecture. Yet what I would like to focus on here, in orderto bring out as clearly as I can the distinction between what I suggestto call “critical rationalism” and “speculative realism,” is notthis larger context around Meillassoux in general, but a particular book he recently wrote on Stephane Mallarme’s poem “Un coup de des jamais n’abolira le hazard” (“TheThrowof the Dice,” 1897). This 2011 book, entitled Le nombre et la sirene, is equally brilliant as it is unsettling with regard to our interest in computability.The main protagonist in the poem is the Master, in the double sense of a particular authority and yet also (as is the case with most fictional characters) in a generic sense. We encounter the Master on a boat in the midst of a stormy and wild sea, holding dice in his fist and pointing his hand into the air. The poem never resolves what the Master actually does or intends to do with the dice, whether he wants to throw them in order to learn about his near destiny, whether he believes that he can intervene in the “fulfillment” of what appears to be his “predicament.” Arethe dice asign of the Master’s despondence, his impotence to continue being what he is, a master, vis-a-vis the powers of cosmic chance that science has just began to affirm in the stochastic methods introduced by Faplaceand others? Does the calculation with probability mark the ultimate end to any form of mastership, and instead enforce a more humble stance for man in a cosmos whose nature is determined indirectly, on the level of a second derivative, as a paradoxical determination of being undetermined?
Most of the interpretations somehow unfold along these lines.45The brilliance of Meillassoux’s reading lies in opening up, quite inversely to these readings, a novel possibility of how the poem can be interpreted as presenting an instance of actual, successful mastership. Meillassoux presents nothing less than an understanding of the Master in an entirely original way, which relies neither on annihilating chance nor on desiring to control it, and the calculations that are possible with it, objectively. We could easily call what Meillassoux reveals in Mallarme’s poem a symbolist way of engaging with the
42	A recent discourse where thought is devoted to this kinship between expropriation and mastership, via the question of whether and how sexuality can be understood asthe being of symbolic relations—i.e. the being of relation-in-general—was published in two booklets, one by Jean-Luc Nancy, L’«it y a» du rapport sexuel (Paris: Editions Galilee, 2001), and one by Alain Badiou and Barbara Cassin, II n’ya pas de rapport sexuel: Deux legons sur “L’Etourdit” de Lacan (Paris: Fayard, 2010).
43	Judith Butler makes a similar argument about language asthe dimension in which we are all equally dispossessed, in her essay “Giving an Account of Oneself,” Diacritics 31, no. 4 (Winter 2001): 22-40. Pier argument, I would suggest, can be expanded and generalized along the lines I propose here.
44	For any esteem of intellectuality as something that has been achieved by civilization, it is, for example, a sheer disaster that so much of research all across the social-science and engineering disciplines today is evaluated, funded, and discussed along the simple and reductive line of carbon dioxide reduction.
45	The “death of the author,” which was proclaimed by Roland Barthes, Maurice Blanchot, and Jacques Derrida, among others, was decidedly rooted in particular readings of Mallarme’s great character of our poem, the Master.
46	See Vuillemin, La Philosophie de I’algebre, especially the concluding chapter, “Fa mathematique universelle,” 465-518.
47	In his earlier book After Finitude: An Essay on the Necessity of Contingency (Fondon: Continuum, 2008; published in French as Apresla finitude in 2006), Meillassoux reflected on whatsuch an “encapsulating move” entails in relation tothe philosophical tradition, and introduced the notion of “corre-lationalism” for referring to all stances that embrace a transcendental position. He suggested calling “realism” any stance that negates correlationalism. With due distance to the euphoric reception of this proposal (but also with some sympathy) Alberto Toscano has discussed the (also politically) problematic aspects aboutsuch an ambiguously “generous” generalization in his essay “Gegen Spekulation oder eine Kritik der Kritik der Kritik,” in Realismus Jetzt, ed. Armen Avanessian (Berlin: Merve, 2013), 57-75.
48	“We have abstractly developed the hypothesis, which seemed to us to correspond in ‘The Throw of the Dice’ to Mallarme’s draft since 1895—the one of a diffusion, rather than a representation, of the divine within the Oeuvre.” Thanks to Diana Alvarez-Marin for translating this and the subsequent quotes from the original French: “Nous avons developpe abstraitement I’hypothese qui nous a paru correspondre, dans le ‘Coup de des,’ au projet de Mallarme depuis 1895—celui d’une diffusion, plutöt que d’une representation, du divin par l’Oeuvre.” Quentin Meillassoux, Le nombre et la sirene: Un dech iff rage du “Coup de des” de Mallarme (Paris: Fayard, 2011), 89.
theme of mastership—yet this, at first sight at least, comes close to saying nothing very surprising. And yet, thethemeof symbolism as Mailarme renders it present in the poem, and that is worked out by Meillassoux, not only affects severely what is more commonly associated with symbolism in art, it also affects the notion of symbolisms in mathematics—the entire legacy of developing, trusting, and departing from what can be learned through working out resolutions to formulas. The clue in Meillassoux’s reading—as I would put it—is to have Mailarme engender a one-of-a-kind corpus of numbers whose “nature” is universal, while at the same time being singular. Meillassoux speaks differently about this; he does not mention the context of corpus theory in mathematics at all, for him it is all about the unique event of depositing the number that can be no other (on the side of Mailarme) and someone (him, Quentin Meillassoux) finding it. Already before Meillassoux, many interpreters have sought to find a due, and to be able to prove the hermetic nature of the poem as a treasure that was capable of conserving something inarticulate yet essential, by seeking to demonstrate how their clue fits the structure of the poem like a key fits the keyhole. What distinguishes Meillassoux’s reading from any such attempt isthat hefindsthe clue he needs not in something exteriortothe poem, but only because he engenders it himself, immanently, by working through and appropriating the materiality of the text, intimately and from within the poem, literally by not much else than counting, speculating reasoning, and by providing the groundsfor his reasoning in clear and distinct form. And yet it would be mistaken to assume that at stake in Meillassoux’s reading is a notion of mastership that relates to a Cartesian subject, that knows how to master an object in all critical distance and pious devotion (after all, for Descartes it is God gifting us individually with ideas).46 Rather, at stake in Meillassoux’s reading is a notion of mastership based on what I would call iiisistentially shared intellectual intimacy.The mastership that Meillassoux portrays in Mallarme’s poem, I would like to suggest, is mastership in succeeding to invoke acts of learning against the sheer improbability that characterizes learning. In such a situation, all clearly set identity distinctions between author, reader, and the protagonist are raised into a lofty cloud where the outcome, after settling backto “commonness” again (which we could call existential extimacy) after such exposure \n\o\he insistentiai intimacy of such learning, is profoundly uncertain. This is ever more remarkable, I think, if we consider that our present, in the beginning of the twenty-first century, marks a moment when all hopes that count as reasonable with regard tothe relation between chance and calcuation go toward controlling chance through calculus, under the positivist restraint that such calculation needs to be combined with the provisional empirical precision and explication that characterizes the least degree of speculation. Againstthis critical divide between induction (empirical) and legitimate generalization (formal and deductive), Meillassoux affirms the move to symbolically encapsulate both, and work empirically within the abstract “indexicality” of the poem’s “material.”471 call it indexicality and materiality of the text because the stance of such “encapsulation” means to depart not from clearly bound dimensions, but from a state of mixture involving the semantics, the harmonic and graphical meter, the broader historical-political-cultural context as well as the history of the legacy he continues (poetry), and all hermeneutic aspects one can think of; having all the distinctions that grow out of these classical dimensions, he takes the liberty of putting them into a cloud of probabilistic relationality from which he then sets out to extract his own reading, where all classical stances that could be taken as a “ground” end up being slightly shifted, revolved, and rearranged in a manner that is consistent within itself, yet that lacks objective necessity in the consistency it arranges. Indeed the main hypothesis he puts forward is that Mallarme’s project was not to represent the divine, but to dissolve itthrough his own poetic oeuvre.48 It is this contingent character of his reading, coupled with fine exactness and formal rigor, that sets up what I would call “the improbability of learning” that I see staged in Meillassoux’s reading. Every act of learning, I would like to argue, confronts us with just such a “confused” and “oversaturated” situation. To deal with such confusion through trust, until one has developed a “stable ground” or “consistency” that one can master in a relaxed (not in any particular and strict way dependent) manner, isthe “spiritual” character of learning—in all the ambiguity this entails.
I must say that this emphasis on seeing a notion of mastership introduced through Meillassoux’s reading of Mallarme’s poem, which sets upon the fundamental improbability of learning, is not (not directly, at least) the way Meillassoux himself wants to guide the outlook that stems from his reading. For him, this point of view would be much too prosaic. In his eyes, the genius of Mailarme (and that of himself) is—explicitly and literally so—programmatically spiritual in nature, not technically spiritual as I would prefer to have it with my emphasis on learning and literacy. The great passion that I wish to point to as being involved in any act of teaching/learning plays a crucial role
for Meillassoux as well—he is very attentive to it—yet to him it does not characterize learning in general; he sees in it asingular mo me nt t hat g rows so p owe rf u I i n t h i s f oc al i z at i on as a s i ng u I a r moment that he recognizes in it an act of divine nature. I will not attend much here to the aspects of Meillassoux's book where he draws quite daring consequences from this, suggesting to see inthe poem a veritable liturgy that iscapableof hosting and bringing comfort and orientation to a community-to-come, open t o any one w ho i s w i 11 i ng t o p art i c i p ate i n pe rf or m i ng t he sac re d ritualsof what he calls "Mallarme's secular religion."49
Cosmic untendedness, prosaic ness in verse
But let me sketch a bit the larger context within which Meillassoux is inspired to such ideas. For it is a context that bears close familiarity to the contemporary situation in architecture, vis-a-vis the power of computing. So what was at stake more generally with the question of meter in poetry, and the rise of free verse?
Since antiquity, poetry was always credited a certain dignity, as rightfully deserving a peculiar kind of spiritual trust. Different from other manners of expression through language, a poet did not lecture a doctrine, and did not speak in the name of an authority, And yet, there was a peculiar necessity attached to poetry, because any appreciation of excellence, as a poet, was tied to the poet'sstrict subjection toametrical law that was larger and more binding than his will; a poet strictly had to subject his verses to the conservat ive constraints of poetic meter.50 If a poet could lend his voice to evoke a t hing with elegance, and without doing it violence—that is, through masterfully playing within these constraints—there could be attached, to that which is voiced poetically, a certain divine autonomy or gift, Like this, whatever was articulated poetically could be articulated only indirectly, and thus remain divine in nature. The oeuvre of a poet was to express this divine insight, As such, it is not appropriated by the verse that composes it, and what is more, the meter that renders the verse enunciable allows the listeners/readers to participate in the appreciation of such divine nature. There was in this sense, of a peculiarly poetic and strangely singular kind, a necessity involved in the cre-at i ve vocat ions of addressi ng t hat which cannot be voiced directly, Due to this necessity, poets were held to deserve a particular kind of spiritual trust. Before the background of this legacy, the rise of so-called free verse in nineteenth-century poetry mirrored a profound crisis of cosmic untended ness that has its roots in a larger context, and that resulted from the strict separation of science from religion during the Enlightenment.51 For poetry, the indirect manners of linking the sounds not only in a grammatically
49 "Modernity had therefore triumphed, and we did not know. The passion put, throughout the nineteenth century, to snatch the messianism of his Christian condition, to reinvent a civic religion freed from dogma, an emancipative politics exterior to the form er Salvation. [...] Mal I arme would have taught us that modernity had in fact produced a prophet, but erased; a messiah, but by hypothesis; a Christ, but const ell atory. He would have architected a fabulous crystal of inconsistence containing in its heart, visible by transparence, the mermaid gesture, impossible and vivid, which had engendered it, and still engenders it. And the poet would have thereby broadcast the 'sacred' of his own Fiction with each reader accepting to nourish herself on the mental wafer of its fragmented Pages. The whole in accordance with an accurate atheism, to which the divine is nothing beyond the Self articulating itself to the very Chance." (From the original French: "La modernite avait donctriomphe, et nous ne le savions pas. La passion mise, tout au long du XlXeme siede, ä arracher le messianisme de sa condition chretienne, ä rein vent er une religion civique delivree du dogme, une politique emancipatrice exterieure ä Fanden Salut. [...] MalIarme nous aurait appris que la modernite avait en effet produit un prophete, mais efface; un messie, mais par hypothese; un Christ, mais const ell atoi re II aurait architecture un fabuleux cristal d'inconsistance contenant en son cceur, visible par transparence, le geste de Sirene, impossible et vif, qui I'avait engendre, et l'engendretoujours. Et le poete aurait ainsi diffuse le «sacre» de sa propre Fiction aupres de chaque lecteur acceptant de se nourrir de l'hostie mentale de ses Pages fragmentees. Le tout selon un atheisme exact, pour I equel I e di vi n n1 est rien au-del ä du Soi s' arti cul ant au H asard m em e.") I bid., 128; see also ibid., 78ff.
MAU RICH) RODRIGUEZ
HOUSE OF THINGS
Once architecture isopen to embracing key paradigms of Information Architecture (I A), architects can think about a “digital” order in a more instinctive manner, foreshadowing an imminentfuture in which “we’reall becoming librarians” (morville 1998). In essence, the natureof “architecting” is purely organ iza-tional; only now, it also operates over an informational, no longer exclusively manifest material ground. A central concern of IA and architecture alike, is to provide the structure of a corpus to an unstructured field of givens. A series of such parallelisms has been set to project new opportunities for architectural design by means of symmetry. The goal of this project is to illustrate how abstract relations are capable of reconstructing spatial configurations in a manner that originates from synthetic grammars engendered by following a desired narrative, and specifically designed to tell stories about people, about events, oraboutthings. Considering artifacts as components endowed with potentiality and capable of altering architectural experiences, the notion of a house isto be reevaluated—this project considers dwelling in terms of an informational model of human activities that can be described, organized, measured, and classified in an open variety of ways as a household of familiar objects: a “House of Things.”
50	The rol e of m eter in poetry can be parall el ed with the rol e of modul arity i n the architectural order of columns.
51	Thi s sam e crisi s famously prcvoked Kant to face the problem of phi losophy bei ng I eft with grounding reason within the sole alternative of either skepticism or dogmatism, an alternative that he sought to overcome with his notion of critique as a means to dethrone the centrality of whatever notion of "pure reason." For a broader discussion see again Vuillemin, La phifosophie de f'afgebre.
52	In the same manner, it is this cosmic untendedness that liberated architecture to concentrate on the vectors of howto build institutions as a form of political "tendedness" on the one hand, and on that of radically subjecting the building practices to procedures of technological industrialization—a vector that it self found an institutional form in the polytechnical universities that were founded in the late eighteenth century and all throughout the nineteenth century. The secularization movement in post-revolution ary Europe was carried by this momentum of modernization, and it affected also the fine arts. The mechanists were considered artists before this, as the French expression of industry as arts et metiers still illustrates.
correct way, but also figuratively coherentthrough rhythm, rhyme, alliteration patterns, and the like on a structural level, began to turn prosaic as the custom of fixed meter became secularized. Allegoricallyspeaking, within the Cartesian coordinated space of representation, connecting points to the continuity of aline can count as no more but a simulated continuity. It is i n a si mi lar sense that also the poetic line (verse) literally began to turn prosaic.52 It is difficult to thernatize this today, but the secularization that took possession of the ancient legacy of creative speech was of such awkwardness! Its old and trusted sense of necessity was threatened, naturally, from the arbitrary decisions that ordered the lines of free verse. At the time when Mailarme was writing, that very spirit of modern prosaicness had set out to modernize even poetry, while nevertheless remaining keen in attempting to maintain a distinction between poetry and prase. Li ke t he other symbolist poets, Mal I arme was outraged by the ent ailments
of this development.53Yet different from other poets, Mailarme never seems to have released his outrage through taking sides programmatically, either for the conservatives or the modernizers, This is precisely why his poems have been interpreted in the twentieth century mainly along the lines of necessary acceptance of the impossibility of mastership (and authorship) in the exposure to stormy cosmic untendedness. His character of the Master is read with admiration as bearing up bravely in a spirit of affirmed vanity against his own awareness of his ultimate impotence,
It is before this background that the recent reading of Mailarme by Meillassoux touches such a sensitive zone, It opens up the perspective that the symbolist answer to these developments might not merely be read in terms of a bourgeois sublimation as a proclaimed continuation of the spirit of fine arts—bourgeois because in poetry, separated from its dignity, there is nothing really at stake anymore, except the gain in private pleasure. Symbolization appears, with Meillassoux's reading, as something more than merely the crafty and artsy coating in codes and educatory puzzling of a truth that is as inevitable as it is bare of offering truedelight. Let us attend now more closely to how symbolism is being substantiated by Meillassoux's reading.
53 See Jacques Rändere, Mal farme: The Politics of the Siren, trans. Steven Corcoran (London: Continuum, 2011); original French version published in 1996.
00« A House of Things. Final materiality 01 Activity groups and abstraction procedure
54	The whole argument is summarized in the chapter entitled "Sommes" (Summations) in Meillassoux, Lenom-bre et fa sIrene, 47ff.
55	Significantly, i n the subtitl e of the Germ an transl ation of Meillassoux's book, dech if frage is translated as Verrätse-lung, not as Entzifferung, as with the English translation (decipherment). In English, Verrätsefung could perhaps best be expressed as "dis-ciphering." It strikingly makes Meillassoux's point explicit: that Mallarme's oeuvre seeks to dissolve, rather than to represent or even resolve, the nature of the divine. See footnote 50.
56	It needs to be pointed out again that Meillassoux himself is not speaking with reference to the mathematical theory of numerical corpus; interested as he is in dis-ciphering (see footnote 56) the notion of num bers, i n order to dissolve what it renders present, he speaks of the identity of his number 707, of the particular being of this number (which he identifies as the incarnation of an altogether new notion of numbers, namely number-as-chance).
Once architecture is open to embracing key paradigms of Information Architecture, architects can think about a “digital” order in a more instinctive manner, foreshadowing an imminent future in which “we're all becoming librarians” (M0RVILLE 1998). Using computer-aided tools, architecture beginsto operate “univocally” over an i nfor (national basi s. From this point of view, architecture would be more adequately conceived of as a verb in inti nite tense, as “architecting,” rather than as a noun, in its substantiated form as “architecture.” Yet its purpose, namely that of structuring things, remains unchanged even if we conceive of it in thi s i nfi nitarily active manner.
I n essence, architecting i s of a purely orga-nizational nature and invdvesthecomposition of elements of very diverse types.
As the data that become accessible grow into unprecedented and unexpected amounts, the skills pertaining to the achievement of order and stability within the information ocean become of primary interest It is not surprising that Information Technology (IT)and Computer Science are the leading fields in mastering these skills and in developing the techniques to do so. Afterall,they are natively familiar with information; their materials and their systems are also much “lighter” and they behave in much faster ways than those of the built environment Somewhat surprisingly, in spite of thegenerally broad impact of these developments on all the ways in which we getorganized today, the core principles and methods behind IT are not yet pervasively discussed and integrated in architectural design. One might argue that the reason for thisismainlyone of availabil -ity and/or skills in dealing with the technical tools; but by holding this view, current architectural discourses and practices follow a different mind-set than the one that advances IT with such speed. Also in architecture offices and schools, computers proliferate today; free software, tutorials, and readers are surfacing ever so often, source code is being shared and discussed openly. Computer skills are acquired by more and more architects, and with it, the
Hisclairn istosee in Mailarme a true symbolist master, because he sees him as having engendered his own numerical corpus—i.e. a symbolic nature of numbers, from "placing" in the manner of a distribution (hidden in the seemingly arbitrary meter of the poem) the one number that cannot be another. TOT.^The entire analysis of Meillassoux revolves around determining the "identity" ofthis number—as the being of chance (I'etre du hasard) t hat consists i n making itself infinite,55 Mei I lassoux's t hesis is t hat f rorn t his one number, the sum of all the words in the poem, Mailarme has extracted the meter in which he wrote the poem—and that Meillassoux explicates as "the clue" he finds from the experience of what I have called the insistential intimacy "within" the poem's proper interiority, by working through its material. The meter Meillassoux hence postulates is not, like the arbitrary structures of prase and free verse, fully contingent without any "generical I y necessary" motivation, Why? Because rooted within the necessities constitutive for a symbolic corpus is an entire algebraically constrained scope of articulate-ability.^This scope of articulate-ability is capable of rooting, within his engendered numerical corpus, a metric of poetical structure under the strict governance of what counts how. it is a metric that is both open for so me interpretative instantiation, but that
divide separating computer skills as an add-on from architecture more strictly is being overcome rather faster than slower. Yet what remain sto be bridged i s a concep-tual gap—one between what we are actually capable of doing, and the way in which we think about what we are doing, with these new skills; learning from the “informational rationale” could be of great use forthis purpose.This is perhapsthe biggest challenge so far, but it might also yield the most intriguing results.
In Information Architecture, contemporary computational methods have enabled us to filter, disentangle, and interpret vast; raw data to produce useful knowledge. It may come as a bitof a surprise to learn that many of these methods emerge not from clear paths and predefined structures, but from uncertainty, vagueness, and impreciseness. Since the advent of the Internet and the subsequent information explosion (M0RVILLE 1998), the primary interests in computation have shifted from sharing a set of “absolute truths” to establishing relative stabilityfromscattered, partial knowledge. In short, it is a paradigm that aims (1) for resi lienee in i ts ability to react to va nations, (2) for generality in response to growing diversity and (3) for learning and discovery instead of securing and preserving existing foundations. Such astandpointhasallowed the development of a logic for impred se prediction, forecasting, and approximation that is to a great extent empirically driven, and doesnotdepartfrom assumed certitude and a priori reasons. The driving engine for this quietbutpowerfiil revolution liesin the combination of abstract thinking, computation, and empirical experimentation by means of simulation, modeling, and articulation.
This research proposal seeks to explore how the aforementioned paradigm in Information Architecture may be integrated into architecture. With its help, it seeks to describe architectural design parameters and conditions in a significantly more applied, chaotic, complex, and emotional manner, in a manner that enriches the design process from conception to completion—one that ultimately affects
also embodies as a certain transpersonal, not strictly willfully postulated, necessity For Meillassoux, it isthe being of chance. So let's see howthe meter that Meillassoux extracts from the sum of the poern'swords is not simply a representation of the meter Mailarme hasworked in, but truly an extraction; that is, the result of an algebraic-symbolic procedure. And let us see what is meant by this "numerical corpus,"
Because his procedure is itself masterfully artistic, and it would be silly to summarize it here, it must be sufficient to indicate in inverse terms how Meillassoux proceeds: he looks for the summation of the numbers cast by the dice throw, based on Mallarrne's line that says "Toute Pensee erriet un Coup de Des" (EveryThought engenders a Dice Throw), If the clue to the poem lies in identifying the number that could not be any other, so Meillassoux, then its "meaning" must be to achieve the inevi-t able engendering of this number(in German I would say, ins Werk setzen, tentatively translated as "to put into place and action") a thought of such nature, and this in a manner such that it unfolds by necessity when being read within the oeuvre. Hence, the identity of this number that Meillassoux is looking for cannot be given as a representation, it must be "placed" operatively, As he puts it:
architecture. The reaching out toward abstraction should not be understood as an attempt to suggest impossible spaces, unbuildable structures, orto d ri ve architecture away from its traditional core of real buildings, and into cyberspace and game spaces of illusion. Rather, as we understand it here, abstraction is aboutfinding commonality, aboutfinding resilient and insisting invariances within levels of conceptual depth.
Throughoutthistext, abstraction specifically refers to that which gives rational means that are developed and applied in mathematics, logics, and computer programming. Abstraction is what is capable of dealing with any meta-activity (TURN ER & EDEN 2013). Pursuing abstraction withinthe computational design process permits to includeanything that can beindexed, measured, or counted as a potentially relevant factor. Like this, computational design opens up the traditional material palette with which architects are used to working. Architectural design can now also involve language, associative semantics, and emotional response. By indexing its patterns as computable data, such immaterial aspects can be translated into archi -tectural substance.
The concrete interest of this project is to il lustrate how abstract relations can construct spatial configurations whose form comes not from predefined geometries or references, but from synthetic grammars thatfollow a desired narrative. Thi s narrative can tel I any story, about peo-ple, about events, or about things. Architecture has paid a great deal of attention to matters of scale and proportion, mainly based upon the human body and its relation to space. H owever, architecture i s not made up solely of bodi es in spaces th at can be composed in their interplay, but of experiences. Understanding architecture as a collection of experiences entails an understanding of space as a condition. Within the domestic, experiences are composed of architectural objects (affect spaces) and their relationships. These objects are increasingly being modified and affected
02
SIMILARITIES (ARTIFACTS
Conceptual workflow, from any house to a particular House-ness
There is a trivial way, but by the sarnetoken accurate, of understanding this sentence, Instead of saying that this statement isabout affirming, in a quite vague and rather mundane way, that every thought is a gamble, we can interpret it this way: every thought, insofar as it isforrnulated inalanguage, produces a series of random numbers related to language components necessary to formulate it. Our concluding sentence contains in fact, as any sentence, a certain number of letters, syllables, words, nouns, etc. These numbers are "engendered" by the thought that finds itself formulated in it, buttheydonot have inthernselves any meaning—and particularly no meaning related to the thought at stake,57
In short, Meillassoux substantiates his hypothesis such that the final code consists of the ciphers? - 0 - 7, and he legitirnatesthe entire argumentative path that leads him to this number by showing that—if written as 707—it is indeed the number that counts all the words in the poem.
So if we explicate this procedure inversely, it strikingly resembles what any statistician does on an ordinary basis: he deterrninesthe "indexical magnitude" (often called random
57 "II y a un- facer, triviale, mais par la mime precise, de comprendre cette phrase. Xu lieu de direqu'il s'agit dans cet enonced' affirm er, defaconassez vague et plutot banale, que toute pensee est un pari, nous pouvons (interpreter ainsi: toute pensee dans la mesureoü eile est fomulee dans un langage, produit une Serie de nombres aleatoires lies aux oomposantes de langage necessaires pour laformuler. Notre phrase conclusive oontient en effet, oomme toute phrase, un certain nombre de lettres, de syllabes, de mots, de sub-stantifs, etc. Ces nombres sont «engendees» par la pensee qui s'y trouveformulee, maisilsn'ont par eux-m ernes aucun sens-et en particulier aucun sens lie a la pensee enjeu." Meillassoux, Le nombre et id. Sirene, 32.
by technology. It indeed requires some effort to ignore the pervasiveness of artifacts and their enhancing contribution to complement our quotidian activities. Interconnecting a network of everyday ob jects to track and compare data which they gather about how much, when, and in which ways we use them, might reveal a different set of notions of density, frequency, rhythm, intervals, resonance, and other landmark descriptions of spatial grammars throughout architectural history (ASHTON 2009). Considering artifacts as operators for experiences, a new kind of tectonics can be conceived, one that uses ensembles of ordinary domestic objects, of our things and our stories they are invested with, as units to articulate spatial design.
The final interest of this project is to reeva I u ate the notion of a house by con sid -ering dwelling as an informational model of human activities as they are described, organized, measured, and classified in terms of artifacts: a “House of Things.”
HOUSE-NESS & DOMESTIC ARTIFACTS
Striving to shift from traditional dependency on geometrical elements to a dependency on a symbolic system of relationships that can encode magnitudes, quantities, and qualities according to our (various) abilities in dealing with them, implies fundamental revisions of current design methodologies. This perspective has two major entailments: (1) a critical examination of howtheindividual’sscope of training and developing abilitiesin computational architectural design is unnecessarily restrained by the predefined settings of template procedures in software, and (2) a critical examination of how, and if at all, there can be room once again for an architect’s intentionality and authority in
the predominantly pragmatic and largely opportunistic-seeming praxis of contemporary and future architecture. This new role of intentionality and authority might concern the articulation and organization of a higher-level abstract “materiality” rather than the implementation of particularplanning processes and designs. Archi -tecture might perhaps regain a position of integrity if it finds ways of instrumenting the purely pragmatic, short-term projects as exemplary cases in which long-term interests can be pursued.
The issues addressed by this text so far, especially those regarding the relationship of architecture and technology, refer implicitly to a discussion about space at la rge, or more preci s el y ab ou t th e process of how space is conceived. This can be regarded as the common denominator between Information Architecture and Architecture. For architecture, material and spatial orderistraditionally organized according to a metrics derived from other material and spatial things. Thatis, architecture has been organizing concrete matter departing from concrete matter. Architecting, as the integration of the “informational rationale” into architecture, is capable of acting upon a much greater variety of “substances" other than extensive matter. Just like mathematics and information technology are operating on a symbolic level of substances that can be encoded in different manners, so architecture can also operate on a symbolic level.
I f we thin k about it, the idea th at archi -tecture is made up of much more than “just” materials is not hard to acknowledge. After all, the dependency of space with its users is what ultimately defines, animates, and activates architecture. Without the experience, there is no archi-tectu re. This dependency di rects architecture away from a mere validation by presence or absence of certain aspects, and closerto seeing in it a notfully reducible assembl age of engagement s or emotional relations. Engagements happen between users and particular experiences. With
the inclusion of the emotional, the idea of architectural experience becomes much harder to pin down. At the same time it becomes a much more general concept that can be tailored to specific scenarios or na r rati ves. I n thi s project, we seek a way of creating particular units of experience that remain va lid to work with in a tectoni c and natural architectural approach.
The approach to define the “units of experience,” as it is pursued in this project, analyzes and classifies architecture into collections of spaces that are composed in a purely relational manner, around a collection of activities.Thinking in terms of “activities” decouples “functions” from representational notions that assume an elemental or archetypal spatial order. It separates programmatic design from strictly deterministic definitions, and hence creates a concept of “what can be done,” as a space of potentials. In such a verbal mode of program, architecting allows to design with spaces-to-be, enabling a projected space that is flexible and adaptable, and which can eventually be materialized in a variety of ways.
Buthowto obtain, outof such abstractly projected experiences, a system of measurable and countable units, elements, and proportions, as architecture needs it in order to compose real spaces? To determine a spatial grammar and a set of objects to be assembled into design, we can call on technology’s aid. The “Internet of things” foresees a network of appli-ances and applications that share and exchange data. Open-Source Hardware is making this a reality, easily endowing any artifact with an immense variety of “capabilities.” Even though domestic artifacts are usually perceived as somewhat disconnected from, or foreign to, architecture, our approach is that they can be referred to for producing an accurate and rich description of our engagement with spaces, people, and the environment; domestic arti facts are seamlessly embedded in our daily routines; and because of that, they can be helpful for creating maps of experiences.
or chance variable) of which the possibility space "consists." All he needs for that is a code—e.g., the alphabetical code, or the Morse code, or any physically metrical measure expressed in digital code.5SThe creativity of Mei I lassoux lies, among many other aspects, in looking out for what might count as such a code for "probabilizing" Mallarme's poem. More concretely, Meillassoux experiments with adjoining (metaphorical, nonrnathernati-cal) "domains of rationality" as such a code—for example, the musical scale of C major in orderto determine which number is labeled bythe expression cars/(which returns in certain patternsthroughoutthe poem). Such labeling numbers again indicates particular constellations that ask for further codes to decipher labels as pointers to the next steps in substantiating his hypothesis,59 For example, he ascribes a specific importance to the numbers 5 and 7, links those to the stellar constellation of which Mailarme says, in one line, that the final sum of the nurnber-that-cannot-be-another is expressed in. An excerpt of how he renders this plausible:
58	Those interested in the background of com muni ca-tional coding theory, and the role of entropy measure and chance variables therein, are recommended to look at the classic paper for communication theory by Claude E. Shannon, "The Mathematical Theory of Communication" (1948), where he describes the two modes of coding that are still central today, in the distinction they have introduced, so-called channel coding and source coding.
59	See Mei II assoux, Le nombre etfa sirene, 54-59.
Yet we know [,,,] the author of "The Throw of the Dice" held the stars in their pure dissemination like acelestial symbol of Chance. To cut bythe gazea
os
03	Activity proto-spaceswith similarity links
04	Activitiesand containing mesh
05	Training procedure for a House ofThings
The technical approach of the intended project stems from computational strategies known as Machine Learning, which allow computers to learn from experiences by evaluating performance on tasks (MITCHELL 1997), as opposed to being explicitly programmed to perform in a preset way (SAM UEL1959).This pro ject embra ces the power of these programs to provide opportunities for engaging architectural discourse and thought with contemporary technology. It sees in machine learning technologies a fundamentally different and creative collection of methodologies, which are capable of reframing the current stance of computational design toward a more “human” approach. The interest in these methods for architectural practice relies on their capacity to organize complexity into design, in away that does not reduce, but learns to cope with, the imprecision and uncertainty involved whenever we deal with the veritable medley of people’s emotions, material, and environmental behaviors. This novel understanding implies giving way for margins of error, and accepting speculatively general or loose (JONES 2006) concepts, categories, and assemblies of potential architectural elements that are not predefined but pre-specific (BÜHLMANN 2008). Architectural objects could engage with everydaythings, embedding potential capabilitiesthat are specifi c only in a to-be-realized sense (BÜHLMANN 2010).
DEFINING
H0USE-NESS,
DESCRIBING
ARCHITECTURE
A house is described i n terms of the spaces it contains. Spaces are then described in terms of the activities that are related to them. These can be obtained from existing plan s, thati s, by example or by any kind
of relation (e.g., etymological, narrative, or statistical). A description of these activities can then be obtained by their relationship to artifacts. Assuming such artifacts are capable of gathering almost any type, size, or preciseness of data concerning the activities, content is generated through use. This “flattening” of a complex description into a homogeneous set of artifacts makes itpossible to compare activities by merging notions of quality and quantity. New versions of the activities can be mapped to reflect a particular stance orf eature. Fina I ly new spaces can be composed of the modified activities, and a specific House-ness is created from them. (FIGUREOD
Traditionally, the approach toward the understanding of space in design involves projecting the metrics of objects and bodies onto a spati al plane wherethey areto be arranged. In fhe proposed method, a distinct metrics of relations is put forth, describing a core relationship between household artifacts and activities. This complex relationship is projected onto an abstract map (SOM) and spaces can emerge by grouping potentia I ly equi valentspaces. I n principle, fhe relationship between artifacts and activities could be as rich asthe amount of data that can be processed and collected. There is no real limitto the complexity of fhi s description.
Enter lists. Architecture is complex. Attempting to model this complexity represents an enormous chal I enge. However, it is within reach to obtain seemingly endless arrays of information that can be arranged to produce meaningful combinations. We say seemingly, but it comes within reach also practically, since data can be collected at a constant rate. The challenge is not really a technical one, but a conceptual one. The principal strategy proposed consists in taking traditional spacesthatmakeupaparticulararchitec-ture, and describe them in terms of what happens in or around or because of them. (FIGURE 02] Such a description can never be exhaustive or definite; it cannot crystallize beyond its indexicality. The link to artifacts is a “degree of membership” or
60	"Or nous savons [...] quo l'auteur du «Coup do dos» tonait los otoilos on lour dissemination puce comme un Symbole oeleste du Hasard. Deoouper par le regard une oonstellation dans oette splendour depourvue do sens, c'est accomplir un aote tout a fait analogue a I'aote poetique selon Mailarme. Car oe poete s'attaohe ä faire scintiller les mots, forges et dissemines par le hasard do la langue, par (usage d'une syntaxe deroutante on laquelle ohaque vocable semble isole par une«lacune» de tous les autres, comme decontextualise: oe qui lui permet do rayonner d'une lumiere qu'on no lui avait jamais connut." Ibid., 30.
61	In the second part of the book, entitled "Fixer 11 i nflni," ©Iff.
constellation in this meaningless splendor is to perform a totally analogous act to the poetic act according to Mailarme, For this poet is committed to make the words sparkle, forged and disseminated bythe randomness of language, by the use of a confusing syntax in which each term appears isolated by a "gap" from all the others, as though decontext uali zed: allowing it toshine a light we had never known it capable of.60
Although he does not mention it, Meillassoux is pondering one of the favorite themes in thinking about proportionality—the golden ratio. Two quantities are in the golden ratio if their ratio is the same as the ratio of their sum to their maximum—this is exactly what Mei I lassou x's reading will postulate (without stating it explicitly).®1 The golden ratio has inspired people throughout many centuries precisely because it provides maxi mum stability for maximally different "components" within a strictly proportional framework, This is why LeCorbusierfarnously integrated the golden ratio into his architectural measuring system that hecalled "The Modulor," and that he "rooted" in a certain partitioningscherne of the human body. But different than Le Corbusier, Meillassoux suggests rooting his "poetic
05
ANY HOUSE (VICTORIAN HOUSE]
rnodulor" not in the profane human body but in the numerical corpus of divine chance. As such, Meillassouxtakesthe noninitiate readerthrough afabulousand awe-inspiring journey to how he ends up with the number 707, which—in the finale of this speculative trip through possible codes—turns outto be, and I am sorry forthe prosaicness in putting it this way, the chance variable we know from ordinary statistics, the sum of all the counted words. The nurnber-that-cannot-be-another facilitates to carryout probabilistic analysis on Mallarrne's text. Even in statistics, a random variable is not a variable strictly speaking, for it has no fixed value. In other words, it is not a magnitude of which we could ask metrical questions like howrnuch? What it does is label a number that counts a magnitude that is unknown. As such, a chance number (I would prefer to call it an "indexical magnitude") can incorporatea possibi I ity space, and allowto experiment with it in probabilistic terms, by partitioning it into a set of events that can be combined in their interplay, Thus we can see how Meillassoux experiments with adjoining (metaphorical, non mathematical) "domains of rationality" for his hypotheses. From the hypothetically postulated distributions, patterns, and regularities he seeks to extract a certain meter—and this means, in his case, nothing less than a proportionality of numerical infinity,
We can put this aspired context of an agnostic-spi ritual it y-turned-into-a-ci vie-religion totheside, and consider simply in terms of method how Meillassoux proceeds in order todeterrninethe unknown indexical magnitude (chance variable). His procedure might best be called "hypothetico-inductive," and because of its performed creativity, it can surely count as truly instructive for anyone working with statistical procedures. How Meillassoux proceeds is extremely interesting, which is only more impressive if we consider that on the formal level, it corresponds to ordinary standards in how probabilistic analysis works, Exceptthat in scientific contexts, speculation and creativity in the determination of the chance variable is, of course, much less desired and appreciated. But there, as in the case of Meillassoux, the metrics (proportionality) "induced" can be tested "empirically" on the formal level (in the case of Meillassoux that of the poem), until a model is found that doesn't leave any inconsistencies that could not be integrated meaningfully into that model, With this model, hethen works hermeneutically to make sense of it, providing its legitimation on numerical basis. This is how the role of the meter with which he works is not entirely arbitrary, but also not in any coercive way necessary. There might be other models of meter for measuring another chance
a labeling number th at describes a potential or actual connection between activity and objects.
The basic relationship between the chosen activities responds to the following question: What artifacts are normally used, or lend themselves potentially to being used, while performing an activity?The program outputs a proximity map that backs up the supposed similarities between activities. However, the clustering, distinguished through color tones as a code, yields unforeseen groupings that could hint at new spatial configurations. Given the potential for discovering new relations, this map was translated into three dimensions, converting an abstract linkage into a scale-less spatial distribution. A cube is the starting point of the space bounded by the map. The program starts with a now three-dimensional random layout of the weight values for each node (they are called “neurons” in the machine learning jargon) and iteratively tries to representthe data. A simple interface allows to display progress, and adds basic control functions for viewing and saving differentinformation.
A connectivity map [FIGURE 03) determines the possible clusterings that result from comparing activities. The emerging configuration of connected activities is logical and yetuncommon.Thecreation of new space “types” out of combined activi -ties yields a signi ficantly diff erentprogram-matic scheme than can be achieved by traditional methods. The degrees of closeness or strength of the connections can be visualized in the thickness of the links.
It is also possible to reconstruct a geometry that gives a “face” to the activi -ties; we suggest calling this a proto-space. These activity meshes (FIGURE 04) are created by selecting the highest value features (artifacts) from the original dataset, as the most influential ones or as the best descriptors of each activity. A point is then created for each high-rated artifact, forming a mesh that varies in shape, number of vertices, and color. Out of this proto-geometry, a different space can be
created. An envelope wrapping the activi -ties describesthe vol u methati s necessary forthe map to operate.This opens up other possibilities to explore the SOM’s behavior on various topologies, site constraints, configurations, and settings. Volume can be understood as a map, creating both a space and a representation of spatial inform mation: an inhabitable map.
Any particular geometry istherefore a suitable candidate space for mapping. For the scope of thi s project, only relatively simple geometries are used. However, looking at existing designs as envelopes for mapping could produce interesting results, reflecting the examples’ aesthetic notions of proportion, or more functional ones like the maximum building volume for a specific location, etcetera (FIGU R E051. This research project focuses on making use of abstract and potentially more comprehensive relations for architectural design. Therefore, a basic model of any particular house (in our casean arbitrarily chosen Victorian house) is chosen to reflect a spatial idea of houseness as a starting point Further iterations derive from the dataset that describesthe program of the chosen house. An apparently analytical process is driven toward synthesis by reconstructing the composing elements and creating fundamentally different arrangements. (FIGURE06)
The final mapping produces a flexible definition of spaces, or more accurately, of boundaries between spaces. The actual constraint of spaces is left open forfurther decisions related to traditional top-down design strategies. The volumes that these boundaries occupy (they are seldom linear) could probably be utilized to contain spacesfor all the technical fixtures orinfra-structural utilities. This strategy of deriving contrast-driven boundaries is not far from an architect’s attempts to separate spaces, classifying them into distinctareas by traditional means. There is a distance, however, that puts apart the two method s: the former method clearly profits from computational integration and manages to embody both analytical and synthetic procedures simultaneously.
FINAL REMARKS & IMPLICATIONS
A translation of the tectonic logic from a material to an informational model (assembling an architecture from data), and back to reality, might setthe basisfor the devel-opmentof anew kind of architectural grammar. This setsforth an interesting scenario where constraints of the real world, together with possibilities of computation, strive for balance and confront the exactness of computers to the richness, ambiguity, heterogeneity, and dynamism of human interactions with themselves and their environments. This project intends to reflect upon plausible disturbances and complements to “traditional” design processes, regardless ofthe availability of robots, software, pen-ci I s, or paper. It intends to integrate a different set of architectural contents or “substances,” extending the scope of operation for architecture. (FIGURE 07)
Considering data handling and analysis as an active partof architectural design could produce new visions of what “performance" means, or different definitions of “smartness” in buildings. The idea behind seeking to integrate within architecturethe tools and the learning paradigms pursued in information architecture is to develop future designs and improvements to exist-i ng ones. If we wantto liberate architecture from the doctrines of typologies, a necessarily different approach mustbetaken. In orderto work with unclassified populations of houses, we can learn from those paradigms how relinquishing control enables developing a methodology of discovery, in which neither collection nor element provides the final authority of a “foundation”; rather, from their interplay we can “architect” a methodology based on the engendering of a synthesis. (FIGURE08)
This could certainly be interpreted as an inroad from archi tecture to computer science. However, becauseof itsbroad scope, it seems only traditional of architecture to allow, or even to seek, the exchange of
variable on the basis of which one could carry out numerical analysis, and that would very likely be capable of "substantiating" very different overall readings. This does not weaken the brilliance of Meillassoux's own reading, in my opinion. But it does introduce cornplicationsforthe performative-lithurgic role he attachesto his reading, While I obviously do not share this programmatic stance, I very much share the interest in seeing a novel understanding of mastership, rooted in symbolization within probability space.
Cosmo-politics, or putting; to work a symbolist meter
This novel understanding of mastership is rooted in aslight shift in perspective, which allows Meillassouxto look at Mallarrne's poem in this way: he does not read the poem in terms of how it articulates the nature of chance directly, but in terms of how it articulates the nature of chance through articulating the natureof numbers. Rhetorically, this is how he can begin his book with a powerful statement like "Let's get to the point directly" (page 9). The point he wants to get at directly is the nature of numbers,Yet, we must remember, according to Me i 11 ass ou x t his nature is engendered in the poem. So there can be no mentioning of "directness" in any strict sense. Directness—this is what we can pursue if
we presume a nature of numbers, not if we attempt to evoke such nature in a poetically particular manner. The power of the opening of Meillassoux's book is a rhetorical trick that envelops in a veiling manner all implications that point in this direction. For him, as he makes clear later on, Mallarrne's act of articulating poetically the nature of numbers is an absolute and singular act—this is what moves him to see in the poet-authora figure no less eminent than that of Jesus Christ. The way he sees it. Mailarme literally incorporates, in his oeuvre, the possibility of a new poetic meter to come. According to Meil lassoux, Mailarme is a figure as eminent as Christ because as the latter sacrifices his body, Mailarme sacrifices the Corpus of his Oeuvre—the living "substance" of what makes him a master, by giving over t he rece pt i o n of it t o the unlikeliness that is proper to anything that is governed by cha rice. This is how Meillassoux wants to read this engagement with the "indexical magnitude" of a "chance variable" within the Christian theme of transubstantiation. Within this Eucharist tradition, the sacrifice of Jesus Christ's body was "necessary" to evoke the unity of a community to come—anyone who believes in the actuality and truth of this happening was welcome within the community, whose unity is grounded on no other inclusion/exclusion criteria but the appreciation of this "act" and its particular
theological interpretation. Reenacting it brought absolution and purification of the members from their si ns, and from their distinctions among each other, and constitutes the "force" capable of strengthening the Holy Communion. Meillassoux reads Mallarrne's act (of sacrificing the corpus of h isoeuvre to the unlikely reception inthe unlikely event that someone actually bears witness to his act, and proclaims its significance widely) in strict parallel to this tradition. He imagines also a people to come, to be united through reenacting the liturgy of Mallarrne's poetic oeuvre as a means to strengthen such a coming sense of community, Such union Meillassoux imagines as a truly postmodern communion; that is, a people who complement a secularized politics with a poetic religion, The daring cultural-historical symmetry evoked thereby is that of modernity in the position of the Old Testament, and the problem of howto continue modernity (which is our problem today) in the position of the New Testament. In his poetically grounded cosrno-politics, Mailarme is st igrnati zed by Meillassoux as the only one and true master who has managed to gain victory over chance (which reigns within science and thereby unsettles the very valuesthat are foundational of modernity; e.g., individual identity, self-governing subjects, scientific progress through steady refinements in approaching
concepts across disciplines. In fact, integration or mediation could be regarded as the constitutive “Other” to those fvi notions of architecting, which happen to be consid -ered “essential.” Although this project provides only a glimpse and an example of what can be done with these technologies, it is meantto provide an idea toward articulating how architecture could be affected by the “materiality” of information.
The notion of highly specified and determined spaces or capsules and their loosely defined relations has the intention of permitting to compose and recompose their configuration, affecting the overall structure but leaving its order untouched (JONES 2006). This could be interpreted as a kind of programmatic modularity (JONES 2006), producing adaptable or resilient assemblages and allowing to understand space no longer in ter ms of static places but asa complex condition. (FIGURE09]
Function in architecture can no longer be thought of in the same way as it used to before the informational turn (BÜHLMANN 2010). Issues of mobility, generality, and materiality are being vigorously modified by technology toward lighter, faster, and programmable embodiments of functions.
A tendency can be afforded to divert from the full-sized appliances with enormous spatial extension, to the imperceptible, ubiquitous applications embedded and distributed in tiny chips. Perhaps the scaled “components” in these novel capsules of programmable function or contained specificities can endure as “building blocks” for thinking order in architecture. This project explores the possibili ty to address techno) -ogy in its own “language,” assuming that it might become once as familiar to us as understanding the spatial implications of drawing a line or sketching a box is today.
(FIGURE 10)
06« Basic geometric«! operations (architectural intentions^
07	« Acti vity relations and resul ting spaces from
sequences
08	Final envelope
09	Scenario for internal view
10» Scenario for urban location
the realization of an ideal and universal [all-inclusive] order, etc.). Meillassoux, in his reading, reveals his own communal identity as that of those who know howto beartes-tirnony to Mallarme'ssyrnbolist and graceful gift to humanity—the act of his sacrifice,
Cosmo-literacy, or the alphabetization of the nature of numbers
If we relate this interpretation to its recent reception, it may on the one hand strike one as unbearably uncomfortable, to the degree that one feels tempted to call it silly. Yet on the other hand, one cannot help but admire the conclusiveness in actually working with the text material as it is there, inthe verses of the poem and the reality of the contextual questions raised, and this makes it equally an irresistible attraction. Indeed, it has been a while since a voice in philosophy has dared articulate such claims on such speculative yet precise grounds! But then again, such intimacy of philosophical thought with what we might call religious energies is straightforwardly inevitable if one seeks to resist the submission of philosophy underthe ultimate governance of scientificallydeclared legitimization—that is, to free it from all forms of inspiration and spirituality. What Meillassoux does, and what can be decoupled from his m/ss/on, I think, is to expose a notion of
method that proceeds by scientific standards, yet hands it over to the field of aesthetics and art. Frornthis perspective, and in orderto appreciatethe originality of Meillassoux's reading, one does not have to follow him in the mission he attaches to it, Mallarrne's poetic articulation of the nature of number, if we read it not as a poetic dedication in the form of asong of praise or an ode to this nature, but along with Meillassoux in a quantitatively symbolist manner, points the way of how we might consider symbolization as a means for learni ng how to articulate numbers and develop mastership in dealing with the indexically and symbolically given “magnitudes." Such mastership is grounded in learning how chance variables can be counted, literally in the sense of ordered enumeration (discretizing and grarnrnatizing) but also more comprehensively in the sense of governing. If we affirm that modernity has disenthralled us from all hopes in Aristotelian-rninded symbolization, as the articulation of the voice of being,62 we might also affirm in Mal lärme 's po et i c articula tion of the nature of nurn bers a c o nt i nuat i o n i n t he s pi r it of Ar ist ot I e, Since Pythagoras, and especially since Plato's Tim eaus, the widespread ideaaboutthe nature of numbers is that the very "framework" of a cosmos that we can hope to understand by reason, consists in numbers. The numbers are the soul of the cosmos, which
62 Univocity is the crucial assumption in Aristotelian metaphysics. It demarcates where Aristotle departs from hi s teacher PI ato, for whom the cosm i c assumption (espe-cially in the Timeaus) is a principle of analogy and proportional ity. The book that Alain Badiou (whosefaithful disciple Meillassoux identifies himself) wrote on Gilles Deleuze, entitled The Clamour of Being, clearly itemizes these sentiments in a straightforward polemic (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999; originally in French in 1996).
the Platonic Demiurge has mingled and mixed, cut into two to connect end to end, such that an inner circle comprehends all material becoming, while an outer circle comprehends all ideal being. Numbers make up t he auxiliary structured or a cosmo-logy, they are the necessary coefficients in any formal term. Numbers are what is capable of holding, literally, a logical cosmos in order—we come back to this in more detail in the following paragraphs. Suffice it to say that from such a perspective, Meillassoux's reading of Mallarrne's poem would suggest nothing less than that the nature of numbers at stake is one t hat can now be alphabetized. If t he nat ural numbers are what is capable of holding, literally, a logical cosmos in a universal order, by deriving criteriafor consistency from the assumption of primary "fullness" or "perfection," thesymbolic nature(s) of numbers need to find criteria for consistency by dealing with "primary abundance." Dealing with primary abundance would mean that no order of consistency (logical order), no such and such "fullness," can ever comprehend all that might, virtually, be possible.
Is not this a reading whose relations to poetryfeel almost banal?Whileancient meter was capable of liberating logics from directly stating truth and thus made room for poetic articulation, which may count as divine because it is neithercornprehensively necessary
REFERENCES
Ashton, Kevin. “That'Internet of Things' Thing.” RFID Journal (June 29, 2009). http://www.rfidjournal.com/ article/view/4986.
Bühlmann, Vera. “Pseudopodia. Prolegomena to a D iscourse on D esign.” In Pre-specifics: Some Com paratistic Investigations on Research in Art and Design, edited by Vera Bühl mann and Martin , 20-79. Zurich: J RP | Ringier Press, 2008, 20-79.
Djanikian, Gregory. “Mrs. Caldera’s House ofThings.”
In About Distance: Poems. Pittsburgh, PA: Carnegie Mellon University Press, 1995, 15.
Frampton, Kenneth. Studies in a Tectonic Culture:
The Poetics of Construction in Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996.
Jones, Wes. “Loose Modularity, Lumpy Logic.” Praxis: journal of writing + building 3(2002). http: //www. jpaessays. info/loose-mod Jl. html.
Jones, Wes. “Unvolumetric Architecture and the Emergence of the Architectural.” In Contemporary Public Space: Un-Volumeiric Architecture, edited by Aldo Aymoni no and Valerio Paolo Mosco. Milan: Skira Editore, 2006. h ttp: //www.j paessays. i n fo/u nvol um etri c. h tm I.
Kohonen, Teuvo. “The Self Organizing Map.” Proceedings of the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers HEED 78, no. 9(1990).
Mitchell, Tom M. Machine Learning, lsted. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1997.
Mitchell, William. “After the Revolution: Instruments of Displacement.” In Disappearing Architecture: From Real to Virtual to Quantum, edited by Georg Flach hart and Peter Weibel. Basel: Birkhäuser, 2005, 13-23.
Morville, Peter and Louis Rosenfeld. Information Architecture for the World Wide Web: Designing Large-Scale WebSites. Sebastopol, CA: 0’Reilly Media, 1998.
Ng, Andrew. “CS229: Machine Learning." Lecture at Stanford University, Stanford, CA, 2013.
Sekler, Eduard F. “Structure, Construction, Tectonics.” In Structure in Art and in Science, edited by Gyorgy Kepes. New York: George Braziller 1965, 89-95.
Turner, R aymond and Am non Eden. “The Philosophy of Computer Science.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter2011 Edition), edited by Edward N. Zalta. First published December 12, 2008. http://pi ato .Stanford, edu/archives/wi n2011/entri es/computersci ence/.
---. “Pre-Specifics: Considering the Design of
Mediality.” In Pre-specifics:AccessX!edited by Freek Lorn me and Michael Capio. Eindhoven: Onomatopee 52, 2010.
nor arbitrarily contingent, the meter engendered by Mailarme (and any meter that can be engendered in the same manner) makes room for cosrno-litera / a rticula tions of i de as t hat rn i g ht characterize a world to coma. But, we might ask, does the assumption of such a quantitatively symbolist manner of poetic articulation not indeed confront us, as Meillassoux seems to hold, with a sheer impassability (in German, Ungangbarkeit)! To count as poef/c(and not political) articulation it would be essential for such a symbolist man ner not to treat this nature that it articulates (that of number) in a violent manner. It must affirm this nature's dignity—i.e. as inexhaustible by the reasoning of finite synthesis or speculation—while nevertheless setting out to articulate it as a rneansto communicate that which does not avail to appropriation by reason. In short, it must respect its "integrity" and "identity" neither on the transcendent grounds of sufficient reason, nor on the symbolist grounds of infinite speculation (as Meillassoux proposes), but on symbolic grounds of finite synthesis. Such respect would be the core aspect of a truth notion that is worthy to be called that of a critical rationalism,
Appropriating1 a body-to-think-in
One of the arguably most influential documents of the history of Western Culture—Plato's dialogue Tiroaeus— tells, in theforrn of a myth, the coming into being of the cosmos such that we can conceive of it logically. The cosmos turns into the subject of knowledge inTirneaus's account, and
he conceives of it as a symbolic body—the cosmic animal—whose corporeality he conceived, somewhat surprisingly perhaps, already 2,500 years ago as being constituted by numbers. In Plato’s cosmic animal, there is but one nature of numbers. Today, with universal algebra, we have as many natures of numbers as we can symbolize consistently into structures. We call them by the names of rings, fields (Zahlenkörper), modules, and the like. They work with matrices and “animate” relations—animate because vectors are lines that embody direction, they have a “motive force” or “cause” imminently to the relation they incorporate. We call algebraic structures universals, in the plural, and each of them has “one-of-a-kind” scopes of how their organization may be articulated. Much of our technics today is ordinarily dealing with such abstract structures. Atthe same time, philosophers and mathematicians are initiating veritable battles around howthese structures are to be rooted and identified (the so-called Foundational Crisis, and more recently, the struggle between set theory and category theory for primacy in settling, as in the former, or overcoming, for the latter, the issue of foundations).
Let me perhaps indicate initially where I intend to lead this line of thought. What I would like to consider is viewing what we readily call “a symbolic corpus” outside the confines of representational speculation, reflection, and mimesis, and instead in terms of indexical speculation, reflection, and mimesis. Such an indexical turn would entail relating to the symbolical corpora of mathematics not as we relate to a constellational order of the heavens, but as we relate to our bodies. Our bodies too do not fully avail to reason, and they constrain our sensual and motor capacities. Might notthe notion of “a body” be a better word than the notion of “a house” for picturing what the philosophical tradition has strived to conceive as the architectonics of reason? A body-to-think-in, with proper constraints of intellectually sensual (intuit ive) and intellectually motor (literate) capacities? Is it possible that we are so much accustomed to an understanding of numbers as giving us the one and only framework within which things can be rationalized and appear consistent, that the assumption of treating them as bodies-to-think-in sounds too frighteningly strange? Even if one might feel spontaneously compelled to agree, the guestion that motivates such a daring shift in perspective has been up and on the table for more than a century: How might we come to terms with universal algebra, its symbolic corporeality by probabilistic methods, and the generic instances that are articulated out of it?
63	Starting from two. Even within a nature of numbers so conceived, the integration of the zero for nothing and the one for entity remains a crucial obstacle for any exhaustively explanatory consensus.
64	For him, the explanation why humans have been capable of “inventing” mathematics as the core power of reason, is that these idealized natural numbers are “reason’s nearest kin.” “Frege’s central claim in the Grundlagen was that in arithmetics we are not concerned with objects which we come to know as something alien from without through the medium of the senses,” writes Michael D. Potter, “but with objects given directly to our reason and, as its nearest kin, utterly transparent to it.” Reason’s Nearest Kin: Philosophies of Arithmetics from Kant to Carnap (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996), 79.
The most common representation of the nature of numbers ...
To put it in words we all remember from our school days: we take the positive integers as the proper class of natural numbers;63 we know we can symmetrically mirror them to negativity—for the sake of speculative analysis; and we remember that the boundedness among the integers can be “spelled out” into ratios (the rational numbers)—if only we put the integers into mutual relations. Of course we also don’t forget the irrationals, those numbers that yield an indefinite value when they are put into a “ratio.” Despite their name, they are not too troubling anymore. There are sophisticated limiting and bounding processes with logarithms and series such that the counting in of irrationality seems like a reasonable and respectful tribute to be paid to the vastness of real numerical nature. An illustrative pictureforthis concatenated and comprehensive nature of numbers is the continuous number line. With its totality, including rationals and irrationals alike, we associate today the domain of real numbers. To put it straightforwardly: the real numbers contain all that can possibly be marked out by reason, as rational or irrational, and hence understood about numbers’ nature.
... and how it got into trouble still not resolved today
This was still the firm belief of one of the founding fathers of a logical calculus, Gottlob Frege (1848-1925) when he assumed—not unlike a prosaic double of Plato—the existence of a transcendent realm where the class of natural numbers rests as “objects,” eternally and ideally, and given directly to human reason without requiring mediation through the senses.64 With his text The Foundations of Arithmetics: A Logico-Mathematical Enguiry Into the Concept of Number (1884) we have another strong story about the nature of numbers by one of Mallarme’s (1842-98) own contemporaries. While Mailarme (according to our discussion above) has taken the Platonic numerical ideality and turned it into a probabilistic one, Frege took it and turned into a logical one. Only three years after Frege, Edmund Husserl also wrote a treaty entitled The Concept of Number (1887). He published his own book entitled Philosophy of Arithmetics (1891) only four years later. While Frege meant to engage strictly logical issues in such elementary consideration with the intent to purify reasoning, at least ideally, Husserl instead meant to complement logical issues with psychological issues—which he hoped to be capable of treating
65 See page 86.
66	Rändere, “Who Is the Subject of the Rights of Man?,” 304.
67	Israel Kleiner, A History of Abstract Algebra (Basel: Birkhäuser, 2007), 8.
with equal rigor as is possible for logical issues. We cannot go into this theme in much breadth here, but let me briefly recapitulate the larger context and how it relates to our two conceptual persona, the generic and the master, and the possibility to see, in what they open up in their interplay, the birth of bodies-to-think-in that are collective before they can be appropriated individually, and whose nature is engendered together with the symbolic corpus of numbers according to which they are organized.
First, let us take this background as an indication that indeed something larger than a poet’s personal resignation vis-a-vis the rise of free verse must have been at stake in the nineteenth century. This seems all the more justified if we remember that the mathematician George Boole (1815-64), whom I have already mentioned earlier for having been accused of proceeding in a strikingly similar manner as Meillassoux does in his reading of Mailarme—namely of “bringing forward definite solutions from treating indefinite problems symbolically”65—preceded all of these investigations on the nature of numbers by a few decades. His main work was entitled in all due provocation, An investigation of the Laws of Thought on Which Are Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities (1854). To view Mailarme in this context adds a lot of plausibility to Meillassoux’s shift in perspective, namely that the poem is not directly about the nature of chance, but about that of numbers. But not only this. It also tells us something important about our context and interest in computability, design, and the generic today—it allows us to see the force of what Ranciere calls dissensus at work in all that can be computed. Let’s recapitulate again: dissensus is “not a conflict of interests, opinions, or values” but “a division put in the ‘common sense’: a dispute about what is given, about the frame within which we see something as given.” While on the level of generic instances, those one-of-a-kind particulars that can be instantiated and modulated within the framework of a master model, we might only negotiate “conflicts of interests, opinions, or values”; what is at stake with a criticality on the level of the master models is indeed dissensus as “a division put in the ‘common sense’: a dispute about what is given, about the frame within which we see something as given.”66This is why we ought to treat the instances of generic computing as pre-specific rather than as typical (which would be to viewthem as generic in an adjectival, not in an adverbial, sense), and the respective master models as what they are: models that owe everything to mastership, and not to some generic “nature.” But let’s look more closely at how this background in number theory relates to computation.
Algebraic operations, or how the nature of numbers can be brought to work
As sketched above, the understanding of the nature of numbers has indeed been bracketed and marked as “something to be put in question” throughout the nineteenth century. Yet this was not, however, a result of pure intellectual curiosity and ideological speculation, but of the facticity of technical eminence: The taming of electricity equally rests upon calculating with a domain of numbers that does not fit within the continuity (represented as the real number line) within which all that can be called natural about numbers ought to be accommodated. Calculations that regarded waves and currents had to be rooted in a numerical domain that is organized by a peculiar unit, of which it is indeterminate what magnitude (which physical quantity) it allows to measure. Descartes had suggested calling this unit “imaginary,” only to discard it as irrelevant and purely speculative—the imaginary unit is that of the square root of minus one. The “impossibility” it manifests is obvious: surely everyone remembersfrom somewhere that arithmetically, the multiplication of a negative number with itself must yield a positive result. Hence, it ought be categorically impossible, or at least sophistically meaningless—i.e. without any real consequences—to extract a root from a negative quantity. And yet, it does yield consequences, and not only that, it yields consequences in reliable and modular manner: as Israel Kleiner accounts, in his book A History of Abstract Algebra, mathematicians have “given meaning to the ‘meaningless’ by thinking the ‘unthinkable,’ namely that square roots of negative numbers could be manipulated in a meaningful way to yield significant results.”67
All of electronic technics, including information technology and quantum mechanics, rests on the application of this particular numerical domain—whose magnitudinal referent is symbolically determinable, while remaining physically (and philosophically) “unthinkable,” “meaningless.” To put it more simply, it remains unclear of what such a “how much” can be determined. The imaginary unit allows measuring whatever is indexed within the systematicity of a symbolism, and this makes it so peculiarly “unnatural.” U nnatural, that is, unless one were to assume a nature of such a symbolism whose magnitude is only indexically given. And this is exactly what was at stake throughout the
nineteenth century as the development of abstract algebra prospered more and more. The disputes indeed centered around whether we oughtto assume different natures of numbers—a variety of different numerical genera—and if yes, how many.
The nature of number might not be one: Alfred North Whitehead attempted to gather all these developments in a first systematic study under the troubling caption of Universal Algebra in 1899. It was a work that cleared the view on these developments and stated as straightforwardly as it was groundbreaking:68 the problem at stake is the relation between mathematics and logics. To be clear on what we are talking about—why was this groundbreaking? While logics promises to give adequate classification of the nature of things (or in the modern paradigm: the determination of objectivity), such adequacy has rested for Plato (as well as again later, for the moderns) on the assumption of flnitude on the empirical side of science. If we start out from things as they are manifest corporeally, in terms of magnitudes that can be measured, we can depart from very basic (and through that very secure) assumptions, and reach gradually more and more abstract heights through speculative generalizations. Such is the trust in scientific method by the moderns in a kind of science that lets itself be guided by the logics of flnitude, as opposed to spiritual doctrines that all involve infinity. It rests on the assumption that the nature of number is one and that number is universal. From this nature, hence, it ought to be possible that one can extract universal principles that are capable of treating all things equally, and therefore justly. Such universality was seen by Frege and Husserl, and many others at the time (and still today), in arithmetics.The suggestion of Boole, on the other hand, was to ascribe the status of universality to algebra instead of arithmetics. This opens up the notion of the universal to inf!nitary determination. Algebra has been understood, always, as the art of determining unknown quantities through procedures of articulating the proportionate terms that in their interplay make up a formula; with the elevation of its status beyond its merely representational character (what Meillas-soux calls “the correlational”69), the meaning of “unknown” opens up the modern tradition of keeping the scientific and the artistic, in its entanglement with some sort of spirituality, strictly apart. It releases instead a nature of the technical—the means for artifice—in an unbounded condition between mastership and schematic repetition, in which all questions of legitimacy are once again unsettled.
The consequences of affirming the infinitary methods are such that we can no longer maintain in an unproblematic manner that the universal—that which is to be regarded as the property of all things—accommodates naturally the categories we apply, even in the natural sciences, as they too, meanwhile, fall within the domain of technology. Affirming to work with infinitary methods entails dealing with an inverse situation: the categories we apply, in science as elsewhere, determine what can be treated as universal. In all radicality, this amounts to saying that universality appears as a kind of wealth, it means that the universal can prosper or decay. It means that there is an economical dynamics constitutive for what counts as universal; it means that that which can be the property of all things can be more or less prosperous and that this prosperity depends upon the capacities of intellectuality.
This might seem a little like sophistry, admittedly so. And indeed, this criticism has accompanied the disputes around the nature of numbersfrom early on. Rafael Bombelli, who contributed much to the development of a calculus of this peculiarly imaginary numerical domain (constituted by the imaginary unit), wrote already in the sixteenth century that the development of such a calculus “was a wild thought in the judgment of many; and I too was for a long time of the same opinion. The whole matterseemed to rest on sophistry ratherthan on truth. Yet I sought so long until I actually proved this to be the case.”70The calculus he developed worked with articulated formulations of the One according to rules such as (+\f-1)(+\f-1) = -1 and (+V~^)(~V~^) = 1.These rules allow to define, mathematically, addition and multiplication; yet these definitions do not apply to all numbers in general, but only to numbers that are members of numerical domains that form corpora, and which are specified according to their immanent partitionability and organization.
This is the level of abstraction proper to algebraic number theory and all mathematics and logics that work algebraically; today this entails nearly all of applied mathematics.The philosophical problems entailed thereby had been systematically put into its proper relations by Alfred North Whitehead in the abovementioned book Universal Algebra.71 Let me add, perhaps, that the relevance for keeping track of developments on such an abstract level, which urges us to assume a symbolically (not naturally) determinate “nature” of numbers, is crucial for developing an understanding of what we are actually doing when we work with universal code in computation. Anything that we regard on the level of its electric materiality must count as a manifestation of such
68	It is clear that Frege’s suggestion regarding the transcendent one nature of numbers, as well as that of Husserl regarding a psychologically differentiated one nature of numbers, both aspire to ward off what Whitehead faced boldly—the universality of algebra (not of arithmetics), and with that, the nature of numbers as subject to categorial determinability.
69	See Meillassoux, After Finitude.
70	Quoted in Kleiner, A History of Abstract Algebra, 8.
71	A book that he wrote before he set out, together with Bertrand Russell, to once and for all clarify the troubles in their seminal work Principia Mathematica (1910-13). Whitehead’s subsequentturn away, afterthe acknowledged failure of the approach proposed in Principia, from analytical philosophy and toward a new kind of metaphysics in Process and Reality (1929), must surely be understood in terms of his awareness of the profundity of the problems involved.
72	I think it is hardly an exaggeration to say that this lies atthe heart of the new attention philosophy started to attribute to a primacy of difference beneath all possible notions of identity, from Kirkegaard and Hegel via Nietzsche to Heidegger, Derrida, Deleuze, and Lacan.
73	Serres, “Revisiting The Natural Contract.”
74	Gertrude Stein, “What Are Masterpieces and Why Are There So Few of Them?” (Los Angeles: Conference Press, 1940), http://gaslight.mtroyal. ca/masterpieces.htm.
symbolically engendered nature.72 Its nature can be determined based on probabilistic measurements—measurements that we carry out today, usually without much consideration, in terms of information. It is before this background that Michel Serres urged intellectuals across all disciplines, in his lecturefrom 2007, to engage with thefactthat the storage, treating (processing), emission, and reception of information isthe “quadruple characteristic in common between all the objects of the world, living or inert.”73
Masterpieces, and why there are so few of them
So we can see how much this peculiar procedure that Meillassoux “detected” in Mai-larme’s poem is indeed a procedure that is affine to what preoccupied anyone who followed the development and the rise of universal algebra. Mailarme, with his desire to link abstraction directly to poetic texture, and his poetic interest in evoking through words rather than describing with words (which became famous as the mark of symbolism in art) certainly was following all of this. It seems more than likely that with his fascination for “absolute truth” he attempted to draw the consequences from what he saw happening to the idea of the universal. He hoped to be able to continue the cultural legacy he was ambitious to contribute to, poetic verse and the dignity it had always been attributed, by reconsidering, poetically, all these issues around the nature(s) of numbers, the nature(s) of counting, and the modalities of mastership in relation to both.
Meillassoux’s reading is original in the way he found to quantitatively engage with the symbolist tradition in poetry. It stresses the interest in attending to the powers of symbolization in terms that are not strictly “linguistic,” thereby reducing realityto language and relations of reference and interpretation. Instead, he draws our attention to terms in algebra that are best called “formulaic.” What it stresses is not only the “nature of numbers” as problematic, as something that needs reconception, but also the “nature offormulas.” It is in this vein that another documentfrom the early twentieth century is importantto consider: Gertrude Stein’s 1936 lecture, “What Are Masterpieces and Why AreThere So Few ofThem.” In an inverse mannerto what we have discussed so far, she does not so much attend to clarifying the “belonging” or “authorization” of the voice with which the figure of the master articulates his evocations. Instead she draws attention to the articulated evocations themselves. Stein insists on the reality of masterpieces, in all their problematics. For her, a masterpiece bears testimony to the fact of acts of engendering. She sees them motivated out of a principle unsettledness of any identity issue, the identity of the master as well as the identity of the subject matter a master masters. “It is not extremely difficult not to have identity,” she says, “but it is extremely difficult the knowing not having identity. One might say it is impossible but that it is not impossible is proved by the existence of masterpieces which are just that. They are knowing that there is no identity and producing while identity is not.That is what a masterpiece is.”74
EigenArchitecture
Like Stein, we want to hold onto the idea that articulations of things entirely in their own terms is not an absolute impossibility, although it certainly seems a paradoxically tautological idea.Yetthis is one of the core interests behind what we wish tothematize in this book as EigenArchitecture. We are i nterested i n a I iteracy that arises out of such an algebraic, formulaic, and apparently tautological notion of identity, a literacy that cultivates the infinitary articulate-ability of the One (identity). If we affirm infinitary methods in computation, the terms that express an identity are not nominal terms, but polynominal terms. And polynomial terms, unlike nominal terms, are capable of settling their clauses in amphibolic multiplicitous structures. Every polynomial term involves variable values and constant values, of which the latter can be “spelled” by attaching them to constellations of coefficients that can be designated and balanced. I n other words, they participate in a quantity that is yet to be determined. Polynomials name terms whose literalness needs to be characterized. They are quantitative, yet the quantity they comprehend is not a fixed value, but a genuinely relational value. They comprehend ever so much as the term is rendered capable of bounding within the constellation of amphibolic multiplicities that makes up the system offormulas in which polynomial termsfeature. Properly speaking, the determinability of this ever so much is adjoined to the terms. It is in this manner that we can speak of articulating a thing entirely in its own terms. In qualitative terms, however, such articulation of course depends upon how developed and differentiated the literacy and mastership is of the person who articulates.
Eigen
Architektur
Computability as Literacy
Editors
Prof. Dr. Ludger Hovestadt: Chair for Computer Aided Architectural Design (CAAD), InstituteforTechnology in Architecture ITA, Swiss Federal Institute ofTechnology ETH, Zurich, Switzerland.
Dr. phil. Vera Bühlmann: Laboratory for Applied Virtuality at the Chair for Computer Aided Architectural Design (CAAD), Institute forTechnology in Architecture ITA, Swiss Federal Institute ofTechnology ETH, Zurich, Switzerland.
Layout and cover design
onlab,ThibaudTissot, Matthieu Huegi, Laia Ortiz
Copyediting and proofreading
Max Bach, Andreas Fischer, Reinhart Fischer
Printingand Binding
Strauss GmbH, D-Morlenbach
Typeface
Monotype Grotesgue
This work is subject to copyright.
All rights reserved, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically those of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, broadcasting, reproduction by photocopying machines or similar means, and storage in data banks.
Product Liability: The publisher can give no guarantee for the information contained in this book. The use of registered names, trademarks, etc., in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and are therefore free for general use.
In some cases, despite efforts to do so, the obtaining of copyright permissions and usage of excerpts of text was not always successful.
©2013 AMBRA | V
AMBRA | V is part of Medocco Holding GmbH, Vienna Printed in Germany
Printed on acid-free and chlorine-free bleached paper.
With 150 figures ISSN 2196-3118
ISBN 978-3-99043-626-4 AM B RA | V
IMPRINT